                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SHAPING LIQUIDITY:
                ON THE CAUSAL EFFECTS OF VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE

                                         Karthik Balakrishnan
                                           Mary B. Billings
                                            Bryan T. Kelly
                                         Alexander Ljungqvist

                                         Working Paper 18984
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18984


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We thank Yakov Amihud, Douglas Diamond, Joseph Gerakos, Lawrence Glosten (our Five Star discussant),
Charles Jones (our WFA discussant), Christian Leuz (our Utah discussant), Amir Sufi, Margarita Tsoutsoura,
Ro Verrecchia, and various seminar audiences for helpful suggestions. We are grateful to Ruslan Goyenko
for sharing his code to generate the effective tick measure from Goyenko et al. (2009) and to Stephen
Brown for sharing his PIN data. Balakrishnan gratefully acknowledges funding from the Dean’s Research
Fund at Wharton. Ljungqvist gratefully acknowledges the generous hospitality of the European Central
Bank while working on this project. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those
of the ECB, the Eurosystem, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Karthik Balakrishnan, Mary B. Billings, Bryan T. Kelly, and Alexander Ljungqvist. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shaping Liquidity: On the Causal Effects of Voluntary Disclosure
Karthik Balakrishnan, Mary B. Billings, Bryan T. Kelly, and Alexander Ljungqvist
NBER Working Paper No. 18984
April 2013
JEL No. G12,G24,M41

                                              ABSTRACT

Can managers influence the liquidity of their firms’ shares? We use plausibly exogenous variation
in the supply of public information to show that firms seek to actively shape their information environments
by voluntarily disclosing more information than is mandated by market regulations and that such efforts
have a sizeable and beneficial effect on liquidity. Firms respond to an exogenous loss of public information
by providing more timely and informative earnings guidance. Responses appear motivated by a desire
to reduce information asymmetries between retail and institutional investors. Liquidity improves as
a result of voluntary disclosure and in turn increases firm value. This suggests that managers can causally
influence their cost of capital via voluntary disclosure.


Karthik Balakrishnan                                               Bryan T. Kelly
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania               University of Chicago
1318 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall                                  Booth School of Business
3620 Locust Walk                                                   5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6365                                        Chicago, IL 60637
kbalakri@wharton.upenn.edu                                         and NBER
                                                                   bryan.kelly@chicagobooth.edu
Mary B. Billings
New York University                                                Alexander Ljungqvist
Stern School of Business                                           Stern School of Business
44 West Fourth Street, Suite 10-94                                 New York University
New York, NY 10012                                                 44 West Fourth Street, #9-160
mbilling@stern.nyu.edu                                             New York, NY 10012
                                                                   and NBER
                                                                   aljungqv@stern.nyu.edu
Improved liquidity raises a firm’s market value by lowering its discount rate (see Amihud and

Mendelson (1986, 1989), Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996), and Amihud (2002)). While

liquidity is often viewed as resulting from market makers’ and investors’ actions in an

exogenously specified information environment, we examine if corporate managers can actively

influence the liquidity of their firms’ shares. An important channel through which they might do

so is voluntary disclosure. Theoretical models such as Diamond (1985) and Diamond and

Verrecchia (1991) show that managers may commit to disclose more information than is mandated

by market regulations in order to reduce information asymmetry among their investors. Consistent

with this, recent survey evidence suggests that managers provide voluntary disclosure to “reduce

the information risk that investors assign to our stock” (Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005)).

   Whether managers can indeed affect their information environments, and thereby

their liquidity and cost of capital, remains an open question. The main empirical challenge is

that voluntary disclosure is voluntary: managers choose to disclose more information for reasons

that could well affect liquidity directly. For example, evidence indicates that firms disclose more

when earnings are easier to predict (Chen, Matsumoto, and Rajgopal (2011)); but lower earnings

uncertainty would reduce information asymmetry, and so increase liquidity, independently

of disclosure. Thus, showing that disclosure affects liquidity causally, and by how much, has

proved challenging. Healy and Palepu (2001) highlight this endogeneity problem in their survey,

noting that “disclosure changes are unlikely to be random events” and concluding that “it is

difficult to draw strong conclusions about the direction of causality.”

   We use plausibly exogenous variation in the supply of public information to show that firms

seek to shape their information environments through voluntary disclosure and that such efforts

improve their liquidity. The former result confirms the central assumption made in theoretical

models of disclosure. The latter result contributes to our understanding of liquidity in financial

markets, by showing that managers can actively influence the liquidity of their shares and,

                                                                                                      1
ultimately, firm value.

    Our tests exploit a natural experiment first explored in Kelly and Ljungqvist (2012, henceforth

KL). In 2000-2008, 43 brokers closed their research operations as a result of adverse changes in

the economics of sell-side research. The closures led to over 4,000 coverage terminations for U.S.

firms. 1 KL demonstrate that the closures are unrelated to individual firms’ future prospects and so

are plausibly exogenous at the level of the affected stocks. They then show that when a stock loses

(some) analyst coverage in the wake of a closure, information asymmetry among investors

increases, the firm’s share price falls by 1.12% to 2.61%, and retail investors sell the stock. These

patterns are most pronounced when the firm loses coverage by an analyst serving retail investors.

    We use this experiment not only to investigate how managers respond to exogenous shocks to

their information environments but also to establish the causal effects of their responses. To do so,

we identify firms in KL’s sample with a history of providing voluntary disclosure in the form of

guidance regarding their quarterly EPS numbers, the most prominent performance measure that a

firm supplies to investors. 2 We then match each ‘treated’ firm to an observably similar ‘control’

firm that did not experience an exogenous coverage shock at the same time and estimate

difference-in-difference tests and treatment regressions.

    After replicating KL’s finding that coverage shocks have a first-order adverse effect on

liquidity (as measured by Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, AIM), we investigate the dynamics

of liquidity. Extending KL’s analysis, we show that the contemporaneous liquidity hit partially

reverses one quarter later. To establish whether this reversal is the result of an increase in

voluntary disclosure, we need to rule out other channels through which liquidity might recover.
1
  A small subset of 564 of these stocks simultaneously lost a market-maker. As we will show, our results are not
driven by changes in market-making. An even smaller subset of 63 stocks also lost an underwriting relationship.
2
  Alternative measures of disclosure are the external AIMR ratings of disclosure policy (Lang and Lundholm (1993,
1996), Botosan and Plumlee (2002)); the frequency of 8-K filings (Leuz and Schrand (2009)); or the length of 10-K
filings (Leuz and Schrand (2009)). These measures would likely have lower power in our setting because it is unclear
how much immediate discretion managers have over their financial statements. We focus on earnings guidance
because it allows us to examine a discretionary disclosure action that is immediately available to managers (assuming
that their firm has a guiding history) and that is both observable to the econometrician and easily measurable. This, in
turn, enables us to identify the causal effects of voluntary disclosure on liquidity.

                                                                                                                       2
The most prominent alternative channel is changes in market-making. If research closures tend to

coincide with closure of the broker’s market-making operation, then liquidity might fall not

because of a change in the information setting but due to a change in trading mechanics, and

liquidity might subsequently recover due to entry of new market makers. We use detailed data of

brokers’ trading operations to show that liquidity reversals are not driven by an initial loss and

subsequent recovery of market-making.

    We then turn to a falsification (or placebo) test to rule out other potential confounding effects.

The results of the placebo test are most consistent with the conjecture that the post-shock recovery

in liquidity reflects firms’ deliberate efforts to fill the information gap created by the loss of

coverage. Specifically, we show that the observed liquidity recovery only occurs among firms

with a history of providing guidance (“guiders”): one quarter after the shock, liquidity returns to

near its pre-shock level on average. Firms without a guidance history (“non-guiders”), on the other

hand, suffer a permanent reduction in liquidity. Moreover, guiders – but not non-guiders – respond

to a coverage shock by increasing disclosure in a sustained and informative way.

    The contrast between guiders and non-guiders is striking: firms that can, react to a coverage

shock by increasing disclosure and their liquidity then recovers, while firms without a history of

guiding almost never begin to guide and suffer a lasting hit to liquidity. 3 These patterns suggest

that disclosure can cause liquidity to improve. Any alternative interpretation of the observed

liquidity reversals must explain why liquidity improves only among guiders and not among non-

guiders. Thus, these tests bolster our interpretation that disclosure causally improves liquidity.

    Further evidence in favor of an asymmetric-information channel comes from the fact that firms

respond only to the loss of a retail analyst, not when they lose coverage by an analyst catering

exclusively to institutional investors. This suggests that managers supply guidance primarily with

the aim to reduce information asymmetry (and thereby increase share price) by communicating
3
 By revealed preference, non-guiders view the costs of committing to sustained disclosure as outweighing the
benefits. We review potential reasons why non-guiders rarely become guiders after a coverage shock in Section 3.

                                                                                                                   3
with retail investors. This is consistent with asymmetric-information asset pricing models in which

retail investors are less well-informed than institutional investors (Kyle (1985)).

   To quantify the effect of voluntary disclosure on liquidity, we estimate treatment regressions

that exploit the observed liquidity dynamics to construct an instrument for disclosure. Clearly,

contemporaneous coverage shocks cannot be used as an instrument as they affect liquidity directly

and so violate the exclusion restriction. But lagged coverage shocks could be a valid instrument.

Identification requires that lagged coverage shocks a) lead to more disclosure, b) do not affect

liquidity directly, and c) do not correlate with some omitted variable that in turn affects liquidity.

   Our findings show that firms respond strongly to coverage shocks by increasing guidance,

suggesting that firms view disclosure as a substitute for public information, at least to some extent.

Thus, condition a) is satisfied. While condition b) cannot be tested directly, there is no evidence of

drift in the response of liquidity to coverage shocks beyond the quarter of the shock (quite the

contrary, given the observed reversals). Thus, investors appear to react immediately and coverage

shocks have no obvious direct effect on liquidity one quarter later. And the absence of reversals

among non-guiders puts constraints on possible violations of condition c), as argued previously.

   When we use lagged coverage shocks to instrument a firm’s disclosure choices, we find that

increased disclosure has a beneficial effect on liquidity. This suggests that managers can indeed

affect their information environments through disclosure, consistent with Graham, Harvey, and

Rajgopal’s (2005) survey evidence. The economic effects of disclosure estimated in our IV models

are between 7 and 12 times greater than when we naïvely ignore endogeneity. This suggests that

naïve estimates are substantially downward biased and confirms Leuz and Wysocki’s (2008)

conjecture that the small economic effects found in prior studies linking disclosure to quantities

such as liquidity or the cost of capital likely reflect endogeneity biases. Finally, we document that

“talking up liquidity” pays off for firms in the sense of increasing their market value.

   Our study makes three contributions. First, prior literature has been unable to identify an

                                                                                                         4
economically meaningful benefit to voluntary disclosure. Once we correct for endogeneity, we

find that firms can affect the liquidity of their shares substantially through voluntary disclosure.

We show that greater liquidity leads to increased firm value, which implies that voluntary

disclosure reduces a firm’s cost of capital. 4 While not unexpected in light of the evidence reported

in Graham, Harvey, and Rajgopal (2005), quantifying the liquidity effect is nonetheless important

given companies’ legitimate concerns that voluntary disclosure could result in shareholder

lawsuits (Skinner (1994)). We focus on voluntary disclosure to isolate a feature of firms’

information environments that is under managers’ direct control. Related work on the liquidity

effects of transparency (Lang and Maffett (2011a,b) and Lang, Lins, and Maffett (2012)) or

information quality (Ng (2011)) considers various measures that can impact investors’ uncertainty

about a firm but does not isolate managerial discretion or address the question of causality. 5

    Second, we contribute to an active debate among practitioners and academics as to whether

guidance is desirable. Consultants such as McKinsey 6 and Deloitte 7 and influential institutions

such as the Business Roundtable and the CFA Institute 8 advise against the practice, citing legal

costs, ‘punishment’ by investors for missed earnings, and lack of evidence that disclosure raises

stock prices or mitigates volatility. Early economic models viewed disclosure negatively.

Hirshleifer (1971), Trueman (1973), and Hakansson, Kunkel, and Ohlsen (1982) show that

disclosure can reduce investors’ ability to share risk. Fama and Laffer (1971) and Hakansson

(1977), on the other hand, argue it can raise firm value by lowering investors’ information

acquisition costs. Later work by Diamond (1985) shows that disclosure can in fact improve risk-

sharing in a general-equilibrium setting, while Fishman and Hagerty (1989) argue that disclosure
4
  This complements the findings of Leuz and Verrecchia (2000), who link a reduction in information asymmetry to a
firm’s commitment to increased disclosure via voluntary adoption of an international reporting regime, and Daske et
al. (2008), who link improvements in liquidity to the introduction of international reporting standards.
5
  As Lang and Maffett (2011b) note, “A problem with most of the transparency literature is that transparency is clearly
a choice variable, likely determined jointly with a variety of other variables, making assessments of causality difficult.
For this reason, the literature to date has generally been careful about inferring causality.”
6
  See Hsieh, Koller, and Rajan (2006).
7
  See http://www.corpgov.deloitte.com/site/caneng/financial-reporting/transparency/earnings-guidance.
8
  Quoted in Houston, Lev, and Tucker (2010).

                                                                                                                        5
improves stock price efficiency and thereby leads to more efficient managerial investment

decisions. Our analysis speaks directly to the beneficial effect of disclosure on liquidity and value.

   Third, we present novel evidence suggesting that voluntary disclosure is primarily aimed at

reducing information asymmetries between retail and institutional investors. This new stylized fact

is consistent with asset pricing models that stress the importance of information asymmetries for

investor demands and hence asset prices.

   The paper proceeds as follows. Sections 1 and 2 describe our sample and empirical strategy.

Section 3 prepares the grounds for our identification strategy by showing that exogenous coverage

shocks have a large adverse effect on liquidity, which subsequently reverses. Section 4

investigates whether the reversals reflect management efforts to fill information gaps, left by

coverage shocks, through increased voluntary disclosure. Section 5 reports instrumental-variables

regressions that model the causal effect of disclosure on liquidity and value. Section 6 concludes.

1. Sample and Data

   Our sample combines data from CRSP, Compustat, and I/B/E/S with data from First Call’s

Company Issued Guidelines (CIG) database. We begin by constructing an unbalanced panel of all

firms in the CRSP-Compustat merged file for the period 1999 through 2009. The unit of

observation in all our tests is a firm-fiscal quarter. For every firm-fiscal quarter, we retrieve

quarterly guidance from First Call; analyst coverage and forecast information from I/B/E/S;

returns, price, and volume data from CRSP; and quarterly financial data from Compustat. We also

compute, for every firm-fiscal quarter, Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure (AIM), which

measures the price impact of trades. Section 5.3 reports robustness tests using six other popular

liquidity proxies. For full details of the construction of all our variables, see Appendix A.

   From our panel, we extract a treatment sample of firms that suffer exogenous coverage

terminations and thus shocks to their information environments. We compare the guidance

behavior and liquidity dynamics of these treated firms to a control sample composed of matched

                                                                                                      6
firms that do not suffer exogenous shocks to their analyst coverage. This approach allows us to

difference away secular trends and swings in liquidity. Figure 1 shows that market-wide

illiquidity, as measured by AIM, generally trended down beginning in late 2002 and rose sharply

in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15, 2008.

    KL document that the coverage shocks we use are plausibly exogenous, so we do not need to

worry about unobserved heterogeneity, selection, or endogeneity contaminating our tests. All that

remains is to make sure that treated and control firms are observably similar and so comparable.

1.1 Treatment Sample

    KL identify a sample of 2,180 unique firms suffering 4,429 exogenous coverage terminations

as a result of 43 brokerage closures over the period Q2, 2000 through Q1, 2008. 9 KL’s unit of

analysis is a firm-day. As mentioned, our panel setup focuses instead on firm-fiscal quarters. Some

of KL’s firms are hit with multiple coverage shocks in a given fiscal quarter, leaving 4,185 firm-

fiscal quarters with one or more termination events. To assemble our treatment sample, we impose

three filters, as set out in Table 1. First, we remove 1,122 firm-fiscal quarters involving 737 firms

that had no history of guidance as of the termination quarter. Dropping such firms means we focus

on within-firm changes in guidance policy (i.e., the intensive margin). 10 Second, we require that a

treated firm has suffered no exogenous coverage terminations in the previous four quarters. This

requirement eliminates 794 firm-fiscal quarters involving 447 ‘serially shocked’ firms and ensures

that we observe a clean treatment effect. Third, since our tests are in the spirit of diff-in-diffs, we

remove four instances of firms that did not trade in the quarter before a termination and two firms

that lost coverage in their last fiscal quarter of listing on the NYSE, Amex, or Nasdaq. These


9
  Note that our sample period begins at the time Regulation Fair Disclosure came into effect. Reg FD prohibits firms
from selectively disclosing information to investors or analysts. Most prior work on disclosure uses pre-Reg FD data
(see Botosan (1997), Coller and Yohn (1997), Botosan and Plumlee (2002), and Brown and Hillegeist (2007)).
10
   The extensive margin (i.e., initiation of a guidance program) is also of potential interest. However, only 57 firms
provide guidance for the first time in the first fiscal quarter after an exogenous coverage termination, so firms do not
appear to respond to loss of coverage by initiating guidance for the first time. We will return to this point below in the
context of a ‘placebo’ test focusing on non-guiders.

                                                                                                                         7
filters yield 2,263 termination quarters for which we next seek to identify control firms.

1.2 Control Firms

     KL document that firms suffering exogenous coverage terminations have significantly larger

market capitalizations, are covered by significantly more analysts, and have significantly more

volatile stock returns than the average firm in CRSP and I/B/E/S. These characteristics are known

to correlate with liquidity (Breen, Hodrick, and Korajczyk (2002), Irvine (2003), and Chordia,

Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000)). Thus, to ensure that our tests are not confounded by these

systematic differences, we match firms in terms of log market value of equity, the number of

analysts covering the stock, and return volatility, all measured in the fiscal quarter before the

treated firm’s coverage termination. In addition, given our focus on liquidity, we also match on

AIM. 11 As in the case of the treatment sample, we also require that a potential match has not itself

suffered an exogenous termination in the previous four quarters. 12

     Of the 2,263 treated firm-fiscal quarters, 168 cannot be matched to any eligible control firm

within standard tolerances (specifically, a 0.005 caliper). The final treatment sample therefore

consists of 2,095 firm-fiscal quarters with one or more exogenous coverage termination events

affecting 1,468 unique firms and a corresponding sample of 2,095 matched controls.

1.3 Panel-Regression Sample

     For the purposes of our tests, we retain (up to) four quarters before and (up to) four quarters

after each of the 2,095 termination quarters for both treated firms and their matched controls. 13 In

total, the estimation sample used in our panel-regression tests consists of 17,017 firm-fiscal

quarters for treated firms and 17,239 firm-fiscal quarters for their controls.

11
   Our results are robust to allowing liquidity to have an industry or market-wide component.
12
   Mirroring the other filters we impose on treated firms, we require that control firms are already guiders and trade in
both the quarter before and the quarter after a treated firm’s coverage termination. The match is implemented using a
nearest-neighbor propensity score match without replacement. As in KL, both treated and control firms are also
required to be operating companies (CRSP share codes ≤ 12).
13
   We refer to these nine-quarter spans as termination episodes. Recall that we require firms not to have suffered an
exogenous coverage termination in the four fiscal quarters before entering our sample. Thus, none of the 2,095
termination episodes overlaps in time for the same firm and so each treated firm-fiscal quarter is present at most once.

                                                                                                                        8
     To avoid look-ahead bias, our filters allow firms to suffer further exogenous shocks to their

analyst coverage in the four quarters after the initial termination quarter. Such further shocks occur

in 592 post-termination quarters, bringing the total number of affected quarters to 2,687 (= 2,095 +

592). Bearing in mind that some firms suffer multiple shocks in a given fiscal quarter, the overall

number of coverage shocks captured in our panel-regression sample is 2,821, or 63.7% of the

4,429 coverage shocks in KL’s sample. 14

1.4 Descriptive Statistics

     Table 2 shows how tightly matched treated and control firms are. Panel A reports summary

statistics for the four variables we match on, along with differences in means and medians between

the two groups of firms. Market capitalization averages $7,861 million for treated firms and

$7,919 million for controls. The average treated firm is covered by 6.9 analysts pre-termination,

compared to an average of 7 analysts among the controls. Average monthly return volatility is

3.2% for treated firms and 3.3% for controls. And finally, log AIM averages 0.049 for both groups.

None of these differences in means is statistically significant at even the 10% level. The same is

true of the medians, which are similarly close.

     Panel B reports eight measures of voluntary disclosure. At the broadest level, 33.4% of treated

firms and 31.9% of the controls provide some kind of guidance in the quarter preceding a

termination. Forecasts (defined as guidance issued before the end of the fiscal quarter) are more

common than pre-announcements (defined as guidance issued after the end of the fiscal quarter

but before actual earnings are announced): 27.5% (26.7%) of treated (control) firms provide

forecasts while 9.4% (8.3%) of treated (control) firms pre-announce. None of the differences

between treated and control firms is significant in the quarter before the match.

     In terms of form, guidance can be quantitative (providing a numerical earnings forecast or

forecast range); or it can be qualitative (to the effect that earnings are forecast to be above, below,
14
  Non-guiders account for 1,174 of the 1,608 KL coverage shocks that do not make it into our sample. The remainder
comes mostly from serially shocked firms.

                                                                                                                 9
or in line with expectations without providing a numerical estimate). Consistent with many prior

studies, we find that quantitative guidance is more common: it is provided by around 30% of

firms, compared to around 5% of firms that provide qualitative guidance. At the time of matching,

there are no significant differences between treated and control firms in these proportions.

   We distinguish three types of content: negative, positive, and ‘hot air.’ We code guidance as

negative (positive) if management supplies an earnings estimate that falls below (exceeds) the

prevailing consensus (i.e., the median analyst forecast) one day before the guidance date. We code

the remaining guidance as ‘hot air,’ capturing cases where management supplies guidance that

does not differ from the prevailing consensus. In an average quarter, negative guidance is around

twice as likely as positive guidance (about 18% versus 9%). Around 7% of firms provide guidance

that amounts to hot air. As is the case for the other variables reported in Table 2, treated and

control firms do not differ significantly in the content of their guidance before the coverage shock.

   To provide a broader context for these patterns, Figure 2 shows trends in quarterly guidance in

First Call’s CIG database going back to 1998, the year First Call began to systematically collect

guidance. The top left chart neatly illustrates the large impact of the SEC’s Regulation Fair

Disclosure, which came into effect on October 23, 2000. Quarterly instances of guidance increased

from 735 in Q3, 2000 to 1,132 in Q4, 2000 and 1,566 in Q1, 2001, consistent with firms shifting

from a private to a public channel of communication. Since then guidance has trended downwards.

In Q3, 2010, the last quarter for which guidance data is available, firms issued 588 pieces of

guidance according to First Call. The remaining three graphs in Figure 2 provide breakdowns of

voluntary guidance by horizon, form, and content. They show that forecasts are more numerous

than pre-announcements, that guidance is increasingly (and now virtually exclusively) quantitative

in nature, and that negative guidance outnumbers positive guidance around two-to-one. These

patterns mirror those we see in our sample.




                                                                                                    10
2. Empirical Strategy

   Our aim is two-fold: to test if firms respond to a change in their information environments by

changing the amount of information they disclose voluntarily; and to test if voluntary disclosure

has a causal effect on quantities such as liquidity and firm value. To establish the former, we

estimate a diff-in-diff. This requires an exogenous shock to a firm’s information environment,

which we borrow from KL. The identification assumption is that KL’s coverage terminations do

not coincide with other shocks that would make it hard to isolate changes in the information

environment from other confounding changes. The chief identification concern is that the

brokerage-house closures that cause coverage terminations could also upset trading liquidity if

market-making operations were shut down at the same time. Though this turns out to rarely be the

case in practice, we show that our results hold when we exclude the small number of firms that

experience simultaneous shocks to analyst coverage and to market-making.

   To establish whether firms’ disclosure behavior has a causal effect on liquidity and firm value,

we estimate instrumental-variables regressions using KL’s coverage terminations as plausibly

random shocks to the perceived benefits of voluntary disclosure. The identification assumption

that is central to the causal interpretation of our findings is that coverage shocks are uncorrelated

with unobservable factors that might impact liquidity and firm value. In addition to ruling out

changes in market-making as an alternative channel, we use a falsification (or placebo) test to put

restrictions on the nature of any remaining unobservable factor. Specifically, the placebo test

implies that any alternative channel must result in a recovery in liquidity and firm value only

among firms with a history of disclosing more than is mandated by law and regulation and not

among firms without a guidance history. While unobserved channels can never be ruled out, the

most straightforward dimension on which these two groups of firms differ is voluntary disclosure.

   To map the following discussion of our empirical results to our empirical strategy, it is useful

to summarize the timeline of events as revealed by the data. In quarter t = 0, a firm suffers an

                                                                                                    11
exogenous shock to its information environment in the form of a loss of analyst coverage.

Investors react instantly to the increased information asymmetry by reducing the firm’s liquidity

and its value in the same quarter. Guiders – but not non-guiders – respond by increasing voluntary

disclosure for a period of four quarters beginning in quarter t = 0. In quarter t = +1, investors react

to the increased disclosure and liquidity and firm value recover.

3. The Effect of Coverage Shocks on Liquidity

3.1 Contemporaneous Effects

     We begin by replicating, in our sample, KL’s finding that exogenous coverage terminations

are associated with an immediate, sizeable, and significant reduction in liquidity. KL perform a

diff-in-diff test comparing changes in AIM from the 3 months before a coverage termination day to

the 3 months after for treated firms and a set of control firms matched on pre-event size, book-to-

market, and liquidity. Our matching criteria are somewhat different from theirs, 15 as is our unit of

time (fiscal quarters rather than event days), and as a result of filtering out non-guiders and serially

shocked firms, our treatment sample is a subset of theirs.

     As Table 3 shows, these sampling differences do not affect the results. Like KL, we observe

sizeable and significant increases in log AIM following coverage terminations. 16 In the sample of

2,095 treated firm-quarters, illiquidity increases by an average of 0.024 from the prior-quarter

average of 0.049. The 2,095 control firm-quarters also see their illiquidity increase, though by

less: their change averages 0.014. 17 The difference-in-differences of 0.010 is both economically

large and statistically significant (at the 0.033 level) based on bootstrapped standard errors

15
   KL focus on the asset pricing implications of shocks to information asymmetry and thus match on size, book-to-
market, and liquidity, three of the most common asset pricing characteristics. Our focus instead is on liquidity per se.
As mentioned earlier, liquidity has been linked to size, volatility, and analyst coverage, so our matching criteria are
designed to hold these characteristics constant between the treatment and control samples.
16
   Irvine (2003) finds that liquidity improves following coverage initiations and Ellul and Panayides (2009) find that
liquidity suffers following coverage terminations. In contrast to KL and to our research design, these studies employ
endogenous coverage changes, making it hard to rule out that the analysts in their samples react to an omitted variable
that correlates with changes in liquidity.
17
   The fact that control firms experience non-zero changes in AIM reflects secular trends and swings in liquidity and
illustrates the need to perform diff-in-diff tests. See KL for further discussion.

                                                                                                                     12
stratified by fiscal quarter. 18,19

     These results are unchanged if we condition on other contemporaneous firm-level changes that

could affect liquidity. Table 4, column 1 reports a firm-level least-squares panel regression of log

AIM on an indicator for firms suffering a coverage shock and three lagged covariates that prior

literature has linked to liquidity: log market cap, the log number of analysts covering the stock,

and return volatility. We also include fiscal-quarter fixed effects to control for possible

seasonalities in a firm’s information environment over the course of its fiscal year; an indicator for

firms that are net equity issuers; 20 and year effects. The diff-in-diff estimate declines marginally,

from 0.010 to 0.008. It remains statistically significant, regardless of the assumptions we make

about the variance-covariance matrix: clustering the standard errors by firm yields a p-value of

0.002 (column 1) while bootstrapping them stratified by quarter yields a marginally higher p-value

of 0.004 (column 2). To validate these p-values, we follow Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan

(2004). We randomly generate 1,000 sets of 4,185 ‘pseudo coverage shocks’, filter the

observations as in Table 1, create matched control samples, and re-estimate the regression. This

yields 1,000 estimates of the effect of made-up (rather than actual) ‘shocks’ on liquidity. The

empirical probability of observing a coefficient as large as 0.008 in these random data is 0.044 (44

out of the 1,000 trials). This suggests that the clustered standard errors in columns 1 and 2 are

downward biased, but not by enough to falsely reject the null of no (real) effect at the 5% level. 21

3.2 Dynamics

     Having confirmed KL’s finding that coverage terminations have a first-order adverse effect on

liquidity, we next investigate the dynamics of liquidity. Column 3 adds three lags of the coverage-
18
   Bootstrapping adjusts for potential cross-sectional dependence due to time clustering as multiple stocks are
terminated in each of the 43 brokerage-firm closures.
19
   The diff-in-diff estimate is a third smaller than the 0.015 diff-in-diff reported in KL. This is due to the fact that we
exclude non-guiders. Non-guiders’ liquidity is more sensitive to coverage shocks, in part because they are covered by
significantly fewer analysts to begin with (4.8 versus 6.9, on average).
20
   While equity issuance is not an obvious determinant of liquidity, Lang and Lundholm (1993) show that net equity
issuers have reason to provide more voluntary disclosure.
21
   The other coefficients confirm that larger firms and firms covered by more analysts are significantly more liquid,
consistent with prior work, as are net equity issuers.

                                                                                                                         13
shock indicator. Shocks dated t = –1 have a statistically significant effect on illiquidity (p=0.004)

but, perhaps surprisingly, the effect is negative. 22 This suggests that the contemporaneous liquidity

hit due to coverage shocks at t = 0 is partially reversed one quarter later. This novel finding, which

extends KL’s analysis, suggests that the effect of coverage terminations on liquidity is, to some

extent, transitory. Lags dated t = –2 and t = –3 are neither economically nor statistically

significant, so the adjustment process appears to be completed within one fiscal quarter.

     What could explain these liquidity reversals? They could of course simply be random, but

using our 1,000 trials of randomly generated ‘pseudo coverage shocks’, we never see a significant

increase in AIM being followed by a significant decrease (or vice versa).

     The two principal non-random explanations for the recovery in liquidity are either that firms

seek to fill the information gap created by the loss of analyst coverage or that some force external

to the firm causes liquidity to improve after a while. A leading external force that could be at work

is changes in market-making. 23 If the closure of a brokerage firm’s research operation tends to

coincide with the closure of its market-making operation, liquidity might initially fall not because

of a change in the information environment but due to a change in the mechanics of trading. After

a while, liquidity might recover not because the firm takes curative action but due to other

brokerage houses stepping up their market-making activities in the firm’s stock.

     This channel can be tested directly. We first identify which of the 43 brokerage firms in the

KL sample had market-making operations at the relevant time, based on data from Nastraq and

Thomson-Reuters. Twelve did not. For the 31 that did, we then identify which closed down both

their market-making and research operations at the same time. Fifteen of the 31 brokerage firms


22
   In our 1,000 trials using randomly generated ‘pseudo coverage shocks’, the empirical probability of observing a
coefficient as large (in absolute terms) as the one estimated for t = –1 is 0.02 (20 out of 1,000 trials).
23
   Another potential external channel is beneficial changes in other analysts’ behavior. This can easily be ruled out.
We know from Hong and Kacperczyk (2010) that the remaining analysts covering the stock produce more biased
research after a coverage termination, causing the information environment to deteriorate rather than to improve. We
replicate this finding in our setting. Nor does a coverage termination induce other analysts to initiate coverage: we find
no significant increase in analyst coverage one quarter after the initial shock (p=0.968).

                                                                                                                      14
kept their market-making operations going while 16 shut them down. However, these 16 brokers

did not necessarily make markets in all of the 2,752 stocks that their analysts covered. In fact, the

overlap is small: only 564 stocks suffered both a loss of market-making and a loss of research.

That represents 12.7% of the 4,429 treated stocks in KL. After applying the filters to assemble our

matched treatment and control panels, there are 318 (out of 2,095) treated firm-quarters involving

a simultaneous shock to market-making and research coverage.

     Column 4 allows the treatment effect and subsequent reversal to depend on whether a firm

receives only a research shock or both a research and a market-making shock. For the former, we

see a decline in liquidity in the shock quarter and a subsequent reversal. The point estimates are

virtually identical to those obtained for the sample as a whole (see column 3). Given that these

firms suffer ‘pure’ research shocks, reversals cannot be driven by an initial loss and subsequent

recovery of market-making. 24 Interestingly, the liquidity dynamics of firms suffering both types of

shocks are statistically indistinguishable from those of firms suffering only a loss of research

coverage. Thus, the additional market-making shock does not exacerbate the liquidity decline.

     In column 5, we use a different sample, composed of firms that suffer only an exogenous

reduction in the number of market makers – without at the same time suffering a reduction in

analyst coverage – and their matched controls. 25 Not surprisingly, liquidity declines substantially

when a firm loses a market maker (p<0.001). But unlike in the case of a loss of analyst, there is no

subsequent recovery. In fact, liquidity continues to decline significantly, compared to matched

control firms, for two more quarters. The stark difference in average liquidity dynamics between

firms losing an analyst and firms losing a market-maker is interesting. While both result in an


24
   Indeed, when we model the dynamics of the number of market makers around coverage shocks (CRSP variable
mmcnt), we find no evidence of a fall in the number of market makers coincident with the analyst loss (p=0.878), nor
any evidence of a subsequent rebound in the number of market makers (p=0.726).
25
   These exogenous market-maker shocks come from a sample of 50 closures of market-making operations in 2000-
2008. Where a broker-dealer closes both market-making and research, we exclude stocks that are affected by both
shocks. We apply the same filters to this sample as to the main sample (see Section 1.2) and identify control firms
using the same matching criteria as before, except that we also match on the pre-shock number of market-makers.

                                                                                                                  15
immediate reduction in liquidity, the mechanism is presumably different: unlike a loss of market-

maker, a loss of analyst coverage changes the firm’s information environment. We will later test

whether firms respond differently to the two types of shock and whether such differences in

responses can explain the lack of liquidity reversal following market-making shocks.

       Overall, these results go along way towards ruling out a confounding market-making channel.

We next turn to a falsification (or placebo) test to investigate the potential for other omitted

variables to be confounding our results.

3.3 Placebo Test

       As Angrist and Krueger (1999) discuss, a placebo test uses a different sub-population in which

the treatment effect is expected not to be observed (called the placebo group) because the sub-

population is thought to be immune to the treatment or does not have access to the treatment. In

our setting, the treatment in question is an increase in voluntary disclosure and the treatment effect

is the liquidity reversal one quarter after the coverage shock. If we observed the same treatment

effect in the placebo group as in the sub-population of treated firms, we would infer that the

treatment (more disclosure) is unlikely to cause the observed treatment effect (liquidity reversal).

In this case, some omitted variable would confound the treatment effect, and so we could not

conclude that more disclosure caused the liquidity reversal.

       We use firms with no history of providing guidance as the placebo group. 26 (As we have

already seen, non-guiders rarely become guiders following a coverage shock. 27 By revealed

preference, for the majority of non-guiders suffering a shock, the marginal cost of initiating a

commitment to guidance exceeds the expected benefit.) Loss of research coverage depresses

liquidity for both guiders and non-guiders, but only guiders can react to the shock by increasing

voluntary disclosure. Thus, if the liquidity reversals we observe among guiders are caused by

management’s curative efforts, and not by some other channel that is available to both guiders and
26
     Recall that the treatment and control samples used in our tests so far screen out such non-guiding firms.
27
     See footnote 13.

                                                                                                                 16
non-guiders, we expect to find no significant reversals among non-guiders. On the other hand, if

the reversal pattern is confounded by some omitted variable, liquidity should subsequently recover

regardless of disclosure behavior.

   To implement the placebo test, we create a matched sample of non-guiders using the same

algorithm as for the guiders. We start with the 1,122 shocks suffered by non-guiders (see Table 1),

remove serially shocked firms, and find eligible controls matched on size, analyst coverage,

volatility, and AIM. This yields 769 panels of treated firms and 769 panels of matched controls.

Only 27 of the 769 treated non-guiders (3.5%) become guiders in the quarter after their coverage

shock, confirming that losing an analyst is not a sufficiently large shock to induce non-guiders to

commit to becoming guiders.

   Column 6 of Table 4 estimates the liquidity regression in the non-guider sample, controlling

for observed determinants of liquidity. As in the guider sample, we find a strong and significant

contemporaneous effect of coverage shocks on the illiquidity of non-guiders. The point estimate of

0.021 is three times larger than the equivalent point estimate of 0.007 for guiders in column 3.

This reflects the fact that non-guiders are smaller (mean: $4 billion) and covered by fewer analysts

(mean: 4.8), and so are more sensitive to shocks to their information environments. More

importantly, for our purposes, we find that the contemporaneous increase in illiquidity following

coverage shocks is not subsequently reversed. The effect of lagged shocks on AIM is -0.006,

which is not only statistically insignificant (p=0.417) but also economically small relative to the

estimate of the initial liquidity drop of 0.021. Further lags are similarly small and insignificant.

Thus, coverage shocks appear to have a persistent effect on the liquidity of non-guiders.

   This absence of reversals among treated non-guiders contrasts with the strong evidence of

reversals among treated guiders. It is hard to reconcile with an omitted variable: if some other

mechanism caused the liquidity reversals, why would this process only happen among guiders and

not among non-guiders? For example, it is not obviously consistent with an overreaction story: if

                                                                                                       17
the reversals reflected the correction of an initial overreaction among investors, there is no obvious

reason why non-guiders should not also see reversals.

   Instead, a plausible interpretation of this falsification test is that guiders respond to coverage

shocks by disclosing more information, which leads to a subsequent improvement in liquidity,

while non-guiders choose not to become guiders and so their liquidity remains depressed. While

we do not claim that this is the only possible interpretation of the observed liquidity reversals in

our treatment sample, we note that any alternative interpretation needs to be able to explain why

liquidity later recovers only among guiders and not also among non-guiders.

3.4 The Extensive Margin

   While incidental to the focus of our paper, it is intriguing that so few non-guiders start guiding

when hit with a coverage shock: in the overall sample, only 57 non-guiders become guiders after

losing coverage; in the placebo sample, only 27 do. By revealed preference, non-guiders view the

cost of voluntary disclosure as greater than the benefit. It is an empirical question whether the

coverage shocks in our sample are sufficiently large to change this cost-benefit analysis for a

substantial fraction of the non-guiders. The fact that few become guiders suggests that the costs of

disclosure for these firms must be quite large relative to the size of the liquidity shocks they suffer.

   Prior literature discusses what these costs might be. They include the risk that voluntary

disclosure could benefit competitors (Campbell (1979), Verrecchia (1983), Bhattacharya and

Ritter (1983)) or result in shareholder lawsuits (Skinner (1994), Francis, Philbrick, and Schipper

(1994)). Moreover, the literature emphasizes that it is a sustained commitment to disclosure that

improves a firm’s information environment, not a one-off piece of guidance (see Diamond and

Verrecchia (1991), Leuz and Verrecchia (2000), or Clinch and Verrecchia (2011)). Once begun,

guidance is costly to discontinue: Chen, Matsumoto, and Rajgopal (2011) show that

discontinuation announcements lead to significant share price falls and that analysts interpret them

as implicit admissions that future earnings will be lower than expected. Firms are thus unlikely to

                                                                                                        18
start guiding unless they believe they will want to continue guiding in future.

3.5 Identifying Assumptions

   The results in Table 4 suggest that contemporaneous coverage shocks are not a suitable

candidate for instrumenting voluntary disclosure for the purpose of estimating the effect of

disclosure on liquidity or firm value. The reason is that they directly affect a firm’s liquidity and

so violate the exclusion restriction. But lagged coverage shocks have the potential to be a valid

instrument. Their reduced-form effect on illiquidity in Table 4 is negative, which is consistent

with the proposed disclosure channel. This is reassuring: as Angrist and Krueger (2001) note, if

we do not see the proposed causal relation of interest in the reduced form, it is probably not there.

   To be a valid instrument, lagged coverage shocks must satisfy three conditions. As argued

earlier, they must not correlate with either 1) liquidity directly (other than through their effect on

disclosure) or 2) any omitted variable that in turn determines liquidity. Our tests using market-

making shocks and the placebo group of non-guiders suggest that these conditions are plausibly

satisfied: it is hard to think of an alternative channel, besides disclosure, that would cause the

increase in illiquidity to subsequently reverse only among guiders and not among non-guiders.

   The third condition is that coverage shocks must correlate with voluntary disclosure, and to

avoid weak-instrument problems, must do so ‘strongly.’ We next test directly if firms

(specifically, guiders) indeed disclose significantly more information when their information

environment has been hit with an exogenous coverage shock.

4. Guidance Response to Exogenous Shocks to Information Environment

4.1 Baseline Models

   Table 5, Panel A relates one particular form of voluntary disclosure – management forecasts of

quarterly earnings – to coverage shocks dated from t = –4 to t = +4. Following Angrist (2001),

column 1 is estimated as a linear probability model with firm fixed effects. An exogenous

coverage shock has a positive and significant contemporaneous effect on the probability that a

                                                                                                        19
firm issues a forecast at t = 0 (p<0.001 when standard errors are clustered by firm). The economic

magnitude is sizeable: firms suffering coverage shocks are 4.9 percentage points more likely to

issue a forecast than are observably similar control firms. Relative to the pre-shock probability of

27.5% reported in Table 2, this represents an increase of 17.8% (0.049/0.275 – 1). This result is

consistent with our conjecture that guiders respond to coverage shocks by disclosing more

information and supports the validity of the proposed instrument.

    The first three lags of the shock indicator are also positive and statistically significant (at the

0.013 level or better), suggesting that firms increase their voluntary disclosure for a period of one

year following a coverage shock. The lagged coefficients are somewhat smaller than the

contemporaneous effect of 0.049 but remain sizeable at 0.033 to 0.042. We find no evidence that

firms anticipate future shocks, in view of the small and insignificant coefficients estimated for the

leads. This supports KL’s conclusion that the coverage shocks are exogenous. Among the firm

characteristics, only size is significant; it has a positive effect on disclosure. Overall, the

regression has good fit in light of the relatively high R2 of 49.7%.

    Column 2 shows what happens if instead of clustering the standard errors by firm, we cluster

by calendar quarter. As in the diff-in-diffs shown in Table 3, where we also cluster by quarter, this

helps to adjust for potential cross-sectional dependence due to time clustering of the 43 brokerage

closures. The results are virtually identical: the p-value for contemporaneous shocks increases

marginally from <0.001 to 0.004 while those for the first three lags range from 0.019 to 0.028.

    Linear probability models are simple to estimate but sometimes generate coefficients that

imply probabilities outside the unit interval. While the results in columns 1 and 2 suggest that this

potential drawback does not apply here, column 3 checks if our results are robust to estimating a

logit model with firm fixed effects instead. None of our conclusions is affected, so the remainder

of the paper reports linear probability models whenever the dependent variable is binary.

    As a further robustness check, column 4 models the number of forecasts management issues in

                                                                                                          20
a quarter, instead of the probability of a forecast being issued. Given the count nature of this

dependent variable, we estimate a Poisson model with firm fixed effects. This too leaves our

conclusions unaffected: firms respond to coverage shocks by increasing their disclosure, and they

sustain increased disclosure for a period of four quarters.

   To understand why firms step up disclosure when they lose analyst coverage, we briefly return

to our alternative sample of firms that suffer an exogenous reduction in the number of market

makers but no simultaneous reduction in analyst coverage. Both types of shock hurt liquidity, but

we see a subsequent recovery only after coverage shocks. Column 5 of Table 5, Panel A shows

that firms do not change their guidance behavior when losing a market-maker, despite the hit to

liquidity. This is interesting for two reasons. First, the fact that liquidity does not subsequently

recover hints at a causal effect of voluntary disclosure on liquidity. Second, the stark difference in

firms’ response to the two types of liquidity shock suggests that managers view them as distinct:

liquidity shocks that result from an increase in information asymmetries among investors, in the

wake of coverage terminations, can be cured (or at least mitigated) by voluntarily disclosing more

information; liquidity shocks that result from changes in the mechanics of trading cannot.

   These patterns are consistent with the view that managers consider guidance to be a substitute

for externally produced information, such as analyst research, and suggest that the mechanism that

brings about the liquidity reversals we observe in the data is management’s deliberate attempts to

mitigate the consequences of an exogenous increase in information asymmetry.

4.2 What Kind of Information Do Firms Disclose?

   As we saw in Table 2, guidance can take a number of forms. Panel B of Table 5 relates the

guidance measures introduced in Table 2 to coverage shocks and firm characteristics. Given the

results of Panel A, we focus on shocks dated t = –3 to t = 0 and estimate linear probability models

with firm, year, and fiscal-quarter fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by firm as before.

The first three columns focus on the guidance horizon and show that firms respond to coverage

                                                                                                       21
shocks by issuing forecasts of future earnings rather than pre-announcing imminent earnings. They

are thus more likely to issue guidance earlier in the fiscal quarter, consistent with the view that

pre-announcements are largely nondiscretionary (reflecting, for example, profit warnings).

     The next two columns distinguish between quantitative and qualitative guidance. With the

exception of a small and marginally significant coefficient for shocks at t = –2, we find no

evidence that firms become more likely to issue qualitative guidance following coverage shocks.

They do, however, become significantly more likely to issue quantitative guidance, and the effect

is again economically large and sustained for a period of four quarters.

     The final three columns consider the content of the guidance. In response to losing coverage,

firms become 15.8% more likely to disclose negative news (p=0.002), 28 but they do not increase

their disclosure of positive news, nor do they become more likely to release information that

amounts to ‘hot air’. That managers are more likely to disclose negative news is consistent with

the findings of Hong, Lim, and Stein (2000), who conclude on p. 279 that “analyst coverage is

especially important in propagating bad news.” Along these lines, if managers wish to alleviate

information asymmetry arising from coverage terminations, being forthcoming with negative news

is likely to be a good substitute for lost coverage and also signals a strong commitment to

continued disclosure, consistent with Clinch and Verrecchia (2011).

4.3 Which Firms Respond More Strongly?

     In this section, we explore cross-sectional variation in firms’ responses to coverage

terminations. We first consider variation in the severity of the coverage shock by adding two

indicator variables set equal to 1 if a firm suffered a “particularly severe” shock in quarters t = 0 or

t = –1. We measure severity using the size of the diff-in-diff change in Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity

measure, AIM, and consider different cut-offs for severity. In column 1 of Table 5, Panel C, we

classify shocks resulting in above-median increases in illiquidity as more severe.
28
  This compares the coefficient of 0.029 in column 6 to the pre-shock likelihood of a treated firm releasing negative
news (0.183 in Table 2).

                                                                                                                    22
   The test shows that responses are concentrated among firms experiencing severe declines in

liquidity. Firms suffering below-median shocks are nearly as likely as their controls to issue a

forecast: the coefficient estimate for contemporaneous shocks is 0.008 with a p-value of 0.426. In

contrast, firms suffering severe shocks are 5.1 percentage points more likely to issue a forecast

than firms suffering below-median shocks and 5.9 percentage points more likely to do so than

their controls (= 0.051 + 0.008). Both differences are highly statistically significant (p<0.001).

   Column 2 repeats this exercise with a higher threshold, namely firms with AIM in the top

quartile of the distribution. The results are similar to those in column 1, except that the effect of

non-severe shocks (those in the first three quartiles) becomes larger and statistically significant

(presumably due to the experience of third-quartile firms, which are coded as suffering severe

shocks in column 2 but not in column 3). In column 3, we code severe shocks as those leading to a

AIM that is significantly different from zero at the 5% level (in a two-tailed test). The estimates

resemble those in the other specifications. Thus, regardless of how we measure severity, our

results suggest that firms respond more strongly to more severe shocks to their liquidity.

   Columns 4 through 7 consider firm characteristics that may influence the likelihood of a

disclosure response. Prior work argues that firms that manage earnings are reluctant to provide

voluntary disclosure (Dye (1988), Trueman and Titman (1988), Schipper (1989), and Jo and Kim

(2007)). If so, we expect that earnings managers welcome the reduced attention that accompanies

a coverage shock and, therefore, eschew a curative disclosure action. Consistent with this

prediction, we find a lower likelihood of a disclosure response among firms that habitually meet or

beat analyst expectations (column 4) or have particularly high discretionary accruals (column 5).

   Column 6 reports a significantly smaller guidance response among stocks predominantly

owned by institutional investors, while column 7 shows that managers respond more strongly to a




                                                                                                        23
coverage termination if their stock is covered by relatively few analysts to begin with. 29

       Panel D of Table 5 relates firms’ disclosure responses to analyst characteristics. KL show that

exogenous terminations involving ‘local’ analysts (those that are located close to a firm’s

headquarters) are associated with significantly larger price falls. This is consistent with prior

evidence (e.g., Malloy (2005)) that local analysts provide more accurate earnings forecasts and

thus more pricing-relevant signals. In columns 1 through 3, we investigate whether firms respond

more strongly to the loss of a local analyst. Column 1 codes a local analyst as one located within a

50-mile radius of the firm’s headquarters. Upon losing a distant analyst, firms are 3.1 percentage

points more likely to issue a forecast than are their controls (p<0.001). Upon losing a local analyst,

this likelihood increases by an additional 5.9 percentage points (p=0.001) for a total increase of 9

percentage points (=0.031+0.059) relative to the controls (p<0.001). Columns 2 and 3 expand the

radius to 100 miles and 200 miles, respectively, which reduces the differential effect somewhat, to

5.2 and 3.1 percentage points, respectively (both significant at the 5% level or better). These

results indicate that firms step up their disclosure by more after losing a more local analyst.

       KL predict that closures of institutions-only brokers should have a smaller (or no) effect on

share prices than closures of retail brokers and find this to be true. For our purposes, this should

translate into a smaller (or no) guidance response following loss of an institutional analyst, as

many institutions can either obtain the lost analyst signal from another broker or substitute for it

in-house. Column 4 adds an indicator set equal to 1 if a firm loses an institutional analyst to

capture the incremental effect relative to losing a retail analyst. The results confirm our prediction.

Upon losing a retail analyst, firms are 6.1 percentage points more likely to issue guidance

(p<0.001). In contrast, firms do not respond to the loss of an institutional analyst: the incremental

effect is –4.9 percentage points, meaning they are only 1.2 percentage points more likely than their

controls to issue guidance that quarter (=0.061–0.049). This is neither large economically nor

29
     We also find a negative correlations with firm size and forecast dispersion, though these are noisily estimated.

                                                                                                                        24
significant statistically (p=0.193).

     These patterns suggest the possibility that firms target retail investors with their voluntary

disclosures. They echo our earlier finding of stronger disclosure responses among firms with a

retail-heavy shareholder base. Since the categorization into “retail” and “institutional” investors

plausibly proxies for the “uninformed” and “informed” investors in an asymmetric-information

model, this evidence also supports the interpretation that information asymmetry is an important

channel through which managers influence liquidity. 30

     Column 5 reports how disclosure responds to terminations involving highly-rated analysts

(those ranked all-stars by Institutional Investor magazine or master stock pickers by the Wall

Street Journal). When losing an unrated analyst, firms are 3.1 percentage points more likely to

issue guidance than their controls (p<0.001). When losing a highly-rated analyst, this likelihood

increases by an additional 10.2 percentage points (p<0.001). The total response to an all-star’s

termination of 13.3 percentage points is more than four times larger than the response to losing an

unrated analyst.

     Column 6 tests whether firms respond more to losing an analyst who provides a high degree of

firm-specific information. To quantify this, we measure how an analyst contributes to a firm’s

non-synchronicity with the market and its industry (see Roll (1988) and Roulstone and Piotroski

(2004); Appendix A provides details on how we construct this measure). When non-synchronicity

is high, stock returns may be interpreted as incorporating a relatively high degree of firm-specific

(rather than aggregate or industry-wide) information. We find that disclosure responds nearly

twice as strongly when losing an analyst who produces more firm-specific information (up by 5.6

percentage points) relative to losing an analyst who produces relatively more industry-specific

information (up by 2.5 percentage points).

30
  KL find that exogenous coverage terminations induce retail investors to sell the stock and institutional investors to
buy it. Stock purchases by informed investors, despite the loss of a public signal, is a unique prediction of
asymmetric-information models and provides further support that voluntary disclosure responds to changes in
information asymmetry.

                                                                                                                      25
   The final characteristic we consider is the analyst’s forecast accuracy relative to her peers (see

Hong and Kubik (2003)). Column 7 shows that relative forecast accuracy makes no difference to

firms’ responses to coverage shocks.

4.4 Summary

   The results in Table 5 confirm our conjecture that firms seek to mitigate shocks to their

information environments by changing the amount of information they disclose voluntarily:

consistent with the interpretation that they respond to changes in the distribution of information

among investors, we find that firms increase voluntary disclosure in response to coverage shocks

but not when their liquidity declines following the exogenous loss of a market-maker. These

increases are persistent rather than short-lived and take the form of informative guidance.

   From an identification point, these patterns are encouraging: essentially, the specifications in

Table 5 represent the first stage in a two-stage model that instruments disclosure with coverage

shocks to identify the causal effect of disclosure on liquidity. Identification requires a strong

correlation between coverage shocks and disclosure, and Table 5 shows such a strong correlation.

Before we can estimate the second stage, however, we need to verify that the data support the

timeline that our identification strategy assumes. Table 5 implies that contemporaneous shocks

affect disclosure, while Table 4 implies that contemporaneous shocks violate the exclusion

restriction. Thus, we have no instrument for the contemporaneous effect of disclosure on liquidity.

But we can potentially exploit lagged coverage shocks as an instrument for similarly lagged

disclosure choices, as lagged coverage shocks have no apparent direct effect on liquidity. This

approach will work as long as disclosure affects liquidity with a lag. We now test whether it does.

5. The Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Liquidity and Firm Value

5.1 “Naïve” Relation Between Voluntary Disclosure and Liquidity

   We begin by estimating “naïve” regressions of log AIM on disclosure. They are naïve in the

sense of not attempting to correct for the endogeneity of disclosure. Column 1 of Table 6 includes

                                                                                                     26
indicator variables for contemporaneous and once-lagged management forecasts alongside firm

characteristics and firm, year, and fiscal-quarter fixed effects. The coefficient estimate for

contemporaneous guidance is negative but neither large, at –0.004, nor statistically different from

zero (p=0.227). The estimate for lagged guidance of –0.010 (p=0.006) is nearly three times larger.

This supports the timeline underpinning our identification strategy. Economically, the naïve effect

is modest in size. A one standard deviation increase in the lagged propensity to guide is associated

with only a 7.6% reduction in log AIM, holding all other covariates at their sample means.

       The remaining eight columns of Table 6 regress log AIM on the first lag of the eight guidance

measures introduced in Table 2. We find significant correlations between liquidity and each of the

lagged forecasts, quantitative and qualitative guidance, and negative news, but not between

liquidity and pre-announcements, positive news, or guidance that amounts to hot air.

       Table 6 also reports tests for first-order serial correlation in the dependent variable using the

modified Durbin-Watson test developed for panel-data models by Bhargava, Franzini, and

Narendranathan (1982). The test fails to reject the null of no first-order serial correlation in AIM

and thus supports our chosen regression specification. 31

5.2 Causal Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Liquidity

       We can now test whether voluntary disclosure has a causal effect on liquidity. We do so by

regressing liquidity in quarter t = +1 on the firm’s disclosure choices dated t = 0, instrumented

using coverage shocks dated t = –3 to t = 0. (See Table 5, Panel B for the corresponding first-stage

estimates.) To recap, the key identifying assumption is that coverage shocks dated –3 to 0 do not

affect liquidity in quarter t = +1 other than through their effect on the firm’s guidance choice. (See

Table 4 for the corresponding reduced-form estimates.)

       Since identification requires that the instrument must correlate strongly with the endogenous

variable, we focus on the four disclosure choices that, according to the first-stage estimates in

31
     Accordingly, our findings are robust to allowing for an AR(1) process in the dependent variable.

                                                                                                           27
Table 5, Panel B, respond significantly to the instrument: management forecasts, forecasts or pre-

announcements, quantitative guidance, and negative news. Staiger-Stock (1997) tests show that

coverage shocks are strong instruments for each of these four disclosure choices.

   Table 7 reports the results. Across the four specifications, we find that voluntary disclosure has

a large and negative causal effect on a firm’s subsequent illiquidity; that is, disclosure improves

liquidity. The sign of this relation is the same as in the naïve regressions in Table 6, but the

magnitude of the effect is between 7 and 12 times greater: the coefficient estimates vary from –

0.075 for management forecasts to –0.148 for negative news. (Each coefficient is statistically

significant, with p-values ranging from 0.034 for management forecasts to 0.001 for negative

news.) The large difference between the IV coefficients in Table 7 and their naïve counterparts in

Table 6 suggests that failure to control for the endogeneity of voluntary disclosure seriously biases

estimates of the beneficial effect of disclosure on liquidity downwards.

5.3 Alternative Liquidity Measures

   Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009) review various liquidity proxies and find that

Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure is the best empirical measure of price impact. Table 8

explores robustness to using six other popular proxies to capture the causal effect of voluntary

disclosure on liquidity, namely bid-ask spreads (Panel A), Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka’s

(2009) effective tick size (Panel B), Madhavan, Richardson, and Rooman’s (1997) lambda, which

measures the adverse selection component of the spread (Panel C), the fraction of zero-return days

(Lesmond, Ogden, and Trzcinka (1999) (Panel D), Easley et al.’s (1996) probability of informed

trading (“PIN”) (Panel E), and Pastor and Stambaugh’s (2003) gamma (Panel F). (For variable

definitions, see Appendix A.) As before, we focus on the four guidance choices that respond to

coverage shocks. The estimates in Table 8 show that our conclusions hold for each of these

alternative liquidity measures.

   In addition to establishing robustness, these tests shed light on the channel linking voluntary

                                                                                                      28
disclosure and liquidity. One of the measures, lambda, is designed to capture the permanent

component of price impact, which is interpreted as the price response resulting from private

information being impounded into prices. Panel C shows large and highly statistically significant

effects of voluntary disclosure on liquidity as measured by lambda. This suggests that disclosure

has an informational effect on liquidity, rather than a purely transaction-cost effect, and so

supports an information-asymmetry interpretation of our results.

5.4 The Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Cash Flow Uncertainty

       To provide further evidence that disclosure affects liquidity through an information channel,

we briefly examine earnings surprises. These are revealing about the information channel because

they capture investors’ uncertainty about cash flows without being affected by alternative drivers

of liquidity, such as the number of market makers, tick size, or other microstructure features.

       KL show that coverage shocks cause the remaining analysts to forecast earnings with greater

error, consistent with the stock’s information environment having deteriorated. We ask whether

firms can mitigate this deterioration through increased voluntary disclosure. Using our IV strategy,

we find that voluntary disclosure causes a significant decrease in future absolute earnings

surprises, which supports our interpretation that increased disclosure enhances liquidity by

improving a stock’s information environment. 32

5.5 The Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Firm Value

       While our primary focus is on liquidity, it is worth asking whether “talking up liquidity” pays

off for firms in the sense of increasing their market value. KL show that firms suffer a hit to their

market value when losing an analyst. Using a reduced-form regression analogous to those shown

in Table 4, we confirm this result in our data (not tabulated). Specifically, the average firm’s book-

to-market ratio increases by 0.051 in the quarter of the shock (p<0.001). In the next quarter,

however, the average firm recovers around half of the initial value reduction (p<0.001). These

32
     Results are available on request.

                                                                                                       29
dynamics mirror the liquidity reversals shown in Table 4. To see if they are caused by a disclosure

response, we estimate a version of our Table 7 two-stage model with book-to-market as the

dependent variable. Specifically, we estimate the causal effect of voluntary disclosure at t = 0 on

firm value at t = +1 using exogenous shocks to analyst coverage as an instrument for disclosure.

   Using the same four measures of disclosure as before, Table 9 shows that increased disclosure

results in a significant subsequent recovery. The IV coefficients imply that a one standard

deviation increase in the probability of voluntary disclosure in response to a coverage shock is

associated with a subsequent reduction in the book-to-market ratio of between –0.017 and –0.044.

The average book-to-market ratio in our sample is 0.540, so disclosure responses produce

percentage changes in book-to-market ratios ranging from –2.7% to –8.2%, all else equal.

6. Conclusions

   Our tests exploit a natural experiment, first explored in Kelly and Ljungqvist (2012), that

amounts to a plausibly exogenous shock to a stock’s information environment. This allows us not

only to investigate how firms respond to such shocks but also to establish how firms’ responses in

turn affect liquidity or value. The exogenous nature of the shocks allows us to instrument firms’

responses and thus to establish a causal link between disclosure and liquidity or value.

   We have three main results. First, we show that firms respond to shocks to their information

environments by stepping up disclosure. Second, firms respond only to the loss of coverage by a

retail analyst and not when they lose coverage by an analyst serving institutional investors. This

novel empirical finding is consistent with the notion that voluntary disclosure is motivated by a

desire to communicate with retail investors. Since retail investors are often thought of as being at

an informational disadvantage relative to institutions, firms appear to view disclosure as a way to

reduce information asymmetries among investors. Theoretical asset pricing models show that

reducing information asymmetries leads to a lower cost of capital and higher share prices. The

recovery in firm value that we see in the data is consistent with this channel.

                                                                                                     30
    Third, we show that voluntary disclosure has a large and beneficial effect on both liquidity and

firm value and that these effects are plausibly causal. This result provides a justification to firms

for voluntarily disclosing more information than is mandated by law and regulations, despite the

potential for shareholder lawsuits claiming ‘inaccurate’ or ‘misleading’ disclosure. It also suggests

that managers can, at least to some extent, shape the liquidity of their firms’ stock.

    The dynamic pattern in liquidity that we exploit for identification is consistent with the

prediction of a recent model of managers’ incentives to commit to voluntary disclosure. Clinch

and Verrecchia (2011) show that increases in information asymmetry can have two countervailing

effects, namely the application of a higher discount rate by investors and an increase in disclosure

in response. Clinch and Verrecchia predict a negative contemporaneous relation between

disclosure and liquidity that subsequently reverses if and when investors believe that managers are

committed to continuing the increased disclosure. Our results support this prediction.

    Our results also speak to the question whether management disclosure and research analyst

coverage are substitutes or complements. Reduced-form regressions come to the conclusion that

they are complements, since firms with a large analyst following appear to engage more intensely

in voluntary disclosure (e.g., Lang and Lundholm (1996)). If, as is likely, both management and

analysts produce more information as a response to uninformed investor demand for information,

a positive reduced-form correlation between disclosure and coverage would arise even if these

signals were substitutes—a bias resulting from failure to account for endogeneity. Our

identification strategy, which in effect captures exogenous shocks to uninformed investor demand

for information, disentangles supply and demand to reveal that management disclosure and analyst

coverage are in fact substitutes: when an analyst randomly drops coverage, management steps in

to replace the lost signal. This, in turn, improves the liquidity of their firms’ stock.




                                                                                                        31
References

Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid-ask spread, Journal of
  Financial Economics 17, 223–249.
Amihud, Yakov, and Haim Mendelson, 1989, The effects of beta, bid-ask spread, residual risk,
  and size on stock returns, Journal of Finance 44, 479–486.
Amihud, Yakov, 2002, Illiquidity and stock returns: Cross-section and time series effects, Journal
  of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.
Angrist, Joshua, 2001, Estimation of limited endogenous variable models with dummy
   endogenous regressors: Simple strategies for empirical practice, Journal of Business and
   Economic Statistics 19, 2–16.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger, 1999, Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics,
   Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, eds. A. Ashenfelter and D. Card, Amsterdam.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger, 2001, Instrumental variables and the search for
   identification: From supply and demand to natural experiments, Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 15, 69–85.
Anilowski, Carol, Mei Feng, and Douglas J. Skinner, 2007, Does earnings guidance affect market
   returns? The nature and information content of aggregate earnings guidance, Journal of
   Accounting and Economics 44, 36–63.
Armstrong, Christopher, John Core, Daniel Taylor, and Robert Verrecchia, 2011, When does
   information asymmetry affect the cost of capital? Journal of Accounting Research 49, 1–40.
Bartov, Eli, Dan Givoloy, and Carla Hayn, 2002, The rewards to meeting or beating earnings
   expectations, Journal of Accounting and Economics 33, 173–204.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004, How much should we trust
   difference in difference estimates?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249–275.
Bhargava, Alok, Louisa Franzini, and Wiji Narendranathan, 1982, Serial correlation and the fixed
   effects model, Review of Economic Studies 49, 533–549.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, and Jay R. Ritter, 1983, Innovation and communication: Signalling with
   partial disclosure, Review of Economic Studies 50, 331–346.
Botosan, Christine, 1997, Disclosure level and the cost of equity capital, Accounting Review 72,
   323–349.
Botosan, Christine, and Marlene Plumlee, 2002, A re-examination of disclosure level and the
   expected cost of equity capital, Journal of Accounting Research 40, 21–40.
Breen, William J., Laurie S. Hodrick, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 2002, Predicting equity liquidity,
   Management Science 48, 470–483.
Brennan, Michael J., and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 1996, Market microstructure and asset
   pricing: On the compensation for illiquidity in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics
   41, 441–464.
Brown, Stephen, and Stephen Hillegeist, 2007, How disclosure quality affects the level of
   information asymmetry, Review of Accounting Studies 12, 443–477.

                                                                                                   32
Campbell, Tim S., 1979, Optimal investment financing decisions and the value of confidentiality,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 14, 913–924.
Chen, Shuping, Dawn A. Matsumoto, and Shivaram Rajgopal, 2011, Is silence golden? An
   empirical analysis of firms that stop earnings guidance, Journal of Accounting and Economics
   51, 134–150.
Chordia, Tarun, Richard Roll, and Avanidhar Subrahmanyam, 2000, Commonality in liquidity,
   Journal of Financial Economics 56, 3–28.
Clinch, Greg, and Robert Verrecchia, 2011, Voluntary disclosure and the cost of capital, Working
    paper, Wharton.
Coller, Maribeth, and Teri Yohn, 1997, Management forecasts and information asymmetry: An
   examination of bid-ask spreads, Journal of Accounting Research 35, 181–191.
Collins, Dan, Raunaq Pungaliya, and Anand Vijh, 2012, The effects of firm growth and model
   specification choices on tests of earnings management, Working paper, University of Iowa.
Daske, Holger, Luzi Hail, Christian Leuz, and Rodgrigo Verdi, 2008, Mandatory IFRS reporting
   around the world: Early evidence on the economic consequences, Journal of Accounting
   Research 46, 1,085–1,142.
Diamond, Douglas W., 1985, Optimal release of information by firms, Journal of Finance 40,
   1071–1094.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of
   capital, Journal of Finance 46, 1325–1359.
Dye, Ronald, 1988, Earnings management in an overlapping generations model, Journal of
   Accounting Research 26, 195–235.
Ellul, Andrew, and Marios Panayides, 2009, Do financial analysts restrain insiders’ informational
    advantage?, Working paper, Indiana University.
Fama, Eugene F., and Arthur B. Laffer, 1971, Information and capital markets, Journal of
   Business 44, 289–298.
Fishman, Michael J., and Kathleen M. Hagerty, 1989, Disclosure decisions by firms and the
    competition for price efficiency, Journal of Finance 44, 633–646.
Francis, Jennifer, Donna Philbrick, and Katherine Schipper, 1994, Shareholder litigation and
   corporate disclosures, Journal of Accounting Research 32, 137–164.
Frank, Murray Z., and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2003, Testing the pecking order theory of capital
   structure, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 217–248.
Goyenko, Ruslan Y., Craig W. Holden, and Charles A. Trzcinka, 2009, Do liquidity measures
   measure liquidity, Journal of Financial Economics 92, 153–181.
Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Shivaram Rajgopal, 2005, The economic implications
   of corporate financial reporting, Journal of Accounting and Economics 40, 3–73.
Hakansson, Nils H., 1977, Interim disclosure and public forecasts: An economic analysis and a
   framework for choice, Accounting Review 52, 396–426.
Hakansson, Nils H., J. Gregory Kunkel, and James A. Ohlson, 1982, Sufficient and necessary

                                                                                                33
   conditions for information to have social value in pure exchange, Journal of Finance 37,
   1169–1181.
Healy, Paul M., and Krishna G. Palepu, 2001, Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and
   the capital markets: a review of the empirical disclosure literature, Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 31, 405–440.
Hirshleifer, Jack, 1971, The private and social value of information and the reward to inventive
   activity, American Economic Review 61, 561–574.
Hong, Harrison, and Marcin Kacpercyzk, 2010, Competition and bias, Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 125, 1683–1725.
Hong, Harrison and Jeffrey Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: career concerns and biased
   earnings forecasts, Journal of Finance 58, 313–351.
Hong, Harrison, Terrence Lim and Jeremy Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: size, analyst
   coverage and the profitability of momentum strategies, Journal of Finance 55, 265–295.
Houston, Joel F., Baruch Lev, and Jennifer W. Tucker, 2010, To guide or not to guide? Causes
   and consequences of stopping quarterly earnings guidance, Contemporary Accounting
   Research 27, 143–185.
Hsieh, Peggy, Timothy Koller, and S.R. Rajan, 2006, The misguided practice of earnings
   guidance, McKinsey on Finance.
Irvine, Paul J., 2003, The incremental impact of analyst initiation of coverage, Journal of
    Corporate Finance 9, 431–451.
Jo, Hoje, and Yongtae Kim, 2007, Disclosure frequency and earnings management, Journal of
    Financial Economics 84, 561–590.
Kelly, Bryan, and Alexander Ljungqvist, 2012, Testing asymmetric-information asset pricing
   models, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1366–1413.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315–1335.
Lang, Mark, Karl Lins, Mark Maffett, 2012, Transparency, liquidity, and valuation: international
   evidence on when transparency matters most, Journal of Accounting Research 50, 729–774.
Lang, Mark, and Russell Lundholm, 1993, Cross-sectional determinants of analyst ratings of
   corporate disclosures, Journal of Accounting Research 31, 246–271.
Lang, Mark, and Russell Lundholm, 1996, Corporate disclosure policy and analyst behavior,
   Accounting Review 71, 467–493.
Lang, Mark, and Mark Maffett, 2011a, Economic effects of transparency in international equity
   markets: a review and suggestions for future research, Foundations and Trends in Accounting
   5, 175–241.
Lang, Mark, and Mark Maffett, 2011b, Transparency and liquidity uncertainty in crisis periods,
   Journal of Accounting and Economics 52, 101–125.
Lee, Charles, and Mark Ready, 1991, Inferring trade direction from intraday data, Journal of
   Finance 46, 733–746.
Lesmond, David, Joseph P. Ogden, and Charles Trzcinka, 1999, A new estimate of transaction

                                                                                                   34
   costs, Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113–1141.
Leuz, Christian, and Catherine Schrand, 2009, Disclosure and the cost of capital: Evidence from
   firms’ responses to the Enron shock, Working paper, University of Chicago.
Leuz, Christian, and Robert E. Verrecchia, 2000, The economic consequences of increased
   disclosure, Journal of Accounting Research 38, 91–124.
Leuz, Christian, and Peter D. Wysocki, 2008, Economic consequences of financial reporting and
   disclosure regulation: A review and suggestions for future research, Working paper, University
   of Chicago.
Madhavan, Ananth, Matthew Richardson, and Mark Roomans, 1997, Why do security prices
  change? A transaction-level analysis of NYSE stocks, Review of Financial Studies 10, 1035–
  1064.
Malloy, Christopher, 2005, The geography of equity analysis, Journal of Finance 60, 719–755.
Ng, Jeffrey, 2011, The effect of information quality on liquidity risk, Journal of Accounting and
   Economics 52, 126–143.
Pastor, Lubos, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns, Journal
   of Political Economy 111, 642–685.
Schipper, Katherine, 1989, Commentary on earnings management, Accounting Horizons 3, 91–
   102.
Skinner, Douglas J., 1994, Why firms voluntarily disclose bad news, Journal of Accounting
   Research 32, 38–60.
Staiger, Douglas, and James H. Stock, 1997, Instrumental variables regression with weak
    instruments, Econometrica 65, 557–586.
Trueman, Brett, 1983, Optimality of the disclosure of private information in a production-
   exchange economy, Journal of Finance 38, 913–924.
Trueman, Brett, and Sheridan Titman, 1988, An explanation for accounting income smoothing,
   Journal of Accounting Research 26, 127–139.
Verrecchia, Robert E., 1983, Discretionary disclosure, Journal of Accounting and Economics 5,
   179–194.




                                                                                                    35
Appendix A. Variable Definitions.
Liquidity measures

log AIM is the quarterly average of the natural log of 1 plus Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure (AIM). It is
constructed as follows. Following Amihud, we use daily CRSP data (CRSP variables ret, prc, and vol) to calculate
the ratio of absolute stock return to dollar volume [1,000,000|ret|(|prc|vol)] for each day in a fiscal quarter. We
then average these daily AIM over the fiscal quarter and take logs.

Bid-ask spread is the quarterly average of a firm’s daily bid-ask spread,. We use daily closing bid and ask data from
CRSP (variables ask and bid) to calculate 100*(ask–bid)/[(ask+bid)/2]. We then average these daily bid-ask spreads
over the fiscal quarter. Observations with crossed quotes (negative spreads) are excluded.

Effective tick is the quarterly average of Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka’s (2009) effective tick measure,
constructed using code supplied by Ruslan Goyenko. Using daily CRSP data (CRSP variables prc and vol) and
based on end-of-day price clustering, we calculate an average effective spread over the quarter as the probability-
weighted average of each effective spread size deflated by price.

Lambda (λ) is the quarterly average of the probability that a trade occurs inside the bid-ask quotes. It is constructed
using intra-day data following Madhavan, Richardson, and Roomans (1997) and Armstrong et al. (2011).
Specifically, we gather trade-by-trade and quote data from the Institute for the Study of Security Markets (ISSM)
and the Trades and Automated Quotes (TAQ) database provided by the NYSE. We use the Lee and Ready (1991)
algorithm with a five-second lag to determine the buy/sell direction of a trade. We then estimate λ using the
following firm-specific regression: Δpt/pt-1 = ψ ΔDt + λ (Dt – ρDt-1) + ut, where pt is the transaction price, Dt is the
sign of trade (+1 if buy, –1 if sell), and ρ is the AR(1) coefficient for Dt. As discussed in Armstrong et al. (p. 38),
deflating Δpt by lagged price pt-1 yields an estimate of λ as a percentage of price and so ensures cross-sectional
comparability.

Fraction zero-return days is the fraction of trading days with zero returns in a quarter. Following Lesmond, Ogden,
and Trzcinka (1999) and Goyenko, Holden, and Trzcinka (2009), we use daily CRSP data (variables ret and vol) to
calculate the fraction of trading days with vol > 0 and ret = 0 during the fiscal quarter.

PIN is the stock-by-stock quarterly average of Venter and De Jongh’s (2006) PIN measure. As discussed in Brown
and Hillegeist (2007), the Venter-De Jongh model allows for a strong positive correlation between the daily number
of buys and sells typically observed in the data. We obtain quarterly values of this measure from
(http://janssenbrown.net/StephenBrownresearch/index.html). These data are available only from 2003 onwards.

Gamma is the quarterly average of Pastor and Stambaugh’s (2003) price impact measure. Using daily CRSP data,
we estimate the following regression each month: ret+1 =θ + ϕrt + (Gamma)sign(ret)(Volumet) + εt, where ret is the
stock’s excess return above the CRSP value-weighted market return on day t and Volumet is the dollar volume on
day t. We then average the value of gamma obtained from this monthly regression over the fiscal quarter.

Cash flow uncertainty measure

Earnings surprise is the quarterly difference between actual earnings per share and the prevailing median analyst
estimate (taken from the unadjusted detail files maintained by I/B/E/S), deflated by book value per share (i.e.,
Compustat item ceqq divided by Compustat item cshoq).

Disclosure measures

Forecast/pre-announcement is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm provides earnings guidance (in the
form of a forecast or a pre-announcement) in the fiscal quarter. We obtain guidance data from the Company Issued
Guidelines (CIG) files of the First Call Historical Database (FCHD) maintained by Thomson Reuters. We limit
analysis to quarterly forecasts and pre-announcements of earnings per share (periodicity = ‘Q’ and data_type =
‘EPS’) for the firm’s common stock (security_type = ‘COM’). Following Anilowski, Feng, and Skinner (2007), we
remove observations with missing earnings announcement dates (actdate) and those with guidance dates (anndate)
occurring on or after the actual earnings announcement date.

                                                                                                                      36
Forecast is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if management supplies earnings guidance prior to the end of the
fiscal period (anndate < fpe).

Pre-announcement is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if management supplies earnings guidance after the end of
the fiscal period but before the formal announcement of earnings (fpe < anndate).

Quantitative guidance is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the earnings guidance contains a numerical estimate.

Qualitative guidance is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the earnings guidance contains no numerical estimate.

For quantitative guidance, following Anilowski, Feng, and Skinner (2007), we code three additional variables
relating to its content. To do so, we obtain analyst forecast data from the Summary Statistics files of the FCHD. This
dataset supplies the prevailing consensus estimate on any given day. To ensure that the guidance does not influence
our measure of the prevailing consensus, we measure consensus as the median analyst forecast of earnings per share
as of the day before the guidance date (anndate – 1).

Negative news is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if management supplies an earnings estimate that falls below
the prevailing consensus (i.e., the median analyst forecast) as of the day before the guidance date (anndate – 1).

Positive news is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if management supplies an earnings estimate that exceeds the
prevailing consensus (i.e., the median analyst forecast) as of the day before the guidance date (anndate – 1).

Hot air is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if management supplies an earnings estimate that equals the prevailing
consensus (i.e., the median analyst forecast) as of the day before the guidance date (anndate – 1).

Severity of shock measures

Above-median shock is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm suffers an above-median shock to their
liquidity, as measured by diff-in-diff changes in Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, AIM.

Top-quartile shock is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm suffers a shock to their liquidity (as measured by
diff-in-diff changes in Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, AIM) that places them in the top quartile of the
distribution.

Significant shock is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm suffers a shock to their liquidity (as measured by
diff-in-diff changes in Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure, AIM) that is significantly different from zero at the 5%
level (in a two-tailed test).

Firm characteristics

Market capitalization is defined as the fiscal quarter-end share price (CRSP variable prc) times the number of
shares outstanding (CRSP variable shrout).

Book-to-Market is measured as the ratio of a firm’s book value of equity (Compustat item ceqq) to its market value
(Compustat item prccq multiplied by Compustat item cshoq).

# analysts providing coverage is the maximum number of different analysts providing a forecast of earnings per
share in the 90 days prior to the earnings announcement date (I/B/E/S variable anndats) in a given fiscal quarter,
taken from the unadjusted detail files maintained by I/B/E/S.

Volatility is the standard deviation of daily returns (obtained from CRSP).

Net equity issuance is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm’s net equity issues in the fiscal year are
positive. Following Frank and Goyal (2003), we calculate net equity issues as sales of common and preferred stock
(Compustat item sstk) minus purchases of common and preferred stock (Compustat item prstkc).


                                                                                                                     37
Habitually meets-or-beats is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm habitually meets-or-beats analyst
expectations, which prior work indicates signals the presence of earnings management (Bartov, Givoly and Hayn
(2002)). Specifically, we set this indicator equal to 1 if the firm has met or exceeded analyst expectations in at least
15 out of the prior 20 quarters.

High discretionary accruals is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm’s quarterly discretionary accruals
exceed the median. Following Collins, Pungaliya, and Vijh (2012), we estimate quarterly discretionary accruals (as a
percentage of lagged assets) using a cross-sectional version of the modified Jones model that controls for
performance and firm growth.

High institutional ownership is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the fraction of the firm’s outstanding shares
that are held by institutional investors filing 13f reports (according to Thomson Reuters) exceeds the median.

Low analyst coverage is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the firm is covered by three or fewer analysts.

Analyst characteristics

Distance is the geographic distance between the locations of each analyst-company pair using the Haversine
formula. Locations are coded by Zip codes that are translated into longitudes and latitudes using the Census 2000
U.S. Gazeteer (http://www.census.gov/tiger/tms/gazetteer/zcta5.txt). Analyst locations as of the brokerage closure
date come from Nelson’s Directory of Investment Research or, where unavailable, the analyst’s telephone number as
per his or her research reports in the Investext archive. Headquarter locations come from the firm’s most recent 10-Q
and 10-K filing before the termination date (not from Compustat, as Compustat’s location information reflects a
firm’s location as of the download date).

Local analyst is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the coverage shock involves the loss of an analyst located
within a 50-mile, 100-mile, or 200-mile radius of the firm’s headquarters.

Institutions-only broker is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the coverage shock stems from the closure of an
institutions-only brokerage house. To identify broker type, we rely to a large extent on the broker’s historical
homepages accessed through the Wayback Machine (http://web.archive.org). We supplement this information,
where needed, with news coverage surrounding closure announcements as well as self-descriptions from the
Securities Industry Association’s Yearbook.

Highly ranked analyst is an indicator variable set equal to 1 if the analyst is rated either as an ‘all-star’ in the most
recent Institutional Investor survey before the termination or a ‘master stock picker’ in the most recent ‘Best on the
Street’ rankings produced by the Wall Street Journal.

Analyst firm-specific information production is constructed as follows. Using all stocks covered in the I/B/E/S
recommendations database, we construct a three-way panel that tracks each stock’s monthly non-synchronicity as
well as the identity of all analysts covering each stock in each month. Non-synchronicity is defined as ln(R2/(1-R2)),
where R2 comes from the following regression of stock i’s return on the market return and the return on the industry
portfolio to which i belongs:
                                                Ri,t = ai + biRm,t + ciRind,i,t + ei,t.
(The panel regression includes three further control variables: firms’ market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, and
lagged monthly non-synchronicity.) Since analysts add and delete coverage of stocks over time, we use both cross-
sectional and time variation in analysts’ coverage sets to infer an analyst’s contribution of firm-specific information
to a stock’s estimated non-synchronicity. We include analyst fixed effects to capture the average impact each analyst
has on the information environment of the stocks that she covers, and use the estimated fixed effect to proxy for an
analyst’s firm-specific information provision in the column 6 of Table 5D.

Relative forecast accuracy is an indicator variable set equal to 1 for analysts with above-median measures of
relative forecast accuracy (as compared to the accuracy of their peers). We measure relative forecast accuracy
following Hong and Kubik (2003). We begin by ranking the forecast errors made by each analyst for a given firm
within the firm-year. Next, we convert the rank into a score that corrects for the number of analysts covering the
firm that year. Finally, we average this score over the last three years for a given firm and analyst.


                                                                                                                       38
Figure 1. Average Daily Amihud Illiquidity Measure, All CRSP Firms, 1999-2010.
The figure shows the value-weighted average daily log Amihud illiquidity measure for the universe of firms in
CRSP for the period from 1999 to 2010.




                                                                                                          39
Figure 2. Overview of First Call’s Guidance Data.
The top left graph shows the quarterly number of pieces of quarterly guidance issued voluntarily by management according to the ‘Company Issued Guidelines’
files of the First Call Historical Database. The other three graphs break down the guidance by horizon (top right), form (bottom left), and content (bottom right).
  1,800                                                                                                                                            100%



  1,600                                                                                                                                             90%



                                                                                                                                                    80%
  1,400


                                                                                                                                                    70%
  1,200

                                                                                                                                                    60%
  1,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pre-announcements
                                                                                                                                                    50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Forecasts
   800
                                                                                                                                                    40%

   600
                                                                                                                                                    30%


   400
                                                                                                                                                    20%


   200                                                                                                                                              10%



    -                                                                                                                                                   0%
          1998    1999   2000    2001     2002          2003      2004     2005   2006    2007     2008          2009      2010                                1998     1999    2000   2001   2002   2003   2004    2005    2006     2007   2008   2009     2010



           100%                                                                                                                                  100%



                                                                                                                                                 90%



            80%                                                                                                                                  80%



                                                                                                                                                 70%



            60%                                                                                                                                  60%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Hot air
                                                                                                                                  Qualitative
                                                                                                                                                 50%                                                                                                                            Positive
                                                                                                                                  Quantitative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Negative

            40%                                                                                                                                  40%



                                                                                                                                                 30%



            20%                                                                                                                                  20%



                                                                                                                                                 10%



             0%                                                                                                                                   0%
                  1998   1999   2000    2001     2002      2003     2004   2005   2006   2007    2008     2009      2010                                     1998     1999     2000    2001   2002   2003    2004    2005     2006      2007   2008       2009     2010




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
Table 1. Construction of Treatment Sample.
KL identify a sample of 4,429 exogenous coverage terminations affecting 2,180 unique firms as a result of 43
brokerage closures over the period Q2, 2000 through Q1, 2008. Their unit of analysis is a firm-day. We focus
instead on firm-fiscal quarters. Some firms are hit with multiple exogenous coverage terminations in a given fiscal
quarter, leaving 4,185 firm-fiscal quarters with one or more termination events. We filter out 1,922 firm-fiscal
quarters as set out below, and lose 168 firm-fiscal quarters for which no valid match can be found in a nearest-
neighbor propensity score match using a 0.005 caliper. This yields a final treatment sample consisting of 2,095 firm-
fiscal quarters with one or more exogenous coverage termination events for 1,468 unique firms.

                                                                                          Number of terminations
                                                                           Total          per firm-fiscal quarter
                                                                                           1         2         3

 Kelly and Ljungqvist (2012):
   # unique treated firms (by Compustat gvkey)                             2,180
   # coverage termination events                                           4,429         3,948      460        21
   # firm-fiscal quarters w/ one or more termination events                4,185

   less: not yet guiders as of termination quarter                -1,122
   less: serially shocked firms                                     -794
   less: not traded in fiscal quarter before termination              -4
   less: lose coverage in firm’s last fiscal quarter of listing       -2

   Treated firm-fiscal quarters eligible for matching                      2,263
   less: no valid match with 0.005 caliper                         -168


 Final treatment sample:
   # firm-fiscal quarters w/ one or more termination events                2,095
   # coverage termination events                                           2,821         2,561      236        24
   # unique treated firms (by Compustat gvkey)                             1,468




                                                                                                                    41
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics.
The sample consists of 2,095 firm-quarters during which a firm suffers an exogenous coverage termination (‘treated firms’) and 2,095 firm-quarters for ‘control
firms.’ Treated and control firms are matched on market cap, volatility, the number of analysts providing coverage, and the Amihud illiquidity measure (AIM), all
measured as of the fiscal quarter before the coverage termination. The match is performed using a nearest-neighbor propensity score match with a 0.005 caliper.
The table reports the firm characteristics we match on and the resulting propensity scores (Panel A) as well as a variety of voluntary management guidance
measures (Panel B). All variables are measured as of the time of the match, i.e., the fiscal quarter before the coverage termination. We tabulate means, medians,
and standard deviations for continuous variables and fractions for indicator variables. We also report pairwise differences in means, fractions, and medians
between treated and control firms. To estimate statistical significance, we use t-tests (for means and fractions) and Pearson χ2 tests (for medians). None of the
differences between treated and control firms is significant at the 10% level or better. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A.

                                                     Treated firms                                Control firms                          Treated – controls
                                                                                                                                     Difference      Difference
                                          Mean or                                      Mean or                                       in means/           in
                                          fraction      Std. dev.     Median           fraction       Std. dev.     Median            fractions       medians

 Panel A: Firm characteristics
 Matching variables:
  Market capitalization ($m)             7,860.8       22,100.0      1,486.9         7,919.1         22,700.0      1,564.1           -58.3            -77.2
  # analysts providing coverage              6.9            5.8          5.0             7.0              5.9          6.0            -0.1             -1.0
  Volatility                                 0.032          0.022        0.026           0.033            0.029        0.026          -0.001            0
  log AIM                                    0.049          0.256        0.002           0.049            0.299        0.002           0                0
 Propensity score                            0.164           0.156       0.110           0.164             0.157       0.110           0                 0

 Panel B: Management guidance
 Guidance horizon:
   Forecast or pre-announcement              0.334                                       0.319                                         0.015
   Forecast                                  0.275                                       0.267                                         0.008
   Pre-announcement                          0.094                                       0.083                                         0.011
 Form of guidance:
   Quantitative guidance                     0.304                                       0.299                                         0.004
   Qualitative guidance                      0.048                                       0.038                                         0.010
 Content of guidance:
   Negative news                             0.183                                       0.176                                          0.008
   Positive news                             0.092                                       0.096                                         -0.004
   ‘Hot air’                                 0.069                                       0.068                                          0.001



                                                                                                                                                                42
Table 3. The Effect of Coverage Shocks on Liquidity: Diff-in-Diff Test.
The table measures the impact of an exogenous coverage termination on a stock’s liquidity using a difference-in-
differences test. The exogenous coverage terminations occurred as a result of 43 brokerage closures over the period
Q2, 2000 through Q1, 2008. The sample consists of 2,095 treated firm-quarters and 2,095 control firm-quarters.
Treated and control firms are matched on market capitalization, volatility, the number of analysts providing
coverage, and AIM, all measured as of the fiscal quarter before the coverage termination. Liquidity is measured
using the log Amihud illiquidity measure (AIM). We report average levels of log AIM in the fiscal quarter before a
coverage termination (labeled ‘before’) and in the following quarter (labeled ‘after’). We also report within-firm
changes (labeled ‘difference’) and between-firm differences (labeled ‘treated – controls’). The change in the
between-firm differences is the difference-in-differences. Standard errors, reported in italics underneath the
averages, are obtained from a bootstrap stratified by quarter with 1,000 replications. The bootstrap adjusts for
potential cross-sectional dependence due to overlapping estimation windows caused by time clustering as multiple
stocks are terminated in each of the 43 brokerage-firm closures. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5%
level (two-sided), respectively. In the last row, we report within-firm differences in % of the pre-shock level of log
AIM as a measure of the economic significance of coverage shocks. Note that this statistic is estimated per firm and
then averaged across firms; it is not the relative change in the reported averages.

                                              Treated             Control           Treated –
                                               firms               firms            Controls

                     Before                    0.049              0.049               0.000
                                               0.006              0.006               0.008
                     After                     0.073              0.063               0.010
                                               0.007              0.007               0.010

                     Difference                0.024***           0.014***            0.010**
                                               0.003              0.003               0.004

                       in % of before        43.3%               34.8%




                                                                                                                  43
Table 4. The Effect of Coverage Shocks on Liquidity: Regression Results.
This table reports results from firm-level panel regressions of the log of one plus Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity
measure on indicators capturing exogenous analyst coverage terminations (columns 1, 2, 3, and 6), coverage
terminations that coincide with exogenous reductions in market making (column 4), or exogenous reductions in
market making unaccompanied by changes in analyst coverage (column 5). Coverage shocks are coded as indicators
set equal to 1 if a firm suffers one or more exogenous coverage terminations during that fiscal quarter. In column 4,
the coverage shocks are interacted with an indicator identifying a subset of 318 instances in which a firm
simultaneously loses analyst coverage and market-making in the wake of a brokerage closure. For variable
definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. The unit of observation is a firm-fiscal-quarter. All
specifications are estimated using OLS with firm fixed effects, year effects, and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed effects.
Standard errors are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. In all columns except column 2, they are
clustered at the firm level. In column 2, standard errors are obtained from a bootstrap stratified by quarter with 1,000
replications. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5% level (two-sided), respectively. The number of
observations in columns 1 and 2 is 34,256 firm-fiscal quarters for 2,095 treated and 2,095 matched control firm-
quarters. Due to the presence of lags, the number of observations in columns 3 and 4 is 31,312 firm-fiscal quarters.
Columns 5 and 6 use different samples. Column 5 uses a sample composed of 26,406 firm-fiscal quarters for 1,738
firms with a guidance history that suffer an exogenous reduction in the number of market makers without also
suffering a reduction in analyst coverage and 1,738 matched control firms. In column 6, we use a sample 9,840 firm-
fiscal quarters for 769 ‘non-guiders’ losing analyst coverage and 769 matched control firms.
                                                   Dependent variable: log Amihud Illiquidity Measure
                                                                                                               Non-
                                                        Estimation sample: Guiders                            guiders
                                         (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)              (6)
Exogenous coverage shock
 at t = 0                               0.008***     0.008***      0.007***     0.008***                      0.021**
                                        0.002        0.003         0.003        0.003                         0.009
  at t = –1                                                       -0.009***    -0.010***                     -0.006
                                                                   0.003        0.003                         0.008
  at t = –2                                                       -0.002       -0.002                         0.003
                                                                   0.003        0.003                         0.009
  at t = –3                                                        0.004        0.001                        -0.008
                                                                   0.003        0.003                         0.007
… and market-making shock
 at t = 0                                                                      -0.003        0.038***
                                                                                0.007         0.000
  at t = –1                                                                     0.005        0.026***
                                                                                0.007         0.000
  at t = –2                                                                     0.001        0.017**
                                                                                0.010         0.024
  at t = –3                                                                     0.026*       0.009
                                                                                0.014         0.278
Firm characteristics
log market cap at t = –1               -0.103***    -0.103***     -0.103***    -0.103***     -0.172***       -0.153***
                                        0.008        0.005         0.008        0.008         0.000           0.020
log coverage at t = –1                 -0.008***    -0.008***     -0.007***    -0.007***     -0.003          -0.010**
                                        0.002        0.001         0.002        0.002         0.342           0.004
volatility at t = –1                    0.188        0.188         0.095        0.095        -0.592***        0.130
                                        0.152        0.151         0.145        0.147         0.000           0.338
=1 if firm is net eq. issuer at t=–1   -0.019***    -0.019***     -0.019***    -0.019***     -0.032***       -0.036*
                                        0.005        0.003         0.005        0.005         0.004           0.019

Diagnostics
Within-firm R2                          9.3%         9.3%         8.9%          8.9%         5.7%             9.8%
Wald test: all coeff. = 0              13.5***      29.0***      11.9***        9.4***      34.0***           5.0***
Number of episodes                      4,190        4,190        4,190         4,190        3,476             1,538
Number of observations                 34,256       34,256       31,312        31,312       26,406             9,840

                                                                                                                      44
Table 5, Panel A: The Effect of Coverage Shocks on Voluntary Disclosure.
This table reports results from firm-level panel regressions of one particular form of guidance, management
forecasts, on an indicator capturing exogenous analyst coverage terminations (in columns 1 to 4) or exogenous
reductions in market making unaccompanied by changes in analyst coverage (column 5). We include four leads (to
test for the exogeneity of the shocks) and four lags (to allow for persistence in firms’ guidance responses to the
shocks). For definitions of the control variables and details of their construction, see Appendix A. Columns 1, 2, and
5 are estimated as linear probability models; column 3 is estimated as a conditional (fixed-effect) logit; and column
4 is estimated as a Poisson count model. The unit of observation is a firm-fiscal-quarter. All specifications include
firm fixed effects, year effects, and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed effects. The fixed effects are not shown for brevity.
Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. They are
clustered by firm in columns 1, 3, and 5, and by calendar quarter in column 2. Fixed-effects Poisson models do not
permit clustering and so the standard errors in column 4 are White. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5%
level (two-sided), respectively. The number of observations in columns 1 to 4 is 34,010 firm-fiscal quarters for
2,095 treated and 2,095 matched control firm-quarters. Column 5 uses a different sample, composed of 26,406 firm-
fiscal quarters for 1,738 firms with a guidance history that suffer an exogenous reduction in the number of market
makers without at the same time suffering a reduction in analyst coverage and 1,738 matched control firms.

                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                                                            =1 if mgt
                                                                                         Number of            issues
                                             =1 if management issues forecast             forecasts          forecast
                                              (1)         (2)            (3)                 (4)                (5)

 Exogenous coverage shock
 Leads:           shock at t = +4             0.013         0.013          0.081             0.031             0.001
                                              0.014         0.017          0.112             0.034             0.959
                        shock at t = +3       0.005         0.005          0.022             -0.002           -0.009
                                              0.014         0.019          0.112             0.035             0.330
                        shock at t = +2      -0.008        -0.008         -0.126             -0.049           -0.002
                                              0.013         0.015          0.108             0.035             0.800
                        shock at t = +1       0.019         0.019          0.150             0.035             0.013
                                              0.013         0.020          0.104             0.033             0.169
 Contemporaneous: shock at t = 0              0.049***      0.049***       0.432***          0.132***          0.013
                                              0.013         0.016          0.100             0.032             0.166
 Lags:                  shock at t = –1       0.033**       0.033**        0.278***          0.081***          0.012
                                              0.013         0.013          0.103             0.031             0.163
                        shock at t = –2       0.042***      0.042**        0.321***          0.107***          0.008
                                              0.013         0.018          0.097             0.030             0.360
                        shock at t = –3       0.036***      0.036**        0.252***          0.076***         -0.001
                                              0.013         0.016          0.097             0.029             0.900
                        shock at t = –4       0.016         0.016          0.097             0.029            -0.004
                                              0.013         0.016          0.100             0.031             0.651
 Firm characteristics
 log market cap at t = –1                     0.064***      0.064***       0.625***          0.291***          0.054***
                                              0.007         0.009          0.063             0.025             0.000
 log coverage at t = –1                       0.001         0.001          0.012             0.001             0.001
                                              0.004         0.005          0.035             0.011             0.905
 volatility at t = –1                        -0.195        -0.195         -0.024             -0.016**         -0.002
                                              0.158         0.183          0.015             0.007             0.002
 =1 if firm is net eq. issuer at t = –1       0.000         0.000         -0.006             -0.004           -0.019**
                                              0.009         0.007          0.082             0.026             0.035
 Diagnostics
 R2                                         49.7%         49.7%            4.4%             n.a.             59.9%
 Wald test: all coefficients = 0            10.3***       51.5***         12.4***         18.3***             4.3***
 Estimation:                                OLS/FE        OLS/FE         Logit/FE        Poisson/FE          OLS/FE
 Standard errors clustered on:               gvkey        quarter         gvkey            robust             gvkey

                                                                                                                       45
Table 5, Panel B: The Effect of Coverage Shocks on Voluntary Disclosure by Type of Guidance.
This table relates eight separate measures of voluntary guidance to an indicator capturing contemporaneous exogenous coverage terminations along with three
lags. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated as linear probability models with firm fixed
effects, year effects, and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed effects. The fixed effects are not shown for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at
the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5% level (two-sided), respectively. The
number of observations in each specification is 31,312 firm-fiscal quarters for 2,095 treated and 2,095 matched control firm-quarters.

                                                        Guidance horizon                         Form of guidance                         Content of guidance
                                                              Pre-                             Quanti-       Quali-
                  Dependent variable = 1                   announce-                            tative       tative            Negative        Positive      Hot air
                  if management issues …       Forecast      ment             Both            guidance     guidance            guidance        guidance     guidance
                                                 (1)          (2)              (3)                (4)          (5)                (6)             (7)          (8)

 Exogenous coverage shock
  at t = 0                                       0.041***       0.002         0.036***          0.034***       0.011             0.029***        0.013           0.007
                                                 0.009          0.007          0.009             0.010         0.006             0.009           0.007           0.006
   at t = –1                                     0.024***      -0.001         0.020**           0.020**        0.010             0.014           0.008          -0.003
                                                 0.009          0.006          0.009             0.009         0.006             0.009           0.007           0.007
   at t = –2                                     0.036***      -0.003         0.026***          0.019**        0.010**           0.023**        -0.001           0.016**
                                                 0.009          0.007          0.009             0.009         0.005             0.009           0.007           0.007
   at t = –3                                     0.033***       0.005         0.032***          0.025***       0.008             0.008           0.017**         0.009
                                                 0.009          0.008          0.010             0.010         0.006             0.009           0.008           0.007
 Firm characteristics
 log market cap at t = –1                        0.059***      -0.001         0.057***          0.048***       0.011***          0.038***        0.006           0.013***
                                                 0.007          0.006          0.008             0.007         0.004             0.006           0.005           0.004
                                                                                                                        **
 log coverage at t = –1                          0.000          0.000         0.002             0.009         -0.007             0.004           0.003           0.004
                                                 0.004          0.004          0.005             0.005         0.003             0.005           0.004           0.003
 volatility at t = –1                           -0.252         -0.236        -0.359**           -0.382**      -0.053            -0.352**        -0.110          -0.091
                                                 0.150          0.130          0.177             0.165         0.100             0.138           0.118           0.086
 =1 if firm is net equity issuer at t = –1       0.000          0.003         -0.001            -0.005         0.002            -0.029***        0.018***        0.013**
                                                 0.009          0.006          0.009             0.009         0.004             0.009           0.007           0.006
 Diagnostics
 R2                                             49.9%         20.1%          45.5%             46.7%          12.1%             28.7%           16.8%           21.6%
 Wald test: all coeff. = 0                      14.2***        3.3***        12.3***           10.9***         4.8***           10.3***          2.5***          4.6***




                                                                                                                                                                          46
Table 5, Panel C: The Effect of Severe Coverage Shocks and Firm Characteristics on Disclosure.
This table explores cross-sectional variation in firms’ guidance responses to exogenous coverage shocks. Coverage shocks are coded as indicators set equal to 1 if a firm suffers one or more
exogenous coverage termination that fiscal quarter and additional indicators are included that capture firms that suffer particularly ‘severe’ shocks (columns 1 through 3), manage earnings
(columns 4 and 5), have above-median institutional holdings (column 6), or are covered by three or fewer analysts (column 7). Severity is measured using AIM, the change in a firm’s
Amihud illiquidity measure around the coverage shock relative to the contemporaneous change experienced by its matched control. For variable definitions and details of their construction,
see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated as linear probability models with firm and year effects and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed effects (not shown for brevity). Heteroskedasticity-
consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level
(two-sided), respectively. The number of observations in each specification is 31,312 firm-fiscal quarters for 2,095 treated and 2,095 matched control firm-quarters.
                                                                                Dependent variable = 1 if management issues forecast
                                                                 Severity of shock                 Earnings management
                                                                                  significant     habitually      high               High                                  Low
                                                          above         top          at 5%        meets-or- discretionary        institutional                            analyst
                                                          median     quartile        level          beats       accruals           holdings                              coverage
                                                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)                (6)                                   (7)
          Exogenous coverage shock
           at t = 0                                        0.008           0.026***        0.028***            0.049***        0.051***              0.058***              0.032***
                                                           0.010           0.008           0.008               0.009           0.012                  0.011                0.009
            at t = –1                                     -0.002           0.013           0.019**             0.028***        0.030***              0.026**               0.020**
                                                           0.011           0.009           0.008               0.008           0.011                  0.010                0.008
            at t = –2                                      0.027***        0.027***        0.027***            0.036***        0.029***              0.035***              0.036***
                                                           0.008           0.008           0.008               0.007           0.009                  0.008                0.007
            at t = –3                                      0.032***        0.032***        0.032***            0.033***        0.028***              0.033***              0.033***
                                                           0.008           0.008           0.008               0.008           0.009                  0.008                0.008
           =1 if severe shocks, earnings managers, predominantly owned by institutions, or covered by few analysts
            at t = 0                            0.051***    0.037**     0.038**          -0.030**    -0.037**                                       -0.034**               0.032**
                                                           0.014           0.017           0.019               0.015           0.015                  0.015                0.015
            at t = –1                                      0.042***        0.027           0.006              -0.012          -0.016                -0.008                 0.015
                                                           0.014           0.017           0.019               0.015           0.015                  0.014                0.015
          Firm characteristics
          log market cap at t = –1                         0.058***        0.058***        0.057***            0.059***        0.065***              0.058***              0.059***
                                                           0.007           0.007           0.007               0.006           0.008                  0.007                0.006
          log coverage at t = –1                           0.001           0.001           0.001               0.000           0.002                -0.002                 0.001
                                                           0.004           0.004           0.004               0.004           0.004                  0.004                0.004
          volatility at t = –1                            -0.372**        -0.364**        -0.361**            -0.251*         -0.329*               -0.259*               -0.247*
                                                           0.157           0.157           0.157               0.133           0.190                  0.135                0.133
          =1 if firm is net eq. issuer at t = –1           0.000           0.000          -0.001               0.000          -0.011                 0.004                 0.000
                                                           0.008           0.008           0.008               0.008           0.009                  0.009                0.008
          Diagnostics
          R2                                             45.6%           45.6%           45.5%               49.9%           47.0%                  49.3%                49.9%
          Wald test: all coeff. = 0                      15.8***         15.3***         15.3***             18.0***         15.5***                17.0***              18.1***


                                                                                                                                                                                           47
Table 5, Panel D: The Effect of Analyst Characteristics on Disclosure.
This table explores cross-sectional variation in firms’ guidance responses to exogenous coverage shocks. Coverage shocks are coded as indicators set equal to 1 if a firm suffers one or more
exogenous coverage termination that fiscal quarter and additional indicators are included that capture firms that lose a local analyst (columns 1 through 3), an institutions-only broker
(column 4), a highly ranked analyst (column 5), an analyst who produces a high degree of firm-specific information (column 6), or an analyst whose forecasts are relatively more accurate
than those of his peers (column 7). For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated as linear probability models with firm and year
effects and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed effects (not shown for brevity). Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient
estimates. We use ***, **, and * to denote significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (two-sided), respectively. The number of observations in each specification is 31,312 firm-fiscal
quarters for 2,095 treated and 2,095 matched control firm-quarters.

                                                                                    Dependent variable = 1 if management issues forecast
                                                                   Loss of local analyst                                                   Analyst
                                                                                                                                             firm-                               relative
                                                           50 mile       100 mile        200 mile       Institutions                     specific info                          forecast
                                                            radius        radius          radius        only broker        ranking        production                            accuracy
                                                              (1)           (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)                                  (7)
     Exogenous coverage shock
      at t = 0                                            0.031***           0.031***          0.033***               0.061***              0.031***          0.025**            0.041***
                                                          0.008              0.008             0.008                  0.010                 0.008              0.010             0.008
        at t = –1                                         0.021***           0.018**           0.016**                0.027***              0.020***          0.020**            0.019**
                                                          0.008              0.008             0.008                  0.010                 0.007              0.009             0.008
        at t = –2                                         0.036***           0.036***          0.036***               0.034***              0.034***          0.035***           0.036***
                                                          0.007              0.007             0.007                  0.007                 0.007              0.007             0.007
        at t = –3                                         0.033***           0.033***          0.033***               0.032***              0.032***          0.033***           0.033***
                                                          0.008              0.008             0.008                  0.008                 0.008              0.008             0.008
     =1 if local analyst, institutions-only broker, ranked analyst, high firm-specific information production, or high forecast accuracy
      at t = 0                                   0.059***     0.052***        0.031**         -0.049***         0.102***       0.031**                                           0.000
                                                          0.018              0.017             0.015                  0.013                 0.025              0.013             0.015
        at t = –1                                         0.019              0.030*            0.032**               -0.010                 0.033             0.008              0.019
                                                          0.017              0.016             0.015                  0.013                 0.024              0.013             0.015
     Firm characteristics
     log market cap at t = –1                             0.059***           0.059***          0.059***               0.059***              0.059***          0.059***           0.059***
                                                          0.006              0.006             0.006                  0.006                 0.006              0.006             0.006
     log coverage at t = –1                               0.000              0.000             0.000                  0.000                 0.001             0.000              0.000
                                                          0.004              0.004             0.004                  0.004                 0.004              0.004             0.004
     volatility at t = –1                                -0.250*            -0.250*           -0.251*                -0.252*               -0.240*           -0.258*            -0.250*
                                                          0.133              0.133             0.133                  0.133                 0.133              0.133             0.133
     =1 if firm is net eq. issuer at t = –1               0.000              0.000             0.000                  0.000                 0.000             0.000              0.000
                                                          0.008              0.008             0.008                  0.008                 0.008              0.008             0.008
     Diagnostics
     R2                                                  49.9%             49.9%              49.9%                 49.9%                 50.0%              49.9%              49.9%
     Wald test: all coeff. = 0                           18.4***           18.3***            18.2***               18.3***               18.5***            18.1***            18.0***


                                                                                                                                                                                                48
Table 6. Naïve Regressions of Liquidity on Voluntary Guidance.
We relate the log of one plus Amihud’s (2002) illiquidity measure to eight separate measures of voluntary guidance and to a set of control variables. For variable
definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. All specifications are estimated using OLS with firm fixed effects, year effects, and a set of fiscal-
quarter fixed effects. The fixed effects are not shown for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics
underneath the coefficient estimates. We test for first-order serial correlation in the dependent variable using the modified Durbin-Watson test developed for
panel-data models by Bhargava, Franzini, and Narendranathan (1982). The critical value at the 5% level for panels of our size is 1.96. *** and ** denote
significance at the 1% and 5% level (two-sided), respectively. The number of observations is 34,256 firm-fiscal quarters for 2,095 treated observations and 2,095
matched controls.

                                                                           Dependent variable: log Amihud Illiquidity Measure
                                                           Guidance horizon                       Form of guidance                Content of guidance
                                                                       Pre-
                                                                    announce                     Quanti-     Quali-
                                              Forecast    Forecast    ment        Both            tative     tative       Negative     Positive     Hot air
                                                (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)              (5)        (6)            (7)         (8)         (9)

  Voluntary guidance
  =1 if firm issues … guidance at t = 0       -0.004
                                               0.003
  =1 if firm issues … guidance at t = –1      -0.010***   -0.010***   -0.007       -0.011***       -0.010***   -0.012**        -0.012***    -0.001       -0.001
                                               0.003       0.003       0.004        0.003           0.002       0.006           0.002        0.003        0.002
  Firm characteristics
  log market cap at t = –1                    -0.102***   -0.102***   -0.103***    -0.103***       -0.103***   -0.103***       -0.103***    -0.103***    -0.103***
                                               0.009       0.008       0.008        0.008           0.008       0.008           0.008        0.008        0.008
  log coverage at t = –1                      -0.007**    -0.007***   -0.007***    -0.007***       -0.007***   -0.007***       -0.007***    -0.008***    -0.008***
                                               0.003       0.002       0.002        0.001           0.002       0.002           0.002        0.002        0.002
  volatility at t = –1                         0.199       0.200       0.188        0.200           0.196       0.193           0.196        0.189        0.189
                                               0.221       0.153       0.152        0.153           0.152       0.153           0.152        0.152        0.152
  =1 if firm is net equity issuer at t = –1   -0.019***   -0.020***   -0.019***    -0.019***       -0.020***   -0.019***       -0.020***    -0.019***    -0.019***
                                               0.004       0.005       0.005        0.005           0.005       0.005           0.005        0.005        0.005

  Diagnostics
  Within-firm R2                               9.3%        9.3%        9.3%        9.3%            9.3%         9.3%            9.4%         9.3%         9.3%
  Wald test: all coeff. = 0                   12.9***     13.4***     13.4***     13.4***         13.5***      13.4***         13.4***      13.5***      13.9***
  Durbin-Watson test for serial corr.          0.9         0.9         0.9         0.9             0.9          0.9             0.9          0.9          0.9




                                                                                                                                                                   49
Table 7. Causal Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Liquidity.
We estimate the causal effect of voluntary disclosure at t = 0 on liquidity at t = +1 for four guidance choices using
exogenous shocks to a firm’s analyst coverage as an instrument. Specifically, we instrument a firm’s guidance
choice in quarter t = 0 with a set of indicator variables capturing exogenous coverage terminations in quarters t = –3
to t = 0. (See Table 5, Panel B for the corresponding first-stage estimates.) The identifying assumption is that
exogenous coverage terminations dated –3 to 0 do not affect liquidity in quarter t = +1 other than through their effect
on the firm’s guidance choice. (See Table 4 for the corresponding reduced-form estimates.) We focus on the four
guidance choices that, according to the first-stage estimates in Table 5, Panel B, respond significantly to the
instrument. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A. All specifications are
estimated using OLS with firm fixed effects, year effects, and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed effects. The fixed effects
are not shown for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the firm level are shown in
italics underneath the coefficient estimates. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and 5% level (two-sided),
respectively. The Staiger-Stock (1997) test is a Wald test of weak instruments, i.e., of the extent of correlation
between the guidance choice and the instrument. It has a critical value of 10 in an F-test. The number of
observations in each specification is 27,870 firm-fiscal quarters for 2,095 treated observations and 2,095 matched
controls. (The lower number of observations compared to Table 5, Panel B reflects the fact that the first stage is
lagged relative to the second stage.)

                                                                      Dependent variable:
                                                             log Amihud Illiquidity Measure at t = +1
                                                                     Forecast
                                                                      or pre-
                                                                    announce-       Quanti-
                                                          Forecast     ment          tative     Negative
                                                            (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)

          Instrumented voluntary guidance
          guidance choice at t = 0                         -0.075**       -0.081**        -0.085**        -0.148***
                                                           0.035           0.037           0.039           0.044
          Firm characteristics
          log market cap at t = 0                          -0.101***      -0.101***       -0.101***       -0.100***
                                                           0.008           0.008           0.008           0.008
                                                                    ***             ***             ***
          log coverage at t = 0                            -0.005         -0.005          -0.005          -0.005***
                                                           0.002           0.002           0.002           0.002
          volatility at t = 0                              0.089           0.090           0.088           0.078
                                                           0.158           0.158           0.158           0.158
          =1 if firm is net equity issuer at t = 0         -0.018***      -0.018***       -0.018***       -0.020***
                                                           0.005           0.005           0.005           0.006
          Diagnostics
          Within-firm R2                                   8.5%            8.5%            8.5%            8.5%
          Wald test: all coeff. = 0                       12.2***         12.2***         12.3***         12.3***
          Staiger-Stock test (F)                          30.8***         20.8***         15.9***         10.1***




                                                                                                                      50
Table 8. Causal Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Alternative Liquidity Measures.
This table repeats the analysis of Table 7 using six alternative proxies for liquidity: Bid-ask spreads, effective tick
size, lambda, the fraction of zero-return days in a quarter, PIN, and Pastor and Stambaugh’s (2003) gamma. As in
Table 7, we estimate the causal effect of voluntary disclosure at t = 0 on liquidity at t = +1 for four guidance choices
using exogenous shocks to a firm’s analyst coverage as an instrument. Specifically, we instrument a firm’s guidance
choice in quarter t = 0 with a set of indicator variables capturing exogenous coverage terminations in quarters t = –3
to t = 0. (See Table 5, Panel B for the corresponding first-stage estimates.) The identifying assumption is that
exogenous coverage terminations dated –3 to 0 do not affect liquidity in quarter t = +1 other than through their effect
on the firm’s guidance choice. We focus on the four guidance choices that, according to the first-stage estimates in
Table 5, Panel B, respond significantly to the instrument. For variable definitions and details of their construction,
see Appendix A. We include the same controls as in Table 7, but to conserve space, we only report the coefficients
for the guidance variables. All specifications are estimated using OLS with firm fixed effects, year effects, and a set
of fiscal-quarter fixed effects. The fixed effects are not shown for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
errors clustered at the firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. *** and ** denote
significance at the 1% and 5% level (two-sided), respectively. Due to missing observations on bid-ask spreads and
lambda, the number of observations is 27,441 firm-fiscal quarters in Panel A, 26,741 firm-fiscal quarters in Panel B,
and 25,223 firm-fiscal quarters in Panel C. PIN data in Panel E is only available from 2003 onwards, resulting in a
smaller sample size of 12,829 firm-fiscal quarters. Panels D and F use the full sample of 27,870 firm-fiscal quarters.

                                                              Dependent variable: Liquidity at t = +1
                                                                     Forecast
                                                                      or pre-
                                                                    announce-      Quanti-
                                                          Forecast     ment         tative       Negative
                                                            (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)
          Panel A. Dependent variable: Bid-ask spreads at t = +1
          Instrumented guidance choice at t = 0      -0.033***   -0.032***            -0.037***     -0.035***
                                                            0.003         0.003        0.003         0.003
          Within-firm R2                                   13.0%        12.9%         13.2%        12.7%
          Panel B. Dependent variable: Effective tick size at t = +1
          Instrumented guidance choice at t = 0        -0.144***     -0.146***        -0.158***     -0.166***
                                                            0.006         0.006        0.006         0.007
          Within-firm R2                                   28.4%        28.5%         28.7%        28.3%
          Panel C. Dependent variable: Lambda at t = +1
          Instrumented guidance choice at t = 0      -0.059**            -0.052**     -0.050*       -0.079**
                                                            0.024         0.027        0.030         0.032
          Within-firm R2                                    4.6%         4.6%          4.6%         4.6%
          Panel D. Dependent variable: Fraction zero-return days in quarter t = +1
          Instrumented guidance choice at t = 0      -0.073***    -0.075***    -0.082***            -0.080***
                                                            0.007         0.007        0.007         0.008
          Within-firm R2                                   11.8%        11.8%         11.9%        11.7%
          Panel E. Dependent variable: PIN at t = +1
          Instrumented guidance choice at t = 0      -0.045**            -0.048**     -0.046**      -0.036
                                                            0.019         0.019        0.020         0.026
          Within-firm R2                                    5.8%         5.8%          5.8%         5.7%
          Panel F. Dependent variable: Pastor-Stambaugh’s gamma at t = +1
          Instrumented guidance choice at t = 0     -0.055*** -0.054***               -0.054***     -0.072***
                                                            0.018         0.018        0.020         0.022
          Within-firm R2                                    3.3%         3.3%          3.3%         3.3%




                                                                                                                    51
Table 9. Causal Effect of Voluntary Disclosure on Firm Value.
We estimate the causal effect of voluntary disclosure at t = 0 on firm value at t = +1 (as measured by the ratio of the
firm’s book value of equity to its market value) using exogenous shocks to a firm’s analyst coverage as an
instrument for disclosure. Compared to Table 7, to avoid mechanical correlations with the dependent variable, we
exclude the firm’s log market capitalization from the regressors in the first-stage regressions (not shown) and in the
second-stage regressions reported here. For variable definitions and details of their construction, see Appendix A.
All specifications are estimated using OLS with firm fixed effects, year effects, and a set of fiscal-quarter fixed
effects. The fixed effects are not shown for brevity. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors clustered at the
firm level are shown in italics underneath the coefficient estimates. *** and ** denote significance at the 1% and
5% level (two-sided), respectively. The Staiger-Stock (1997) test is a Wald test of weak instruments, i.e., of the
extent of correlation between the guidance choice and the instrument. It has a critical value of 10 in an F-test. The
number of observations in each specification is 27,870 firm-fiscal quarters for 2,095 treated observations and 2,095
matched controls.

                                                             Dependent variable: Book-to-market ratio
                                                                       Forecast
                                                                        or pre-
                                                                      announce-      Quanti-
                                                          Forecast       ment         tative      Negative
                                                            (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)

          Instrumented voluntary guidance
          guidance choice at t = –1                       -0.334***     -0.453***    -0.282**      -0.981***
                                                           0.117         0.120        0.121         0.149
          Firm characteristics
          log coverage at t = –1                           2.088***      2.197***     2.018***      2.508***
                                                           0.007         0.007        0.007         0.007
          volatility at t = –1                             1.769***      1.754***     1.781***      1.640***
                                                           0.542         0.540        0.541         0.536
          =1 if firm is net equity issuer at t = –1       -0.017        -0.017       -0.018        -0.031*
                                                           0.017         0.017        0.016         0.016
          Diagnostics
          Within-firm R2                                   2.3%         2.4%          2.3%         2.7%
          Wald test: all coeff. = 0                       14.5***      14.8***       14.4***      16.7***
          Staiger-Stock test (F)                          25.4***      16.7***       12.9***       8.1***




                                                                                                                   52
