NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO VOTERS RESPOND TO INFORMATION? EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED
CAMPAIGN
Chad Kendall
Tommaso Nannicini
Francesco Trebbi
Working Paper 18986
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18986

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

We would like to thank Matilde Bombardini, David Green, Andrea Mattozzi, Jim Snyder, and seminar
participants at Alicante, Bank of Italy, Bocconi, Carlo Alberto Turin, EIEF Rome, Harvard, LSE, MILLS
workshop, MIT, Petralia workshop, Rotterdam, SciencesPo Paris, UBC, UK Leuven, and Warwick
for useful comments. Federico Cilauro, Francesco Maria Esposito, Jonathan Graves, Nicola Pierri,
and Teresa Talò provided outstanding research assistance. A large number of people were instrumental
in implementing our experimental design: the mayor of Arezzo, Giuseppe Fanfani, and his 2011 reelection
campaign, in particular Claudio Repek, were extremely cooperative throughout the entire process;
Massimo Di Filippo, Fabrizio Monaci, and the team of “IPR Feedback” showed tremendous expertise
in conducting the surveys. Nannicini acknowledges financial support from the European Research
Council (under grant No. 230088). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Chad Kendall, Tommaso Nannicini, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

How Do Voters Respond to Information? Evidence from a Randomized Campaign
Chad Kendall, Tommaso Nannicini, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 18986
April 2013
JEL No. H1,H7
ABSTRACT
Rational voters update their subjective beliefs about candidates’ attributes with the arrival of information,
and subsequently base their votes on these beliefs. Information accrual is, however, endogenous to
voters’ types and difficult to identify in observational studies. In a large scale randomized trial conducted
during an actual mayoral campaign in Italy, we expose different areas of the polity to controlled informational
treatments about the valence and ideology of the incumbent through verifiable informative messages
sent by the incumbent reelection campaign. Our treatments affect both actual vote shares at the precinct
level and vote declarations at the individual level. We explicitly investigate the process of belief updating
by comparing the elicited priors and posteriors of voters, finding heterogeneous responses to information.
Based on the elicited beliefs, we are able to structurally assess the relative weights voters place upon
a candidate’s valence and ideology. We find that both valence and ideological messages affect the
first and second moments of the belief distribution, but only campaigning on valence brings more
votes to the incumbent. With respect to ideology, cross-learning occurs, as voters who receive information
about the incumbent also update their beliefs about the opponent. Finally, we illustrate how to perform
counterfactual campaigns based upon the structural model.

Chad Kendall
University of British Columbia
1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Canada
chad.kendall@ubc.ca
Tommaso Nannicini
IGIER Universita' Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milano
Italy
and IZA
tommaso.nannicini@unibocconi.it

Francesco Trebbi
University of British Columbia
1873 East Mall
Vancouver, BC, V6T1Z1
Canada
and CIFAR
and also NBER
ftrebbi@mail.ubc.ca

1

Introduction

We study the causal impact of campaign information on electoral outcomes and voters’ beliefs about
political candidates in the context of a large field experiment encompassing an entire electoral
campaign. In collaboration with the incumbent mayor of a medium-sized Italian city who was
running for reelection in 2011, eligible voters received hard and verifiable information, via mail
or phone, about the valence or the ideological stance of the incumbent. The city was randomly
divided into four areas, with the first receiving a campaign message about valence, the second
about ideology, the third about both valence and ideology, and the fourth receiving no message at
all. The informational treatments were administered by the incumbent as part of his campaign. Our
direct mailing covered the entire voting population and our phone bank covered about a quarter of
all households in the city. Moreover, voters received only our mailers from the incumbent campaign,
and only our phone calls from both the incumbent and the main challenger’s campaign.
Relative to the control group that received no campaign message, voters informed about the
valence of the incumbent—via both mail and phone—increased their support for the candidate by
4.1 percentage points as measured by precinct-level official vote shares, and by 9.5 percentage points
as measured by vote declarations in surveys. Much weaker effects on vote choices were detected
when information about the ideological stance of the incumbent was provided, or when campaigning
was done by mail only. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time evidence from an entire
election has been used to answer the question of whether or not campaign information causally
influences actual electoral outcomes in a mature democracy.
This paper is not limited to the analysis of vote choices in the context of a randomized controlled
trial. Our goal is to show the extent of the response of individual agents to political messages and
to understand the degree of sophistication in their subjective updating. The empirical application
revolves around the assessment of the role of campaign ads in elections, but the point is more general
than political advertising. Our methodology can extend to other forms of direct communication
by politicians to voters, has implications beyond the political environment, and is of interest for
commercial advertising—or for any other type of informational treatment—as well.
Using a novel elicitation protocol, we collected information about the distributions of individual
voters’ (multivariate) beliefs about the valence and ideological stance of both the incumbent and
the main challenger through surveys both before and after the informational treatments were administered. We show how, by imposing a limited amount of structure on electoral preferences and
belief distributions, prior and posterior beliefs of individual voters can be fully characterized. We

1

also show that, although only valence treatments were effective in changing votes, our informational
treatments along both the valence and ideological dimension had large effects on voters’ beliefs, moving both first and second moments of the belief distributions for the two main candidates. Indeed,
campaign information affected not only voters’ beliefs about the candidate originating the message,
but also their beliefs about the opponent. Intuitively, in Bayesian signaling games, receiving no
message is valuable information and our evidence on cross-learning appears fully consistent with
updating in the context of a Bayesian political signaling game.
The full characterization of the individual belief distributions we propose is the combination of a
careful design of our surveys and structural estimation of a random utility voting model. The latter
component of our methodology delivers precise estimates of utility weights in voters’ preferences
for a candidate’s valence and ideology. We report a utility weight on valence roughly equal to that
on ideological losses away from a voter’s bliss point. Interestingly, we also show that the preference
weights are heterogeneous in the population and depend on the political stance of the voter, with
voters on the right placing less emphasis on the valence dimension. Finally, we show that the
ideological loss function away from the voter’s bliss point is concave in distance, not convex (e.g.,
quadratic losses) as commonly assumed in the literature.
The random utility model we use follows the method outlined in the theoretical paper of Ramalho
and Smith (2012) to account for non-randomness in voters’ willingness to disclose their votes.
While non-response in survey data is often assumed to be random, we demonstrate the importance
of accounting for its endogeneity and suggest that this method should be more often utilized in
empirical studies in which survey responses are relied upon.
We conclude our analysis by simulating counterfactual electoral campaigns to assess the effects
of specific blanket or targeted electoral campaigns on vote outcomes. We find a blanket campaign
of valence messages to be the most valuable in persuading voters, which is consistent with voters
lacking prior information on the quality of candidates.
This paper is related to several strands of the literature. The effectiveness of electoral campaigns
in mature democracies is the subject of a large literature, including Ansolabehere et al. (1994),
Ansolabehere and Iyengar (1995), Gerber and Green (2000), Green and Gerber (2004), Gerber,
Green, and Shachar (2003), Nickerson (2008), and Dewan, Humphreys, and Rubenson (2010).
Typically the focus of these papers is either on self-declared outcomes for vote choices or on actual
outcomes for turnout. Methodologically, these papers rely on either small-scale experiments for
partisan ads or on randomized non-partisan campaigns for turnout. Our paper complements this
literature by focusing on actual electoral outcomes in a large scale field experiment. We must clarify
2

that our paper is not the first instance of a large scale randomized partisan campaign. Gerber et
al. (2011) look at randomization over intensity of TV ads (with no control over the message content)
on self-declared choices during the 2006 Republican primary for the Texas gubernatorial election.
They find large, but short-lived, effects of such TV ads, inconsistent with Bayesian updating. Unlike
their approach, we randomize the content of partisan ads and also evaluate their impact on actual
vote shares. Our paper also complements this literature from a methodological standpoint by
augmenting the reduced form approach with structural estimation.
Albeit in the context of less mature democracies, the literature in development economics has also
experimented with informational campaigning. Relevant contributions include Wantchekon (2003)
and Fujiwara and Wantchekon (2013), exploring political clientelism in Benin, Vicente (2013), and
Banerjee, Green, and Pande (2012). Banerjee et al. (2011) focus on non-partisan informational
campaigns in India and show that information about the qualifications of candidates matters for
turnout, vote shares, and the incidence of vote buying.
This paper is related to a vast literature on candidate’s valence, initiated by Stokes (1963) and
including Enelow and Hinich (1982), Ansolabehere and Snyder (2000), Groseclose (2001), Schofield
(2003), Aragones and Palfrey (2002) among others. More recently, Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita
(2009), Kartik and McAfee (2007), and Bernhardt, Camara, and Squintani (2011) provide interesting theoretical studies of strategic electoral competition with candidates differentiated along
both (ideological) policy platform and valence dimensions. Galasso and Nannicini (2011) study the
interplay between candidates’ valence and the contestability of electoral districts.
Finally, this paper contributes to the growing literature focused on the elicitation and quantification of subjective beliefs. Elicitation of priors is the subject of Dominitz and Manski (1996),
Manski (2004), Blass, Lach, and Manski (2010), Gill and Walker (2005), and Duffy and Tavits
(2008) among others. To these contributions, which mostly focus on the elicitation of expectations
of economic outcomes, our work provides a useful addition in the context of the elicitation of multivariate beliefs. In particular, we show how to decouple information about marginal beliefs and
their dependence using a copula function approach. We believe this approach may be of use outside
the politico-economic application in our study.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the empirical model. Section
3 describes the experimental setting. Section 4 discusses the reduced form results on vote choices.
Section 5 focuses on the structural estimates of the model and Section 6 on the experimental effects
on voters’ beliefs. Section 7 presents our counterfactuals and discusses the implications of the
heterogeneous response to information on the part of voters. Section 8 concludes.
3

2

Empirical Model

2.1

Voters and Candidates

Consider an electoral race between two candidates, A, the incumbent, and B, the challenger. Let
the set of voters be N , with |N | = N . A voter i is characterized by an ideal policy point distributed
over a finite and discrete policy space, Π, which is common across all voters, with policies P ∈ Π.
The discreteness assumption is meant to capture an empirical feature of the survey data employed
in the subsequent analysis. Voters are heterogeneous, with bliss points q ∈ Π, and receive disutility
from a policy choice away from their bliss point. They also receive utility from the level of valence
of the elected candidate V ∈ Λ, where the set Λ is finite and discrete. When policy p is implemented
by candidate j of valence v, the utility for voter i of type q is assumed to be:
U (v, p; q) = γv − u (q − p) − χu (q − p) v + εi,j
where the utility function includes a deterministic portion and a candidate-specific random utility
component εi,j , independent of V and P . The parameter γ indicates the relative preference weight
of valence versus the policy stance. We assume u (0) = 0, u0 (x) ≥ 0 for x > 0, and u0 (x) ≤ 0
for x < 0. For example, a quadratic loss away from voter i’s bliss point, (qi − p)2 , fits this set
of assumptions.1 However, we assume the more general form u (x) = |x|ζ with ζ ≥ 0. The policy
stance of the politician, p, affects voters heterogeneously depending upon their own ideal position, q,
but candidates of higher quality v are favored by all voters. We also allow for interactions between
valence and policy positions that are governed by χ. The random utility component εi,j of voter i’s
preferences for candidate j captures the personal appeal of j to i.
It is not important for our purposes to specify whether the two candidates A and B implement
their respective ideal policy position P once in office (see Ansolabehere, Snyder, and Stewart, 2001;
Lee, Moretti, and Butler, 2004) or strategically cater their policy to voters (e.g., as in a standard
Downsian setting). We are interested in the voters’ utilities at the time they place their vote, which
only depend upon their beliefs about each candidate’s position, and not on how the policy position
came about or whether or not it is actually implemented. In general, our approach is robust to the
details of the electoral competition structure.
All voters participate in the election (voting is compulsory in our empirical setting). Voter i is
i,j
assumed to have a joint prior distribution function over V and P , fV,P
(v, p), for j = A, B, evaluated

at point (v, p) and defined over the support Λ × Π. We do not preclude V from being potentially
correlated with P and we allow priors to differ based upon i’s characteristics or ideal point q.
1

Quadratic loss functions are standard in the literature (e.g., see Ansolabehere and Snyder, 2000).

4

Our experimental treatments induce a randomized change in the information sets of voters,
which we describe in detail in Section 3. The discreteness of the experimental strategy induces a
finite set of informational types of voters.
Type 1

:

Receiving a message about V, but not P, of A.

Type 2

:

Receiving a message about P, but not of V, of A.

Type 3

:

Receiving a message about both V and P of A.

Type 4

:

Receiving no message about V or P of A.

For simplicity, a “message” indicates having (randomly) received a campaign information treatment, H ∈ {1, ..., 4}. Let us indicate as T (h) the set of voters treated with information type H = h
i,A
(v, p|H = h) indicates the subjective posterior probability that voter i, treated by
and let fV,P

message h, assigns to the event that candidate A has valence V = v and position P = p. The
process of updating beliefs typically reflects the characteristics of the game played between voters
and political candidates (e.g., a signaling game). Our approach allows to leave the nature of such
strategic interaction unspecified.
The expected utility from the election of A for voter i, treated by h and with ideal point q, is:
EUAi (h, qi ) =

XX
p

i,A
fV,P
(v, p|H = h)U (v, p; qi ) + εi,A .

v

If, instead, B is elected, the expected utility for voter of type (h, qi ) is:
EUBi (h, qi ) =

XX
p

i,B
fV,P
(v, p|H = h)U (v, p; qi ) + εi,B .

v

The probability that i of type (h, q) supports candidate A is given by:


Pr EUAi (h, qi ) ≥ EUBi (h, qi ) .

(1)

Given the probability that a voter supports candidate A, we can consider a standard, conditional
logit model, assuming εij to be i.i.d. across voters and distributed with a Type I extreme-value
distribution with cumulative distribution function F (εij ) = exp (−e−εij ). Provided information on
the choice of i to vote for j, Yi = j, we obtain the loglikelihood:
ln L(θ) =

N X
X
i=1

dij ln Pr (Yi = j) =

j

N X
X
i=1

j

i

eEUj (h,qi )
dij ln P
EUli (h,qi )
le

where dij is 1 if i votes for j, and 0 otherwise. Note that the vector of parameters of interest, θ,
i,j
includes both preference parameters [γ, ζ, χ] and the parameters of the joint beliefs fV,P
(.), which

we define in the following subsection.
5

One potential problem with the standard logit model in a setting employing vote declarations as
opposed to actual votes is that voters, when surveyed, may prefer not to disclose their vote. If the
sample of voters who do not disclose their vote is completely random, one can apply the logit model
to the subsample of responders. This is the approach typically followed in the literature, often
without diagnostics in support of the crucial “missing completely at random” assumption, required
for an unbiased estimate. We provide evidence in Section 5 that indicates that the subsample of
voters that choose not to disclose their votes is predictable, so estimation of the standard logit model
would lead to biased estimates in our setting. We therefore apply a novel choice-based approach
suggested by Ramalho and Smith (2012) that allows for non-random non-response under weak
assumptions. The model assumes that, conditional on the voter’s actual vote, the probability with
which a voter chooses to respond to the survey is constant, but that this probability can depend on
their vote. Under this assumption, we can define the loglikelihood as:



N
EUji (h,qi )
EUji (h,qi )
X
X
X
e
e
oi

ln L(θ) =
+ (1 − oi ) ln 1 −
dij ln βj P
βj P
EUli (h,qi )
EUli (h,qi )
e
e
l
l
i=1
j
j
where oi is 1 if i discloses the vote, and 0 otherwise. The additional βj parameters are the probabilities with which a voter discloses the vote for j. The first term of the loglikelihood is the probability
that a voter votes for j and discloses the vote. The second term reflects the probability that the
voter votes for one of the candidates, but chooses not to disclose the vote. Note that when βj = 1
for all j, such that the vote is always observed, we obtain the standard logit model as a special case.
Our results in Section 5 reject βj = 1 for all j, meaning that we are justified in accounting for the
possibility of non-random non-response.

2.2

Voters’ Subjective Updating

Here, we specify the process by which voters’ subjective beliefs are updated in the presence of
campaign advertising. For illustrative purposes, consider the following time line.

6

Our first assumption is that voters consider the campaign information to be truthful. Sufficient
freedom of the press in the Italian electoral context guarantees that such an assumption may be
valid in the case of factual advertising, as we employ in our experimental setup. All messages are
factual and can be independently validated.
Secondly, we assume rational Bayesian voters.2 We refrain from imposing distributional assumptions on priors, posteriors, and on the distribution of signals. Instead, we adopt the option of
eliciting subjective priors and posteriors from specifically designed surveys. This is an important
step for two main reasons. First, elicitation allows us to assess quantitatively how the messaging
strategy we employed experimentally operates in the field. Indeed, voters are not aware of the randomization process and update their beliefs “as if” the messages were directly sent by the candidate.
This is not an assumption, but part of the experimental design. Under the assumption of Bayesian
voters, belief updating about candidate A implies:
i,A
(v, p|H = h) =
fV,P

Pri,A (H = h|V = v, P = p)
i,A
× fV,P
(v, p)
i,A
Pr (H = h)

for h = 1, 2, 3,

Pri,A (H=h|V =v,P =p)
can be recovered directly from the data after
Pri,A (H=h)
i,A
and fV,P
(v, p). Second, our approach allows for general strategic

where the subjective updating term
i,A
elicitation of fV,P
(v, p|H = h)

electoral communication between candidates and voters in the background. We are not required to
model or restrict the voting game played among N , A, and B. Any strategic signaling is captured
by the updating term

Pri,A (H=h|V =v,P =p)
,
Pri,A (H=h)

which we estimate, not model.3

Bayesian updating in case the voter receives no message from the candidate requires further
discussion. Consider the case of a fully rational Bayesian voter that receives no campaign advertising
from a candidate, but knows that such action was available. In such a case, as Chappell (1994)
states, “absence of a message provides information which should be used in Bayesian updating”
with the result that subjective posteriors probabilities are different from priors even absent any
message having reached the voter. In the case of posteriors about candidate B, for instance, this
requires that voter i updates priors based on absence of an H message from B. Formally:
i,B
i,B
fV,P
(v, p|H = h) 6= fV,P
(v, p) for h = 1, 2, 3,

(2)

which is justified from voter i having observed at least one extra campaign message from A without
any corresponding counter-message from B.
2
Note that, while we need voters to be rational and vote sincerely, the assumption of Bayesian updating is simply
convenient for the exposition, as our empirical framework allows us to identify belief updating in more general terms.
3
A dynamic repeated election model with both ideological and valence considerations that would fit our problem
is, for instance, proposed in Bernhardt, Camara, and Squintani (2011).

7

The degree of rationality embedded in condition (2) cannot be extended, however, to the experimental control group H = 4, which does not receive any type of informational treatment by either
A or B and hence has no possibility of knowing that such specific messages would be available but
were not employed. The fundamental assumption of our experimental design mirrors a Stable Unit
Treatment Value Assumption (SUTVA, see Cox, 1958; Rubin, 1978), as it requires the potential
outcome of a control unit to be unaffected by the treatment assignment of the other units. Absent
common shocks, we should assume for H = 4 that the posterior distribution is identical to the prior
i,j
i,j
distribution, that is, for every i ∈ T (4), fV,P
(v, p|H = 4) = fV,P
(v, p) for j = A, B.

More generally, we consider a process of Bayesian updating which accommodates common shocks
across voters, under the (testable) assumption that the subjective probabilities on such shocks are
identical across all i ∈ N and independent of H. Consider, for instance, the case of posteriors
elicited after a common informational shock, W , which can be thought of as the general campaign
carried out by the candidates besides the informational messages from A that we randomize at the
margin. With respect to candidate j, voter i will be characterized by the following posteriors.
i,j
Assumption 1 (SUTVA): fV,P
(v, p|H = h, W ) =

×

Pri,j (H = h|V = v, P = p)
Pri,j (H = h)

Prj (W |V = v, P = p)
i,j
× fV,P
(v, p) for h = 1, 2, 3; j = A, B
j
Pr (W )
and

i,j
fV,P
(v, p|H = 4, W ) =

Prj (W |V = v, P = p)
i,j
× fV,P
(v, p) for j = A, B.
Prj (W )

The credibility of Assumption 1 crucially rests on the experimental design described in Section 3
and is empirically validated in Section 4.
Finally, the elicitation of multivariate beliefs, even on expert subjects, is not an obvious exercise
(Kadane and Wolfson, 1998; Garthwaite et al., 2005) and is the object of a vast literature bordering
statistics and psychology (dating at least as back as Savage, 1971). We outline our approach next.

2.3

Elicitation of Multivariate Beliefs

Elicitation of beliefs and priors is increasingly common in economics and political science, and is
standard in psychology and statistics.4 We describe a transparent protocol of elicitation we designed
to be robust to the behavioral and technological constraints we face. Specifically, we sampled a large
number of voters and need to elicit multivariate beliefs from each.
4

For recent examples in economics, see Dominitz and Manski (1996); Manski (2004); Blass et al. (2010); and Zafar
(2009). See Gill and Walker (2005) and Duffy and Tavits (2008) for applications in political science.

8

For each main candidate j = A, B and each voter i, joint valence and ideology subjective
i,j
i,j
priors fV,P
(v, p) and posteriors fV,P
(v, p|H = h) are defined over Λ × Π. In the remainder of this

subsection, let us focus for brevity on the elicitation of subjective priors, with the understanding
that the same process applies to posteriors. In the empirical analysis we will fix the cardinality
of both Λ and Π to small integer figures, based on Miller (1956), and a large body of cognitive
psychology suggesting that individuals can be quite precise in evaluating choices on relatively coarse
unidimensional supports, but display hardly any precision on finer supports. Specifically, for reasons
explained below, we assume the cardinality of Π to be equal to 5 and the cardinality of Λ to be
equal to 10.
It is evident, however, that even for |Π| = 5 and |Λ| = 10, “brute force” elicitation for both
candidates would require each responder to answer 5 × 10 × 2 = 100 different questions on the
subjective likelihood of each specific (v, p) realization, an effort which would likely frustrate political
experts, let alone regular voters. Garthwaite, Kadane, and O’Hagan (2005) present an insightful
discussion on the difficulty of elicitation for multivariate priors. To this issue, the reader versed
in elicitation may add the problem of effectively training telephone interviewers in the consistent
elicitation of joint probabilities.5 Therefore, we follow an alternative route.
2.3.1

Marginal Belief Distributions

We first focus on information more easily elicitable from voters: the univariate marginals fVi,j (v) and
fPi,j (p). Even in this case, full elicitation of marginals would require a large set of (|Π| + |Λ|)×2 = 30
questions. We streamline the process in order to maintain feasibility without excessive sacrifice of
accuracy. We start by imposing a simple regularity assumption on the distribution of beliefs.
Assumption 2 : Subjective belief distributions are unimodal.
Although restrictive, this assumption makes the interpretation of the elicited probabilities more
direct. All of our remaining distributional assumptions can be illustrated using the questions in
our surveys by way of example. We focus only on A for brevity and consider first his ideological
position P . We enquire about the central tendency of the marginal prior on ideology as follows.
Q1 : How would you most likely define candidate A’s political position?
Left (1); Center-Left (2); Center (3); Center-Right (4); Right (5); Don’t Know ( − 999).
5

While the use of telephone interviews is not generally necessary, in our context it is was required to ensure timely
elicitation of a large sample of the voting population as close as possible to election day.

9

A reasonable interpretation of the answer, with minimal confusion for the respondent, is that the
mode is elicited. In particular, we allow the mode, p̂, to be only one of these five categories.
Assumption 3 : Π = {1, ..., 5} .
An answer of “Don’t Know/Don’t Know A” implies flat priors, or fPi,A (p) = 1/ |Π| = 0.2 for every
p. Our choice of the set Π follows the established result in cognitive psychology that individuals are
well versed in choices over discrete sets of limited dimensionality (|Π| ≤ 10), but that this capacity
deteriorates sharply when the number of options rises above small integers (Miller, 1956). Such an
assumption, however, has costs, as emphasized in Manski and Molinari (2010).
Conditional on non-flat priors, we further enquire about the dispersion around the mode.6
Q2 : How large is your margin of uncertainty around candidate A’s political position?
Certain (1); Rather uncertain, leaning left (2); Very uncertain, leaning left (3);
Rather uncertain, leaning right (4); Very uncertain, leaning right (5).
We indicate the level of increasing tightness of the priors with s ∈ Σ = {1, ..., 4}, where s = 1 is
maximal dispersion, i.e., the case of flat priors; s = 2 indicates substantial uncertainty (answers
3 or 5 to Q2); s = 3 indicates intermediate uncertainty (answers 2 or 4 to Q2); and s = 4 is
maximal tightness, which coincides with a degenerate prior spiking at p̂ (answer 1 to Q2). Q2 also
elicits information about the skew of the beliefs. While we do not allow explicitly for an answer of
symmetric dispersion for s = 2, 3, not to overload the responder, the estimation below allows for
symmetric belief distributions.7 Let us indicate with z ∈ {−1; 1} a negative (i.e., to the left/lower
values) or positive (i.e., to the right/higher values) asymmetry in Q2.
Let us define the modal probability mass with φP = fPi,A (p = p̂). Intuitively, we assume the
probability mass at the mode fPi,A (p = p̂) is lower the higher the level of uncertainty. We allow φP
to vary with s and estimate φP,s , from the data for s = 2, 3, imposing the bounds:
Assumption 4 : 1/ |Π| ≤ φP,2 ≤ φP,3 ≤ 1.
We further assume the off-mode mass, 1 − φP,s , to be allocated asymmetrically around the mode
depending on the indicated asymmetry, z. We assume the off-mode mass decays proportionally
6

Interviewers were trained during pilot interviews to explain to voters that this question entailed uncertainty about
subjective evaluations on the candidates, and should not be interpreted as a right-or-wrong question.
7
In our surveys, we actually included a possible answer “uncertain” to assess the share of respondents indicating
symmetric dispersion around the mode. The share of respondents in that category was so low for ideology (and
actually none for valence) that we omit it from exposition.

10

to the distance |p − p̂| from the mode at a constant rate, as dictated by a function g(x1 , x2 ):
{1, ..., |Π| − 1} × [0, 1] → [0, 1] with gx1 (x1 , x2 ) ≥ 0 and gx2 (x1 , x2 ) ≤ 0.

1/ |Π|

g (φP,s , z ∗ (p − p̂))
Assumption 4’ : fPi,A (p 6= p̂) =

0

In synthesis, we impose:
for s = 1
for s = 2, 3
for s = 4.

Concerning g(.), we allocate αP (1 − φP,s ) mass in the direction of the asymmetry imposing that
αP ∈ [1/2, 1], and allocate (1 − αP ) (1 − φP,s ) in the opposite direction, assuming a linear decay
of the off-mode mass in both directions. This specification of g allows for a very flexible, but
parametrically parsimonious marginal distribution.
Concerning the valence dimension V , we again enquire about the modal belief.
Q3 : Setting aside his/her political position, how would you most likely grade candidate A?
From 1 (minimum competence) to 10 (maximum competence) or Don’t Know ( − 999).
The set Λ is then assumed to be as follows:
Assumption 5 : Λ = {1, ..., 10} .
This particular format of Q3 was driven by the familiarity of Italian voters with primary and
secondary education grade scoring rules, with 10 indicating the best possible mark in a school
assignment and failing grades being below 6. The dispersion around the valence mode and the
skewness of valence beliefs are modeled similarly to Assumptions 4 and 4’ with Λ replacing Π in
the construction of fVi,A (v). We omit their description for brevity. For illustrative purposes, Figure
1 provides an example of the modeled prior beliefs about the valence of A for one particular voter.
The distribution in the figure is based upon the voter’s reported mode (p̂ = 7) and uncertainty
(s = 2) and the estimates we obtain for the parameters governing the distribution.
Finally, we must emphasize that we only elicit the beliefs about valence and ideology for the
incumbent candidate, A, and his main challenger, B, due to the infeasibility of eliciting beliefs
about all minor, third-party candidates participating in the election. In our estimation in Section
5, we assume that the beliefs of all non-incumbent candidates are the same as those elicited for
the main challenger, B. While this is a stark assumption, we justify it by the fact that the main
non-incumbent candidates were ideologically similar and their qualities were relatively unknown
(flat beliefs along the valence dimension are quite common for non-incumbent candidates).8
8

The main third-party challenger was also a right-wing candidate, like B, but was sidelined by their party due to
pending legal litigation related to his previous stint in office. See Section 3 for more institutional details.

11

2.3.2

Joint Belief Distributions: A Copula-Based Approach

Having derived the univariate marginals, we now derive the joint distributions for all voters. Given
any two (univariate) marginals, it is possible to construct a joint (bivariate) distribution in infinite
ways. Copulas, introduced by Sklar (1959), are useful devices for providing a representation of a
multivariate distribution function in terms of its univariate marginal distributions.
Dropping the superscripts, given cumulative marginals, FV (v) = Pr(V ≤ v) and FP (p) =
Pr(P ≤ p), a copula function C satisfies FV,P (v, p) = C(FV (v), FP (p)) where FV,P (v, p) = Pr(V ≤
v, P ≤ p) is the joint cumulative distribution function. C is unique for continuous densities. For discrete densities, as in our setting, typically the same joint distribution can be represented by different
copulas, but a specific copula uniquely identifies a joint distribution. The marginal distributions
carry all of the information related to the scaling and shape of the joint distribution function, while
the copula function incorporates the information concerning the dependence relationship among
the random variables. For parsimony, we will focus on copula families characterized by one dependence parameter. Notice, however, that the dependence parameter does not coincide with a linear
correlation parameter; nonlinear dependence is accommodated as well.
We investigate three popular types of copulas, allowing for different degrees of association ρ
between V and P . First, independence between V and P produces the intuitive copula FV,P (v, p) =
FV (v)∗FP (p). Second, we allow for common dependence across surveyed voters, given by association
parameter −1 ≤ ρ ≤ 1, employing the Farlie-Gumbel-Morgensen (1960) family copula, FV,P (v, p) =
FP (p) ∗ FV (v) ∗ (1 + ρ(1 − FP (p)) ∗ (1 − FV (v))), where ρ > 0 implies positive dependence and
ρ < 0 negative dependence. Potentially, ρ could be made voter-type dependent (e.g., allowing for a
different ρ for left and right-wing voters), but not voter-specific. The FGM family is flexible, but
allows only small departures from independence. The third type of copula family we consider is the
Frank family, FV,P (v, p) = 1/ξ ∗ log(1 + D(ξ)), with D(ξ) = (eξFP (p) − 1)(eξFV (v) − 1)/(eξ − 1) and
ρ = −ξ. The Frank family allows larger departures from independence and requires ρ 6= 0. Indeed,
the Frank copula is well suited to model outcomes with strong positive or negative dependence.
The dependence parameter ρ is not elicited from the survey, but can be estimated from the data.
Recall that we observe vote decisions and such decisions are function of the voters’ posteriors. Given
a copula family, we can estimate a dependence parameter ρ as part of the vector of parameters, θ,
by maximizing the likelihood of observing those votes as in equation (1). One can further employ
standard generalized likelihood ratio tests to assess the relative quality of the assumptions on the
copula family and select the preferred family. We follow this approach.

12

To summarize, our set of parameters of interest is θ = [βA , βB , γ, ζ, χ, θ0 ] with belief parameters
θ0 = [φP,2 , φV,2 , φP,3 , φV,3 , αP , αV , ρA , ρB ], where we allow the association parameter to be different
for A and B. Estimating θ0 from vote decisions is only feasible for the posterior joint distribution.
The prior joint distribution can be fully characterized under an additional assumption.
Assumption 6 : Subjective belief distributions have constant θ0 .
In particular, while we allow marginals to be affected by our informational treatment, we assume that
the dependence between ideology and valence of the candidate is constant. For example, assuming
that a moderate policy stance is positively correlated with smarter candidates, information that
moves subjective priors toward higher levels of valence V is allowed to have an impact on the policy
stance P , pushing it toward a more moderate stance, but it is not allowed to change the association
between P and V .9
Figure 2 and Figure 3 provide an example of the joint distributions for a particular voter’s
beliefs about candidate A prior to the election campaign and after receiving the valence message
treatment. Each joint distribution is determined assuming independence of the marginals and
based on the estimates of the parameters governing the marginal distributions. For this particular
voter, receiving the valence message increased his belief about the valence of A and also reduced
the uncertainty along both dimensions. In Section 6, we will see that such changes in beliefs are
representative of voters receiving the valence message treatment.

3

Experimental Design

In May 2011, in collaboration with the reelection campaign of the incumbent mayor in the Italian
city of Arezzo, we implemented the experimental strategy embedded in the above empirical model
during the mayor’s actual electoral campaign. Specifically, we divided the city into four areas,
randomizing at the precinct level, and the incumbent sent different campaign messages both by
mail and by phone call to voters in these areas. In this section, we describe the institutional setting,
as well as the nature of the (randomized) campaign messages and tools.

3.1

Institutional Setting

In Italy, mayors of cities with more than 15,000 inhabitants are directly elected under a plurality
system with runoff, that is, in the first round the candidate who obtains more than 50 percent of the
9

As an alternative to Assumption 6, one could calibrate ρj for the prior distribution at specific values and observe
the sensitivity of the results. A natural range of values could be the confidence interval of the dependence parameter
for the posteriors. We do not pursue this avenue here.

13

votes is elected, otherwise the two candidates receiving the most votes compete in a second round
which takes place two weeks later. Mayoral candidates are supported by one or more party lists,
but voters can cast separate votes for a candidate and a party list supporting another candidate.
They can also vote only for a mayoral candidate, without expressing any preference for party lists,
but the opposite is not allowed, because valid votes for a party list are automatically attributed to
the candidate for mayor supported by that party.
Elected mayors serve a five-year term and are subject to a two-term limit. Italian municipalities
are in charge of a wide range of services, from water supply to waste management, from municipal
police to certain infrastructures, and from housing to welfare policies. Mayors are the key political
players at the local level, as they can also appoint the executive officers and dismiss them at will. The
city council, which acts as the legislative body, can force the mayor to resign with a no confidence
vote, but in this case the council is also dissolved. Because of this institutional setting, municipal
elections have high salience and turnout is usually very high.
Arezzo is a provincial capital city in the center of Italy, located in the province of the same
name. In 2011, it had 100,455 inhabitants and 77,386 eligible voters. For electoral purposes, the
city is divided into 95 precincts (the smallest electoral unit which usually coincides with a cluster
of streets), which vote in 42 polling places (e.g., schools, public buildings). From a political point
of view, the city was contestable. Giuseppe Fanfani, the incumbent mayor elected in 2006 who
accepted randomization of a part of his reelection campaign, belonged to the center-left coalition,
but before his first election the center-right coalition won for two terms in a row. In 2011, his
main challenger was the official candidate of the center-right coalition, Grazia Sestini, a former
vice minister at the national level. Six other (minor) third-party candidates were also present in
the ballot. The main third-party candidate was a former mayor of the center-right coalition, Luigi
Lucherini, sidelined by his party due to pending legal trouble.10
Local political campaigns are not very sophisticated in Italy, and they mostly rely on public
rallies, direct mailing, and TV appearances (but no ads). Phone banks are rarely used, and doorto-door canvassing almost never occurs.
10

The mayor accepted our proposal to randomize his campaign because of the possibility of receiving potentially
useful information. As the center-right coalition was split between a main challenger (Sestini) and a less competitive
one (Lucherini), he expected either to win in the first round or to go to the runoff. Therefore, our randomized trial
could provide him with an effective strategy for campaigning in the two weeks between the first and second round.

14

3.2

Randomized Campaign

To operationalize our informational treatments, we studied the campaign materials of the incumbent
and assembled relevant information so as to isolate slogans based on either his competence as city
manager (valence message) or his political stance (ideology message). Because we wanted to stay
away from the strategic game between him, the other candidates, and the voters (that is, we
wanted to randomize his actual campaign), we actually devised two different ideological messages:
one leaning toward the left and one leaning toward the center of the political spectrum. We then
allowed him to choose between the two and he selected the leftist message.
Furthermore, although our treatment of interest coincides with partisan campaign messages
delivered by one of the candidates, as opposed to non-partisan information, we wanted our informational treatments to be factual and non-emotional, as typical for cheap or costly signaling games.11
For this reason, we matched the main slogans with bullet points based on verifiable information
about the incumbent’s performance and policy choices during his first term in office. Future research
should extend to emotional messages as well, but we did not explore this avenue here.
Appendix Figures A1 and A2 show the mail flyers containing the two messages.12 The valence
flyer is built around two keywords: competence and effort. The implicit message is that voters
should reelect the incumbent because he was competent and effective as city manager. The factual
information provided refers to the fact that Arezzo developed an urban development plan that was
ranked first by the regional government and received extra funding because of its quality. The extra
funding was used to rebuild monuments, roads, and parking slots in the city center. The ideology
flyer is built around two keywords: awareness and solidarity. The implicit message is that voters
should reelect the incumbent because he shares values that are commonly associated with the Italian
left. The bullet points further reinforce the leftist tone as they point to “public” services, such as
childcare and food facilities for the poor, that were expanded during his first term in office.13 Notice
that the two mail flyers are identical in size, layout, colors, fonts, number of words, and photo of
the candidate; only the content of the campaign message differs.
11

The marketing and advertising literature (see Liu and Stout, 1987) has explored subjective responses to factual
versus emotional or nonfactual messages, indicating systematic differences. As an interesting counter, Gerber et
al. (2011) present a randomized trial involving nonfactual campaign messages.
12
In the Appendix, we also report the English translation of the text of the two flyers. Additional materials related
to our randomized campaign can be found on the website: www.igier.unibocconi.it/randomized-campaign.
13
To validate our operationalization of the two informational treatments ex ante, we randomly assigned the two
flyers to 50 university students at Bocconi University (in Milan) who did not know the mayor of Arezzo. We then asked
them to give their subjective assessment of the politician’s valence and ideology using the same questions described
in Section 2. For the 25 students who received the first message, the average valence evaluation was 6.650 (s.d. 0.963)
and the average ideology evaluation was 3.100 (s.d. 0.700). For the 25 students who received the second message,
these values were 5.450 (s.d. 0.973) and 2.050 (s.d. 0.669), respectively.

15

The two campaign messages—valence and ideology—were supplied to voters in two ways, through
direct mailing and phone calls. The randomization design was implemented as follows. We randomly divided the 95 precincts into four groups: (i) 24 precincts received the valence message; (ii) 24
precincts received the ideology message; (iii) 24 precincts received both messages; (iv) 23 precincts
received no message (control group). Furthermore, we randomly split the first three groups into
two subgroups: in the first, the treatment was administered by both direct mail and phone calls
(12 precincts); in the second, by direct mail only (12 precincts).14
Appendix Table A1 reports the ex-ante balance tests of predetermined variables at the precinct
level. The available variables include the number of eligible voters enlisted in each precinct, the
city-wide neighborhood each precinct belongs to, and past electoral outcomes of national, regional,
European, and municipal elections. As precincts were reshuffled in the last decade, some outcomes
are not available for all 95 precincts. All of the predetermined variables are balanced across treatment groups. Only the number of eligible voters displays a coefficient significant at the 10 percent
level, because of the presence of a few small precincts in the countryside that could not be spread
across all groups. Removing these precincts from the analysis, however, does not alter the results.
In order to increase the effectiveness of the campaign messages, we drew useful insights from the
U.S. experimental evidence summarized by Green and Gerber (2004). First, we acted in the week
before election day, so as to ensure the message sticks in voters’ minds. Second, we had our mail
flyers designed by professionals and directly sent to individuals with their name and address on the
envelope.15 Third, we did not use automated robo calls. We instead trained volunteers to make the
campaign phone calls. Specifically, from the candidate’s headquarters, volunteers called all selected
households with the following protocol: first, they were instructed to talk with the voters and ask
for their opinion for about two minutes. Then, they would ask the voter to listen to a recorded
message from the candidate. At the end of the call, the recorded voice of the candidate read a
30-second script with the above valence and ideology messages (or a combination of the two).16
Our randomized campaign used the above tools—mailers and phone calls—on a large scale. All
households in the city received an envelope from the incumbent campaign. The envelope contained
the official platform of the political parties supporting the candidate plus one of our flyers (or both
of them) according to the assigned treatment group. Voters in the control group received just the
14
As we were already pushing the boundaries in terms of sample size, we decided that the accuracy loss could not
justify an additional subgroup treated by phone calls only.
15
To avoid sending multiple envelopes to the same household, we randomized the name of the receiver within each
household, because we did not want to target only household heads.
16
In the Appendix, we report the English translation of the text of the three recorded messages. Original audio
files are available on the website: www.igier.unibocconi.it/randomized-campaign.

16

platform, but not the flyer with our informational treatment. This procedure allowed us to keep the
candidate unaware of the randomization outcome. Of course, the candidate approved all messages
and paid for the costs of the campaign, but we gave him closed envelopes so that he could not infer
which precincts were receiving one flyer as opposed to the other. In summary, all households with
at least one member enlisted as an eligible voter received our mailers. On top of this, about 25
percent of the households in the treatment groups also received a campaign phone call.17

3.3

Data

To elicit beliefs about the valence and ideology of the two main candidates along the lines described
in Section 2, we ran two surveys of 2,042 eligible voters distributed across all treatment groups.
We ran the first survey ten days before the election and, most importantly, before voters received
the informational treatments, so as to measure priors and demographic characteristics. The second
survey was conducted the day after the election and was meant to measure posteriors and (selfdeclared) vote choices. To implement our surveys, we contracted a company from another Italian
region, so as to have interviewers with different accents from the campaign volunteers and to remove
any link between the campaign and the survey phone calls. About 71 percent of the respondents in
the first survey also replied to the question about whether they voted or not in the second survey.
Therefore, our sample is made up of 1,455 voters, 1,306 of whom actually voted for one of the
candidates. However, 231 of the 1,306 voters did not specify for which candidate they voted and for
this reason we accommodate for potentially non-random non-responses in the model estimation.
To further validate our randomization design ex post, we checked for balancing of the characteristics of voters across treatment groups. Survey variables include demographic characteristics,
educational attainment, political orientation, home ownership, and how often voters read newspapers or watch TV. The results are reported in Appendix Table A2. None of these (self-declared)
individual characteristics is statistically different across treatment groups.18
Table 1 summarizes election results at the precinct level. The incumbent mayor won his bid
for reelection with a vote share 51.3 percent, enough to avoid a run off. Table 2 shows the (self17

Because of budget and time constraints, we could not reach all households by phone.
As an additional ex-post validation of the randomization design, we built proxies of Census characteristics at the
precinct level. This exercise has two limitations, however. First, data from the last available Census refer to 2001.
Second, precincts are not easily matchable with Census cells. To overcome the second limitation, we implemented
the following geocoding procedure: 1) for each street (i.e., line) belonging to a precinct we calculated the weighted
average of the characteristics of the Census cells (i.e., polygons) overlapping with that street (with weights equal to the
overlapping segments); 2) for each precinct, we calculated the weighted average of the characteristics of the associated
streets (with weights equal to the population living in each street). Appendix Table A3 reports the balancing tests
of these Census characteristics across treatment groups. Although the estimates are likely to suffer from attenuation
bias due to measurement error, none of them is statistically different from zero.
18

17

declared) vote choices of surveyed individuals. As often happens in post-electoral polls, there is a
slight bandwagon effect in vote declarations favoring the winning candidate (57.1 percent). The
bandwagon is not a concern for estimation under the (plausible) assumption that this effect is
orthogonal to our treatment groups. In any case, recall that a strength of our approach is that we
can cross-validate the consistency of treatment effects in the survey data (at the individual level)
with those in the aggregate actual voting data (at the precinct level).

4

Evidence on Choices

In this section, we evaluate whether our informational treatments had any effect on voting choices at
both the precinct and individual level. Based on the experimental design described in the previous
section, the (reduced-form) causal effects of campaigning on valence versus ideology can be estimated
through the OLS model:
Yi =

6
X

γk Dik + ηi

(3)

k=1

where Yi is the electoral outcome of interest, Dik are binary indicators capturing treatment group
status, and ηi is the error term.19 The six treatment groups, Dk , include: valence message by phone
(and mail); valence message by mail only; ideology message by phone (and mail); ideology message
by mail only; double message by phone (and mail); and double message by mail only. Observations
receiving no informational treatment are the excluded reference group.
Table 3 summarizes the results in the aggregate sample, whose units of observation are the 95
electoral precincts. At the margin, partisan ads have no impact on turnout. There is evidence,
however, that campaigning on valence brings more votes to the incumbent when phone calls are
used as a campaign tool. Phone calls delivering the valence message increase the incumbent’s vote
share by 4.1 percentage points (i.e., by about 8.4 percent with respect to the average share in the
control group). This estimated effect is sizable, because it must be interpreted as an intention-totreat effect: in fact, only 25 percent of the households in the treated precincts received a campaign
phone call and not all of them accepted our invitation to listen to the message recorded by the
candidate. Because of the small sample size, however, coefficients are not precisely estimated and
we cannot reject the null hypothesis that they are statistically equal to each other.
19

To account for potential intra-class correlation between neighboring precincts we cluster standard errors at the
polling place level, while to account for correlated time shocks in survey data we include fixed effects for the interview
date; results are not sensitive to these modeling choices. Empirical results are qualitatively similar when we include
predetermined variables as additional covariates, although the specification becomes demanding in terms of degrees
of freedom in the aggregate data (results available upon request).

18

What we can reject in the aggregate data is the null that the two campaign tools—mailers versus
phone banks—are equally effective. If we merge together all groups that received an informational
treatment with the same campaign tool, we find that—with respect to the control group—phone
calls increase the incumbent vote share by 2.7 percentage points (p-value: 0.019), while, statistically,
the effect of mailers is both different from 2.7 and not different from zero. This result is in line with
U.S. experimental evidence showing that mailers are usually ineffective in political campaigns (see
Green and Gerber, 2004). In our case, however, mailers are also administered to voters who receive
a phone call. Therefore, we cannot rule out the possibility that mailers alone are ineffective, but
they become effective when interacted with other campaign tools delivering the same message.
Based on the above evidence on the ineffectiveness of mailers alone, Table 4 estimates equation
(3) imposing this restriction: including both “mail” and “no message” in the control group. Standard errors are slightly lower, and the point estimates and the statistical significance of the included
regressors are almost identical with respect to the full model.
In order to validate the aggregate evidence and to gain statistical accuracy, we estimate equation
(3) using the individual-level survey data, where sample size is less of an issue. The units of
observation are the 1,455 eligible voters for turnout or the 1,306 actual voters for the vote shares.
As all outcomes are binary, estimation is by probit. The price we pay is that here outcomes are selfreported, that is, based on vote declarations and not on actual choices. The underlying assumption
is that self-reporting bias is the same across treatment groups.20 Table 5 reports the estimates for
all treatment groups. Results are consistent with the aggregate evidence. Phone calls delivering
the valence message increase the incumbent’s vote share by 9.5 percentage points (i.e., by about
16 percent with respect to the control group). This effect is larger than in the aggregate data,
but treatment intensity is also higher in this context, because all surveyed households received
the campaign phone call, as opposed to only 25 percent in the aggregate data. Phone calls are
still the more effective campaign tool, with a difference significant at the 1 percent level. More
importantly, conditional on campaign tool, the valence message is now statistically more effective
than the ideology message at the 10 percent level.21 Table 6 further emphasizes this point by
20

As we document in the next section, non-response in vote declarations is likely to be non-random, i.e., to be
associated with individual characteristics such as ideology or prior beliefs. This does not imply, however, that (nonrandom) non-response should not be orthogonal to (random) treatment assignment.
21
Although our experimental design—based on randomization at the precinct level—did not allow for stratification
on individual characteristics, we nonetheless investigated potentially heterogeneous responses by repeating the baseline
estimation in split samples along many observable dimensions. The positive impact of valence phone calls on the
incumbent’s vote share turns out to be statistically larger for females, individuals older than 65 years, individuals
without a college degree, and less-informed voters. Instead, there is no significant heterogeneity along previous political
orientation, home ownership, or type of occupation (results available upon request).

19

focusing on informational treatments administered by phone: campaigning on valence brings more
votes to the incumbent and to the party lists that support him, and these point estimates are
statistically larger than those of campaigning on ideology alone.
Finally, in Appendix Table A4, we evaluate the potential impact of spillovers across neighboring
precincts. As a counterpart to Table 5, we estimate the effects on voting choices of the average
treatment intensity for individuals voting in the same polling place, although they may belong to
different precincts and therefore treatment groups. If Assumption 1 (SUTVA) is met, we expect
these measures to have no impact on choices for treatments detected as ineffective in Table 5, and
to have a less significant impact for treatments detected as effective in Table 5. It is thus reassuring
that none of these spillover estimates is statistically different from zero.22

5

Model Estimation

We now report the results from the maximum likelihood (ML) estimation of our voting model. The
estimation procedure is straightforward and relies on fitting individual vote declarations, which—
in Section 4—we have shown to closely match actual vote outcomes.23 The specification selection
warrants some discussion, however.
Section 2 discussed non-response parameters [βA , βB ], preference parameters [γ, ζ, χ], belief parameters [φP,2 , φV,2 , φP,3 , φV,3 , αP , αV , ρA , ρB ], and the choice of a copula family [Independent;
F rank; F GM ]. Concerning the preference parameters, a large literature in political economics and
political science has emphasized preference heterogeneity, for instance in the case of distaste for
specific policy outcomes, such as inflation or unemployment.24 We can easily accommodate this
feature by allowing a different [γ, ζ, χ] vector for left-wing (L), centrist (C), and right-wing (R) voters. We can as well accommodate heterogeneity in the dependence structure of the beliefs [ρA , ρB ]
by allowing them to differ for L, C, and R voters. Concerning the skewness of the marginal beliefs,
one can experiment with relaxing the simple [αP , αV ] to a more flexible [αP,2 , αV,2 , αP,3 , αV,3 ], thus
22

Notice that point estimates are not directly comparable with those in Table 5 because the regressors are no longer
dummies but shares. Compared to the average values and standard deviations of the spillover shares, however, point
estimates are generally small, and—as expected—they are larger for the administration of the valence message by
phone, because in those cases the shares also include treated voters for whom there exists a non-zero effect.
23
The identification of the model is assessed through several rounds of Monte Carlo simulations. For given parameter
values we simulated individual votes and ensured that the estimation based on the simulated data converged to the
original structural values. Our likelihood function depends on a relatively small number of parameters. This allows for
a fairly extensive search for global optima over the parametric space. We use the patternsearch algorithm of Matlab
with differing initial values. Repeating the optimization procedure consistently delivers identical global optima. We
also employed a genetic algorithm (GA) global optimizer with a large initial population of 10, 000 values followed by
a simplex search method using the GA values as initial values for the local optimizer. Both methods resulted in the
same estimates but the patternsearch algorithm converges faster in our environment.
24
Among others, see Di Tella, MacCulloch, and Oswald (2001); Gerber and Lewis (2004).

20

allowing the extent of the skew to change with the variance. All these are testable parametric
constraints that can be assessed based on likelihood ratio tests. On the other hand, the choice of
the copula family requires a generalized likelihood ratio test approach, as the copula families we
consider are non-nested. The Vuong (1989) model selection test is appropriate for this purpose.
In Appendix Tables A5 and A6 we report the full set of model estimates for all the relevant
combinations of parametric and copula assumptions, which are pairwise tested in Appendix Tables
A7, A8, and A9 through likelihood ratio tests and Vuong tests (for the copula). According to the
tests, the preferred specification allows for heterogeneity in preference parameters along the voter’s
self-declared ideological stance, for independence between the ideological and valence dimensions
of both candidates, and for common [αP , αV ]. Thus, the preferred model specification estimates
θ = [βA , βB , {γ z , ζ z , χz }z=L,C,R , φP,2 , φV,2 , φP,3 , φV,3 , αP , αV ]. We report the ML estimates for this
model in Table 7.
We first note that the estimates of the probability of response (i.e., the probability of disclosing
one’s vote) are 0.76 and 0.99 for predicted votes for A (βA ) and B (βB ), respectively, and are very
precisely estimated. While we cannot reject the null that the probability of response is one for
voters that voted for B, we can strongly reject the null for voters that voted for A, which justifies
our choice of modeling non-random non-response.25 Interestingly, voters who are predicted to have
voted B are more likely to disclose their vote, contrary to the possible hypothesis that those who
voted for the winner (A) should be more willing to disclose their preference for the winner. This
result squares with the intuition of conservative voters in Tuscany being particularly assertive.
Generally, the preference parameters are estimated with precision. The parameter governing
the interaction between valence and ideology values for the voter, χ, is estimated to be a fairly
precise zero. Imposing χ = 0 clarifies the interpretation of γ as the relative weight in preferences
of valence (x0 ) to the weight of ideology (1 − x0 ). Hence, γ =

x0
1−x0

= 1 implies equal weights along

both dimensions and this is what we find for L and C voters. The weight on valence for R voters
is, however, much lower, around 27 percent, versus a 73 percent weight on ideology.
Concerning the curvature of the ideological loss function u (.), surprisingly, we find ζ < 1 for all
three types of voters, indicating increasing losses but at diminishing rates from policies further away
from the voter’s bliss point. This is in contrast with the standard assumption of ζ = 2, quadratic
25

As further evidence in support of the probability of disclosing one’s vote being non-random, we ran a probit
regression of a dummy indicating whether or not a vote was disclosed on the elicited posterior beliefs and voter’s
ideology. An F test strongly rejects the null hypothesis of no explanatory power and hence random non-response
(p-value = 0.000). Interestingly, the stronger voters’ beliefs about the valence of either candidate, the more likely
voters are to disclose their vote.

21

losses, for example. For centrist voters, ζ is actually estimated to be zero, although the estimate is
rather imprecise. With ζ = 0, the loss due to deviations from the voter’s bliss point is constant and
independent of the candidate’s policy.
The belief parameters are also precisely estimated for the most part. Interestingly, the specification feeds back information which allows us to assess certain features of the survey design. The
model clearly captures an intermediate level of uncertainty between flat (s = 1) and degenerate priors (s = 4) for both valence and ideology. The on-the-mode probability mass, φV,3 , is estimated at
around 0.40 for valence and the corresponding parameter for ideology, φP,3 , is estimated at around
0.58. Hence, voters answering 2 to 5 to Q2 are more certain than having flat priors, but definitely
not sure about the candidate being at the mode (i.e., answer 1 to Q2). Along the valence dimension, voters do not perceive the distinction between “very uncertain” (s = 2) and “rather uncertain”
(s = 3) given that, at the estimated values, φV,3 = φV,2 . However, along the ideology dimension,
“rather uncertain” does result in less dispersion in the marginal distribution. In addition, the answers given to the skewness dimension seem to be important only along the ideological dimension,
where αP > 1/2, but not on the valence dimension where αV is not significantly different from 1/2,
indicating a symmetric partitioning of the off-mode probability mass.
Finally, concerning the choice of the copula and the estimates of the dependence parameters,
we note that, although both the FGM and Frank copula models have typically higher likelihood
values than under independence, the loss of parsimony of the model does not justify the additional
parameters according to the Vuong tests (see Appendix Table A9). This result occurs because we can
only estimate [ρA , ρB ] very imprecisely, which can be easily rationalized. The parameters [ρA , ρB ]
are essentially identified by voters that are: i) close to a change in their vote choice between A and
B; and ii) characterized by non-degenerate and non-flat beliefs along both the ideology and valence
dimensions. These joint restrictions substantially reduce the number of observations providing
useful identifying variation for estimating [ρA , ρB ]. Notwithstanding the lack of precision, looking
at the signs of the estimated dependence parameters in Appendix Tables A5 and A6 is intriguing.
We generally find evidence of a positive association between left position and valence perceptions
for A driven by left-wing voters, and a positive association between right position and valence
perceptions for B driven by right-wing voters. More extreme positions appear to be correlated with
higher valence, in accordance with the theoretical results in Bernhardt et al. (2011). The Frank
copula is preferred over the FGM copula, although we cannot reject the null of equal fit.
The structural estimation has allowed us to fully recover all of the parameters necessary to
characterize the individual belief distributions. We proceed to the analysis of voters’ beliefs next.
22

6

Evidence on Beliefs

The effect of partisan ads on beliefs is interesting per se, and it can shed light on the robustness
of the impact of the same ads on voting choices, based on their mutual consistency. To increase
accuracy, we restrict our attention to informational treatments delivered by phone, that is, by
means of the effective campaign tool. In Tables 8 and 10, the outcomes are the average and the
standard deviation of the individual belief distributions—from model estimation—of both valence
and ideology of the incumbent and of the opponent, respectively. In Tables 9 and 11, we look at the
same moments of the individual belief distributions, but we instead use survey responses as opposed
to estimates from the structural model. Specifically, the outcomes are the (self-reported) mode and
a binary measure of “uncertainty” (namely, a dummy capturing flat priors in survey responses).
Estimation is by OLS for multivalued or continuous outcomes and by probit for binary outcomes.26
For the incumbent, both the valence and ideology messages have the expected direct effects.
Information on valence increases perceived competence by about 5 percent with respect to the
average perception. The same holds for information on ideology, as perceived ideology decreases
(i.e., moves to the left) by about 5 percent. Interestingly, second moments are also affected by the
two treatments: uncertainty about the incumbent’s valence or ideology is reduced by additional
campaign information along the corresponding dimension. Decreased uncertainty is a relevant
channel of the effect of campaign information on choices. As a matter of fact, the positive effect
of valence phone calls on the incumbent’s vote share is stronger in the subsample of voters whose
priors are flat. In the treated group, we observe a sharp tightening of the belief distribution, which
contributes to the overall effect.
The negative impact of ideology message phone calls on the candidate’s ideology does not translate into more (or less) votes for A. Notwithstanding the large utility weight voters place on this
dimension, the shift in the belief distributions caused by the ideology phone calls is not strong
enough to affect voting choices.27
With respect to ideology, information on the incumbent’s position has interesting cross-effects
on the perception of the opponent’s position. Voters who received the ideology phone call from the
incumbent campaign move their subjective evaluation of the opponent B to the right by 3 percent.
The treatment also reduces uncertainty along this dimension. This might be due to the increased
26

For the sake of intuition, we use OLS also for the ideology mode, which can only take five (ordinal) values. Results
from ordered Probit are qualitatively identical (available upon request).
27
An alternative explanation might be that the ideology message affects right-wing and left-wing in the opposite
way, but this is not what we find in our sample. Ideology phone calls had negligible effects on voting behavior for
both types of voters, while their impact on beliefs was almost equivalent.

23

salience of the left/right distinction or to its relative nature, and it is causal evidence of crosslearning between political campaigns. This finding is consistent with a sophisticated subjective
updating behavior on the part of the voters. For example, this type of evidence would be consistent
(albeit not proof of) Bayesian updating in a two-candidate signaling game.

7

Model Fit and Counterfactual Electoral Campaigns

To conclude our analysis we discuss model fit results and counterfactual electoral simulations based
on our structural estimates. Overall, the structural model under the baseline specification predicts
the actual vote correctly 88.7 percent of the time. In particular, we predict correctly 95.9 percent of
the votes for candidate A and 70.7 percent of the votes for B. Here, the sample under consideration
is restricted to the voters who disclosed their vote only, since we do not know the actual vote of
those who chose not to disclose it.
Turning to counterfactuals, no standard protocol exists in the literature for running these types
of exercises, so we have devised one. Suppose one wishes to assess what would have happened to
the aggregate vote share of A if everybody in the city had received the valence message (i.e., had
gotten treatment H = 1). We simulate this counterfactual campaign using a five step procedure.
Under our stability Assumption 6, for each voter i, it is possible to generate prior belief distributions about A and B based upon their prior survey answers and θ0 , the structural parameter
vector estimated from votes and posterior beliefs. This is the first step. Secondly, for each voter
i ∈ T (h) with h 6= 1 (i.e., not treated with the valence message to begin with), it is always possible
to find the nearest neighbor treated match in the group h = 1, i0 ∈ T (1), based on the Mahalanobis
distance metric derived from covariates (such as age, gender, marital status, education, priors, and
ideology). Voter i0 is the closest match to voter i for which the causal effect of valence on beliefs
is actually observed. Essentially, this is the same intuition one would follow in propensity score
estimation. Once the closest match i0 has been identified, as third step we compute the difference
between i0 ’s marginal posterior and prior beliefs at every point of the support of each of the valence
and ideology dimensions. Fourth, we apply i0 ’s pointwise changes in beliefs to i’s priors to calculate
the counterfactual posterior marginal beliefs of i, under the assumption that, had i gotten the same
treatment as i0 , she would have updated her beliefs in the same way as i0 . Fifth, we compute joint
posterior beliefs using the appropriate copula family and the estimated ρ’s. Given the posteriors for
each voter i, we obtain a simulated electoral outcome, by calculating the expected utility of each
candidate for i and then predicting their vote for the candidate with the highest expected utility.

24

Importantly, this simulation procedure does not require the simulated electoral campaign to only
focus on a single treatment, but it can be tweaked to targeting specific subgroups with different
treatments. For instance, we can simulate a campaign in which valence messages are sent to
known centrist and right-wing voters while ideological messages are sent to left-wing voters. This
is of particular relevance at a point in time when political campaigns, especially in the US, have
increasingly turned to specialized companies, such as Aristotle, for micro data acquisition and
selective campaign advertising, a trend well under way also in commercial and online marketing.
We explore some of the possible electoral counterfactuals in Table 12. For each counterfactual, we
include all voters, even those who did not disclose their actual vote. Table 12 reports counterfactual
electoral outcomes for five types of campaigns by A: (1) a blanket valence campaign; (2) a blanket
ideological campaign; (3) a blanket double valence-ideology campaign; (4) a targeted campaign of
valence messages to center and right-wing voters and double messages to left-wing voters; (5) a
targeted campaign of ideological messages to center and right-wing voters and double messages
to left-wing voters. All results are benchmarked to the simulated electoral outcome that would
have realized in the absence of any campaign message on our part. The counterfactuals are also
assessed in their precision by constructing 95 percent asymptotic confidence intervals based on
bootstrapping from the asymptotic distribution of the parameters. All our counterfactual estimates
appear statistically precise.
The most effective possible campaign is the electoral campaign in which valence messages alone
are sent to all voters. A blanket valence campaign increases the vote share of A by 2.2 percentage
points relative to no campaign, which is more than enough to make the difference in a closelycontested election. Interestingly, a blanket campaign of ideology messages actually reduces the
vote share of A substantially, in fact by the same 2.2 percentage points that a blanket valence
campaign would instead bring to A. In fact, the 95 percent confidence intervals for the two simulated
campaigns do not overlap, so we can be reasonably certain that a blanket valence campaign would
have outperformed a blanket ideology campaign. To understand why the ideology campaign reduces
vote shares, recall that the ideological message in our experiment has a leftist bent, reducing the
expected utility from A for R, C and possibly the most moderate of the L voters. Overall, the loss
of support from C and R in our sample turns out to more than sufficient to offset the gain in L
voters. For the same reason, a double campaign of both ideology and valence messages increases
the vote share of A by 0.5 percentage points, which, while effective, is not as effective as the blanket
valence-only campaign. Finally, the mixed campaign in which L voters get both types of messages
while C and R voters get valence messages only is almost as effective as the valence campaign,
25

while the campaign in which L voters get both types of messages while C and R voters get ideology
messages substantially decreases A’s vote share. In summary, consistently with our overall results,
campaigning on valence appeared the most effective tool to persuade voters.

8

Conclusion

This paper presents novel evidence on the effects of campaign information on voters’ decisions in
a large-scale field experiment. Importantly, our effects are observed both in vote declarations of
surveyed voters and in actual vote outcomes at the precinct level. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first empirical randomization exercise in the literature that operates at the scale of an entire
election and covers the entire voting population in a mature democracy. Both our reduced-form
and structural estimation results uncover large electoral gains from valence-based informational
campaigning, possibly due to the relatively higher lack of prior information about the candidates
along this dimension.
An additional contribution of our paper is to present a belief elicitation protocol that allows us,
when combined with information on the electoral choices of voters, to completely characterize voters’
beliefs about candidates along both the ideological and valence dimensions. Our methodology allows
us to flexibly incorporate multivariate belief distributions within a structural random utility voting
model. We then employ this empirical model to structurally estimate both belief distributions and
voters’ preference parameters.
From a methodological viewpoint, we incorporate a general structure of beliefs updating that
goes well beyond what normally achievable with standard assumptions in the political and commercial advertising literature. For instance, let us consider conjugate priors of the Gaussian family.
With normal beliefs new signals cannot reduce the precision of the subjective distributions, they
always reduce the variance of these distributions. But relying on such beliefs is very restrictive. To
see this consider another intuitive belief distribution: a binomial. When there are two (or more
generally finite) states, the probability of the “good” state can go up or down depending on the
signal value. As a result, the variance of the beliefs can actually increase or decrease after receiving
additional information. Hence, the importance of leaving the beliefs family unrestricted is crucial
in not forcing erroneous assumptions onto the data.
Our estimates show that the utility weight placed by voters on a candidate’s policy position is
of approximately equal magnitude to that placed on a candidate’s valence and that the common
assumption of convexity of the losses from ideological distance is not supported by the data. We

26

also show how the informational treatments we designed systematically influence both the first
and second moments of voters’ marginal beliefs about both candidates in the electoral race, not
only the beliefs about the candidate originating the message. We believe this causal evidence of
cross-campaign learning can prove useful for understanding the level of sophistication in subjective
updating by voters.
Potential applications of our elicitation methodology and estimation appear to be quite wide, including, in addition to political campaigning, commercial advertising and marketing. Our approach
could be of use for the assessment of any type of informational treatment for randomized controlled
trials, most of them currently performed in developing countries. Finally, our incorporation of
the probability of non-response may be applied in many other contexts in which non-random nonresponse to survey questions seems plausible (e.g., reports of income or other labor-related questions
for which those surveyed may be uncomfortable disclosing information).

27

References

[1] Ansolabehere, Stephen, and Shanto Iyengar. 1995. Going Negative: How Political Advertisements Shrink and Polarize the Electorate. New York: The Free Press.
[2] Ansolabehere, Stephen, Shanto Iyengar, Adam Simon, and Nicholas Valentino. 1994. “Does
Attack Advertising Demobilize the Electorate?” American Political Science Review, 88, 829–
838.
[3] Ansolabehere, Stephen and James M. Snyder. 2000. “Valence Politics and Equilibrium in Spatial Election Models,”Public Choice, 103, 327–336.
[4] Ansolabehere, Stephen, James M. Snyder, and Charles Stewart, III. 2001. “Candidate Positioning in U.S. House Elections,”American Journal of Political Science, 45, 136–159.
[5] Aragones, Enriqueta and Thomas R. Palfrey. 2002. “Mixed Equilibrium in a Downsian Model
with a Favored Candidate,”Journal of Economic Theory, 103, 131–161.
[6] Ashworth, Scott and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita. 2009. “Elections with Platform and Valence
Competition,” Games and Economic Behavior, 67, 191–216.
[7] Banerjee, Abhijit, Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su. 2011. “Do Informed Voters Make
Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India,” MIT manuscript.
[8] Banerjee, Abhijit, Donald Green, and Rohini Pande. 2012. “Can Voters be Primed to Choose
Better Legislators? Evidence from Voter Campaigns in India,” MIT manuscript.
[9] Bernhardt, Dan, Odilon Camara, and Francesco Squintani. 2011. “Competence and Ideology,”
Review of Economic Studies, 78, 487–522.
[10] Blass, Asher A., Saul Lach, and Charles F. Manski. 2010. “Using Elicited Choice Probabilities to Estimate Random Utility Models: Preferences for Electricity Reliability,”International
Economic Review, 51, 421–440.
[11] Chappell, Henry W. Jr. 1994. “Campaign Advertising and Political Ambiguity,” Public Choice,
79, 281–303.
[12] Cox, David R. 1958. Planning of Experiments. New York: Wiley.
[13] Dewan, Torun, Macartan Humphreys, and Daniel Rubenson. 2010. “The Impact of Leaders
and the Messages They Convey,” LSE manuscript.
[14] Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald. 2001. “Preferences over Inflation and Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness,”American Economic Review,
91, 335–341.
[15] Dominitz, Jeff and Charles Manski. 1996. “Eliciting Student Expectations of the Returns to
Schooling,” Journal of Human Resources, 31, 1–26.
[16] Duffy, John and Margit Tavits. 2008. “Beliefs and Voting Decisions: A Test of the Pivotal
Voter Model,” American Journal of Political Science, 52, 603–618.
28

[17] Enelow, James M. and Melvin J. Hinich. 1982. “Nonspatial Candidate Characteristics and
Electoral Competition,” Journal of Politics, 44, 115–130.
[18] Farlie, Dennis J. 1960. “The Performance of Some Correlation Coefficients for a General Bivariate Distribution,” Biometrika 47, 307–323.
[19] Fujiwara, Thomas and Leonard Wantchekon. 2013. “Can Informed Public Deliberation Overcome Clientelism? Experimental Evidence from Benin,” American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics, forthcoming.
[20] Galasso, Vincenzo and Tommaso Nannicini. 2011. “Competing on Good Politicians,” American
Political Science Review, 105, 79–99.
[21] Garthwaite, Paul H., Joseph B. Kadane, and Anthony O’Hagan. 2005. “Statistical Methods
for Eliciting Probability Distributions,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 100,
680–700.
[22] Gerber, Alan S., James G. Gimpel, Donald P. Green, and Daron Shaw. 2011. “How Large
and Long-lasting Are the Persuasive Effects of Televised Campaign Ads? Results from a
Randomized Field Experiment,” American Political Science Review, 105, 135–150.
[23] Gerber, Alan S., and Donald P. Green. 2000. “The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and
Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment,” American Political Science Review, 94,
653–63.
[24] Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Ron Shachar. 2003. “Voting May Be Habit-Forming:
Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment,” American Journal of Political Science, 47,
540–50.
[25] Gerber Elisabeth R. and Jeffrey B. Lewis. 2004. “Beyond the Median: Voter Preferences,
District Heterogeneity, and Political Representation,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 1364–
1383.
[26] Gill, Jeff and Lee D. Walker. 2005. “Elicited Priors for Bayesian Model Specifications in Political
Science Research,” Journal of Politics, 67, 841–872.
[27] Green, Donald P., and Alan S. Gerber. 2004. Get Out the Vote: How to Increase Voter Turnout.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press.
[28] Groseclose, Timothy. 2001. “A Model of Candidate Location When One Candidate Has a
Valence Advantage,”American Journal of Political Science, 45, 862–886.
[29] Kadane, Joseph and Lara J. Wolfson. 1998. “Experiences in Elicitation,” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, 47, 3–19.
[30] Kartik, Navin and R. Preston McAfee. 2007. “Signaling Character in Electoral Competition,”American Economic Review, 97, 852–870.
[31] Lee, David, Enrico Moretti and Matthew J. Butler. 2004. “Do Voters Affect or Elect Policies?
Evidence from the U.S. House,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119, 807–859.
[32] Liu, Scott and Patricia Stout. 1987. “Effects of Message Modality and Appeal on Advertising
Acceptance,” Psychology and Marketing, 4, 167–87.
29

[33] Manski, Charles F. 2004 “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, 72, 1329–1376.
[34] Manski,Charles F. and Francesca Molinari. 2010. “Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in
Surveys,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 28, 219–231.
[35] Miller, George A. 1956. “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on
Our Capacity for Processing Information,” Psychological Review 63, 81–97.
[36] Nickerson, David W. 2008. “Is Voting Contagious? Evidence from Two Field Experiments,”
American Political Science Review, 102, 49–57.
[37] Ramalho, Esmeralda A. and Richard J. Smith. 2012. “Discrete Choice Nonresponse,” Review
of Economic Studies, 7, 34–58.
[38] Rubin, Donald B. 1978. “Bayesian Inference for Causal Effects: The Role of Randomization,”
The Annals of Statistics, 79, 1–20.
[39] Savage, Leonard. 1971. “Elicitation of Personal Probabilities and Expectations,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 66, 783–801.
[40] Schofield, Norman. 2003. “Valence Competition in the Spatial Stochastic Model,” Journal of
Theoretical Politics, 15, 371–383.
[41] Sklar Abe. 1959. “Fonctions de rı̈¿ 12 partition ı̈¿ 12 n dimensions et leurs marges,” Publications
de l’Institut de Statistique de l’Universitı̈¿ 12 de Paris, 8, 229–231.
[42] Stokes, Donald E. 1963. “Spatial Models of Party Competition,”American Political Science
Review, 57, 368–377.
[43] Vicente, Pedro C. 2013. “Is Vote-buying Effective? Evidence from a Field Experiment in West
Africa,” Economic Journal, forthcoming.
[44] Vuong, Quang H. 1989. “Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and Non-Nested Hypotheses,” Econometrica, 2, 307–333.
[45] Wantchekon, Leonard. 2003. “Clientelism and Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Benin,” World Politics, 55, 399–422.
[46] Wattenberg, Martin P. and Craig L. Brians. 1999. “Negative Campaign Advertising: Demobilizer or Mobilizer?” American Political Science Review, 93, 891–899.
[47] Zafar, Basit. 2009. “College Major Choice and the Gender Gap,” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Report No. 364.

30

Tables and Figures

Table 1 – Election Results at a Glance
Mean

Median

S.d.

Min

Max

Obs.

Turnout

0.708

0.714

0.050

0.389

0.788

95

Incumbent share
over valid votes

0.513

0.508

0.061

0.354

0.667

95

Incumbent parties
over valid votes

0.541

0.542

0.065

0.358

0.679

95

Notes. Descriptive statistics at the precinct level of the variables specified in the first column. “Incumbent parties” refer to the vote shares of the party lists supporting the incumbent.

Table 2 – Vote Declarations at the Individual Level
Mean

Median

S.d.

Min

Max

Obs.

Declared turnout

0.898

1.000

0.303

0.000

1.000

1,455

Declared vote
for the incumbent

0.571

1.000

0.495

0.000

1.000

1,306

Declared vote
for incumbent parties

0.493

0.000

0.500

0.000

1.000

1,306

Notes. Descriptive statistics at the individual level of the variables specified in the first column.
“Incumbent parties” refer to the (self-declared) vote in favor of the party lists supporting the incumbent.

31

Table 3 – Reduced-Form Aggregate Estimates, All Groups
Reference group: no message
Ideology
Ideology
by phone
by mail

Valence
by phone

Valence
by mail

Double
by phone

Double
by mail

Turnout

-0.011
[0.031]

-0.000
[0.015]

0.013
[0.011]

0.010
[0.013]

-0.006
[0.009]

-0.006
[0.013]

Incumbent
share

0.041**
[0.019]

0.004
[0.025]

0.013
[0.016]

0.021
[0.025]

0.027*
[0.015]

-0.023
[0.015]

Incumbent
parties

0.032*
[0.018]

0.018
[0.023]

0.015
[0.016]

0.029
[0.026]

0.021
[0.014]

-0.015
[0.015]

Notes. Observations: 95 precincts. OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables in row headings and treatment groups in
column headings. Robust standard errors clustered at the polling place level in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is
represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

Table 4 – Reduced-Form Aggregate Estimates, Phone Calls
Reference group: mail or no message
Valence
Ideology
Double
by phone
by phone
by phone
Turnout

-0.012
[0.030]

0.012
[0.011]

-0.006
[0.010]

Incumbent
share

0.040**
[0.019]

0.012
[0.015]

0.026*
[0.013]

Incumbent
parties

0.026
[0.020]

0.008
[0.016]

0.014
[0.012]

Notes. Observations: 95 precincts. OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables in row
headings and treatment groups in column headings. Robust standard errors clustered at
the polling place level in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at
the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

32

Table 5 – Reduced-Form Individual Estimates, All Groups
Reference group: no message
Ideology
Ideology
by phone
by mail

Valence
by phone

Valence
by mail

Double
by phone

Double
by mail

Turnout

-0.024
[0.027]

-0.019
[0.034]

0.006
[0.026]

0.033
[0.022]

-0.019
[0.028]

-0.003
[0.029]

Incumbent
share

0.095**
[0.039]

-0.061
[0.049]

0.018
[0.049]

-0.028
[0.043]

0.035
[0.050]

0.004
[0.050]

Incumbent
parties

0.109***
[0.040]

-0.007
[0.060]

-0.008
[0.061]

-0.044
[0.046]

0.009
[0.051]

-0.014
[0.049]

Notes. Observations: 1,455 eligible voters (turnout); 1,306 actual voters (vote shares). Probit marginal effects reported;
dependent variables in row headings and treatment groups in column headings. Fixed effects for survey date included. Robust
standard errors clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by
**, and at the 1% level by ***.

Table 6 – Reduced-Form Individual Estimates, Phone Calls
Reference group: mail or no message
Valence
Ideology
Double
by phone
by phone
by phone
Turnout

-0.026
[0.023]

0.005
[0.023]

-0.021
[0.023]

Incumbent
share

0.110***
[0.033]

0.035
[0.043]

0.051
[0.045]

Incumbent
parties

0.123***
[0.032]

0.005
[0.053]

0.022
[0.044]

Notes. Observations: 1,455 eligible voters (turnout); 1,306 actual voters (vote shares).
Probit marginal effects reported; dependent variables in row headings and treatment
groups in column headings. Fixed effects for survey date included. Robust standard errors
clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is represented by
*, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

33

Table 7 – Model Estimates, Baseline Specification
Model’s
parameters
βA =Pr(response|A)

Estimate
[s.e.]
0.76
[0.01]
0.99
[0.01]
1.08
[0.21]
1.10
[0.14]
0.37
[0.13]
0.34
[0.21]
0.00
[0.49]
0.98
[0.32]
0.18
[0.14]
0.02
[0.09]
-0.03
[0.05]
0.40
[0.15]
0.40
[0.28]
0.56
[0.05]
0.58
[0.16]
0.38
[0.19]
0.71
[0.19]
-1,043.60
1,306

βB =Pr(response|B)
γL
γC
γR
ζL
ζC
ζR
χL
χC
χR
φV,3
φV,2
αV
φP,3
φP,2
αP
Loglikelihood
Observations

Notes. Asymptotic standard errors in brackets. The selected specification assumes independence of marginals, heterogeneous preference
parameters, and forces same skew of marginal distribution of beliefs
for different stated levels of uncertainty.

34

Table 8 – Beliefs about Incumbent from Model Estimates
Reference group: mail or no message
Valence
Ideology
Double
by phone
by phone
by phone
Average
valence

0.310**
[0.148]

-0.022
[0.142]

-0.100
[0.098]

Valence
std. dev.

0.005
[0.082]

0.063
[0.095]

0.025
[0.093]

Average
ideology

0.015
[0.063]

-0.121**
[0.056]

-0.102*
[0.055]

Ideology
std. dev.

-0.036
[0.060]

-0.090**
[0.039]

-0.127***
[0.044]

Notes. Observations: 1,306 actual voters. OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables
in row headings and treatment groups in column headings. Fixed effects for survey date
included. Robust standard errors clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance
at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

Table 9 – Beliefs about Incumbent from Survey Responses
Reference group: mail or no message
Valence
Ideology
Double
by phone
by phone
by phone
Valence
mode

0.326**
[0.157]

-0.039
[0.144]

-0.092
[0.096]

-0.052***
[0.013]

0.002
[0.018]

-0.003
[0.018]

Ideology
mode

-0.049
[0.052]

-0.104**
[0.052]

-0.052
[0.059]

Ideology
uncertainty

-0.052*
[0.023]

-0.046**
[0.019]

-0.032
[0.019]

Valence
uncertainty

Notes. Observations: 1,455 eligible voters. OLS coefficients (mode) or Probit marginal
effects (uncertainty) reported; dependent variables in row headings and treatment groups
in column headings. Fixed effects for survey date included. Robust standard errors
clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is represented by
*, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

35

Table 10 – Beliefs about Opponent from Model Estimates
Reference group: mail or no message
Valence
Ideology
Double
by phone
by phone
by phone
Average
valence

-0.127
[0.081]

-0.045
[0.133]

-0.071
[0.094]

Valence
std. dev.

-0.077
[0.110]

-0.096
[0.107]

-0.048
[0.132]

Average
ideology

-0.075
[0.067]

0.189**
[0.075]

-0.032
[0.070]

Ideology
std. dev.

0.041
[0.075]

-0.177***
[0.064]

-0.091
[0.057]

Notes. Observations: 1,306 actual voters. OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables
in row headings and treatment groups in column headings. Fixed effects for survey date
included. Robust standard errors clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance
at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

Table 11 – Beliefs about Opponent from Survey Responses
Reference group: mail or no message
Valence
Ideology
Double
by phone
by phone
by phone
Valence
mode

-0.094
[0.106]

-0.043
[0.133]

-0.051
[0.088]

Valence
uncertainty

-0.028
[0.047]

-0.029
[0.045]

0.008
[0.054]

Ideology
mode

0.023
[0.048]

0.141**
[0.062]

-0.016
[0.063]

Ideology
uncertainty

-0.044
[0.028]

-0.089***
[0.030]

0.001
[0.032]

Notes. Observations: 1,455 eligible voters. OLS coefficients (mode) or Probit marginal
effects (uncertainty) reported; dependent variables in row headings and treatment groups
in column headings. Fixed effects for survey date included. Robust standard errors
clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is represented by
*, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

36

Table 12 – Predicted Vote Differences under Counterfactual Electoral Campaigns
Counterfactual treatment

Predicted vote difference
in percentage points

Blanket valence
treatment

2.2
[0.77, 3.33]

Blanket ideology
treatment

-2.2
[-3.37, -0.27]

Blanket valence & ideology
treatment

0.5
[-0.73, 1.84]

Valence treatment to center & right
valence & ideology to left voters

1.3
[-0.19, 2.37]

Ideology treatment to center & right
valence & ideology to left voters

-2.4
[-3.87, -0.92]

Actual electoral
campaign effect

1.8
[1.23, 3.14]

Notes. Counterfactual additional votes (in percentage points) that candidate A would have obtained with
the simulated campaigns described in the first column relative to no electoral treatment being administered.
Bootstrapped 95 percent confidence intervals in brackets. Confidence intervals are based on 1,000 draws from
the asymptotic distribution of the ML parameter vectors.

37

Figure 1 – Prior Valence Marginal Distribution for Voter #371

Figure 2 – Prior Joint Probability Distribution for Voter #369

38

Figure 3 – Posterior Joint Probability Distribution for Voter #369

39

Appendix

For all materials related to the design of our randomized controlled trial (including survey questionnaires; colored treatment flyers; audio files of the treatment phone calls; and maps of the treatment
groups) please refer to the website: www.igier.unibocconi.it/randomized-campaign.
In the next two subsections, we report the English translations of the text of the mail flyers (which
are then showed in Figure A1 and Figure A2) and of the text of the candidate’s recorded messages
for the campaign phone calls.
In the subsection devoted to tables and figures, we report:
• balancing tests of precinct characteristics across treatment groups (Table A1);
• balancing tests of individual characteristics across treatment groups (Table A2);
• balancing tests of 2001 Census characteristics across treatment groups (Table A3);
• estimates of potential spillover effects (Table A4);
• complete summary of the structural model estimations (Tables A5 and A6);
• LR and Voung tests of model selection (Tables A7, A8, and A9);
• flyers for both the valence and ideology message (Figures A1 and A2).

A1 Mail Flyers: English Translations
Valence flyer. COMPETENCE AND EFFORT. 100 million worth of investments: Spent in part
on the Fortress, squares, streets, and parking lots. PIUSS, the integrated plan for the development of
the city: The city of Arezzo was ranked first in Tuscany; this is an important accomplishment. Innovation: The digital center, the hydrogen pipeline, and the energy house. FANFANI FOR MAYOR.
Ideology flyer. AWARENESS AND SOLIDARITY. Children: Created an integrated system to
cater the needs of all, opened 3 new public nursery schools. Elderly: In-home assistance, new public
services to help families. A network of solidarity for the neediest: Housing, meal centers, work
integration services. FANFANI FOR MAYOR.

A2 Phone Call Recorded Messages: English Translations
Valence message. Dear Voter, the 15th and 16th of May, the citizens of Arezzo will vote to elect
the mayor and city councilmen. We all therefore have the opportunity to make an informed choice
for the future of Arezzo. Over the last years, my administration invested 100 million Euros to
develop and improve our city. Results are under the eyes of everyone and can be observed by simply
looking at the Fortress, the squares, the streets, and the parking lots. Thanks to the quality of our
40

work, the PIUSS—the plan for the development of the city of Arezzo—was ranked first among those
in Tuscany. This was an important accomplishment that also enabled us to gain access to important
financial resources to improve the prominence of our city. However, we did much more than this,
we strived to boost innovation with the digital center, the hydrogen pipeline, and the energy house.
Given also all these reasons, I take the liberty to ask for your vote in the election of the 15th and
16th of May. Reward our COMPETENCE and our EFFORT. Best regards from Giuseppe Fanfani.
Ideology message. Dear Voter, the 15th and 16th of May, the citizens of Arezzo will vote to elect
the mayor and city councilmen. We all will have the opportunity to make an informed choice for the
future of Arezzo. For us, future stands for SOLIDARITY. In these five years of city government, we
dealt with issues regarding childhood creating an integrated system of services able to provide answers
to all families and opening three new public nursery schools. We also took care of our elderly people,
providing new services to help families assist them and increasing in-home assistance. At the same
time, we definitely did not forget about those that found themselves living in difficult circumstances
also because they were affected by the international crisis that severely struck our region. In fact, we
increased housing, meal centers, and professional integration services for all those in need. Given
also all these reasons, I take the liberty to ask for your vote in the election of the 15th and 16th
of May. Make SOLIDARITY win! For an “Arezzo” careful and open to the hardships of those in
need. Best regards from Giuseppe Fanfani.
Valence plus ideology message. Dear Voter, the 15th and 16th of May, the citizens of Arezzo
will vote to elect the mayor and city councilmen. We all therefore have the opportunity to make
an informed choice for the future of Arezzo. Over the last years, my administration invested 100
million Euros to develop and improve our city. Results are under the eyes of everyone and can
observed by simply looking at the Fortress, the squares, the streets, and the parking lots. Thanks
to the quality of our work, the PIUSS—the plan for the development of the city of Arezzo—was
ranked first among those in Tuscany. At the same time, we definitely did not forget about those that
found themselves living in difficult circumstances also because they were affected by the international
crisis that severely struck our region. In fact, we increased housing, meal centers, and professional
integration services for all those in need. Given also all these reasons, I take the liberty to ask
for your vote in the election of the 15th and 16th of May. Reward our COMPETENCE and our
EFFORT. Make SOLIDARITY win! For an Arezzo careful and open to the hardships of those in
need. Best regards from Giuseppe Fanfani.

41

Appendix Tables and Figures

Table A1 – Ex-Ante Balancing Tests at the Precinct Level
Reference group: no message
Ideology
Ideology
by phone
by mail

Valence
by phone

Valence
by mail

Eligible voters

-66.083
[96.591]

-101.583
[70.235]

19.250
[57.771]

First neighborhood

0.036
[0.136]
0.116
[0.188]
-0.014
[0.190]
-0.138
[0.149]

0.036
[0.112]
-0.051
[0.140]
0.236
[0.172]
-0.221
[0.141]

-0.005
[0.025]
0.011
[0.015]
-0.015
[0.015]

Second neighborhood
Third neighborhood
Fourth neighborhood

Regional ’10 turnout
Regional ’10 left
Regional ’10 right

European ’09 turnout
European ’09 left
European ’09 right

National ’08 turnout
National ’08 left
National ’08 right

City ’06 turnout
City ’06 left
City ’06 right

Double
by phone

Double
by mail

-63.667*
[36.922]

-65.500
[66.886]

-6.083
[56.033]

0.203
[0.178]
-0.051
[0.151]
-0.098
[0.134]
-0.054
[0.146]

-0.047
[0.112]
-0.051
[0.154]
0.152
[0.199]
-0.054
[0.164]

0.203
[0.123]
-0.051
[0.086]
-0.014
[0.169]
-0.138
[0.139]

-0.047
[0.109]
0.033
[0.128]
-0.098
[0.134]
0.112
[0.129]

-0.003
[0.016]
0.013
[0.019]
-0.017
[0.014]

0.016
[0.010]
0.013
[0.013]
0.011
[0.012]

0.012
[0.010]
0.012
[0.017]
0.007
[0.018]

0.000
[0.010]
0.004
[0.013]
-0.006
[0.011]

-0.002
[0.014]
-0.021
[0.013]
0.019
[0.018]

-0.004
[0.026]
-0.012
[0.030]
0.009
[0.022]

0.008
[0.012]
0.015
[0.026]
-0.015
[0.021]

0.019
[0.012]
-0.016
[0.016]
0.018
[0.015]

0.013
[0.013]
-0.014
[0.025]
0.009
[0.024]

0.002
[0.011]
0.018
[0.019]
-0.014
[0.020]

0.007
[0.012]
-0.028
[0.021]
0.026
[0.020]

-0.014
[0.025]
0.016
[0.019]
-0.018
[0.020]

0.012
[0.008]
0.026
[0.019]
-0.023
[0.017]

0.002
[0.006]
-0.015
[0.019]
0.013
[0.017]

0.002
[0.007]
-0.004
[0.028]
0.004
[0.028]

0.005
[0.007]
0.020
[0.020]
-0.024
[0.021]

0.000
[0.009]
-0.019
[0.017]
0.023
[0.018]

-0.002
[0.020]
0.016
[0.029]
-0.014
[0.029]

0.008
[0.011]
0.035
[0.024]
-0.037
[0.024]

0.012
[0.009]
-0.029
[0.023]
0.028
[0.022]

0.009
[0.013]
-0.017
[0.034]
0.014
[0.033]

0.011
[0.011]
0.009
[0.021]
-0.008
[0.021]

-0.006
[0.013]
-0.029
[0.022]
0.022
[0.024]

Notes. Observations: 95 precincts, 86 (European), 84 (National), 83 (City). OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables in
row headings and treatment groups in column headings. Eligible voters is the number of eligible voters in the precinct (average
820.168). The neighborhood dummies capture the city-wide neighborhood the precinct belongs to. The other variables are the
electoral outcomes in past elections and are expressed as vote shares. Robust standard errors clustered at the polling place level
in brackets. Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

42

Table A2 – Ex-Post Balancing Tests at the Individual Level
Reference group: no message
Ideology
Ideology
by phone
by mail

Valence
by phone

Valence
by mail

Double
by phone

Double
by mail

Male

0.008
[0.039]

0.014
[0.050]

0.034
[0.038]

0.004
[0.038]

0.006
[0.047]

0.042
[0.039]

Over 65

-0.035
[0.053]

0.004
[0.048]

-0.012
[0.048]

0.086
[0.053]

-0.046
[0.042]

0.056
[0.048]

College
graduate

-0.004
[0.035]

-0.027
[0.041]

0.010
[0.041]

0.008
[0.047]

0.035
[0.045]

-0.016
[0.040]

Out of
labor force

-0.019
[0.052]

0.010
[0.054]

-0.037
[0.058]

0.048
[0.059]

-0.041
[0.050]

0.050
[0.053]

White
collar

0.029
[0.045]

-0.005
[0.043]

0.032
[0.038]

-0.013
[0.041]

0.008
[0.039]

-0.013
[0.038]

Other
occupation

-0.010
[0.049]

-0.005
[0.041]

0.006
[0.040]

-0.035
[0.039]

0.033
[0.042]

-0.037
[0.051]

Center-left

0.045
[0.044]

0.058
[0.055]

-0.009
[0.048]

-0.033
[0.040]

-0.059
[0.042]

0.014
[0.059]

Home owner

-0.017
[0.040]

-0.007
[0.030]

-0.045
[0.039]

0.027
[0.036]

0.007
[0.033]

-0.037
[0.028]

Read
the press

0.037
[0.036]

-0.007
[0.038]

0.025
[0.042]

-0.024
[0.052]

0.032
[0.049]

0.048
[0.047]

Watch TV

0.034
[0.042]

-0.016
[0.055]

0.038
[0.039]

0.068
[0.046]

-0.033
[0.042]

0.055
[0.038]

Notes. Observations: 1,455 eligible voters. OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables in row headings and treatment groups
in column headings. All variables are dummies. Read the press and Watch TV capture whether the voter declares to do this
“very often” or “often.” Fixed effects for survey date included. Robust standard errors clustered at the precinct level in brackets.
Significance at the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

43

Table A3 – Ex-Post Balancing Tests of 2001 Census Characteristics
Reference group: no message
Ideology
Ideology
by phone
by mail

Valence
by phone

Valence
by mail

Double
by phone

Double
by mail

Males

-5.112
[7.450]

-1.318
[6.922]

-8.103
[6.353]

-1.957
[7.245]

-2.587
[5.220]

1.187
[8.773]

Married people

-5.780
[8.041]

-1.608
[7.496]

-8.986
[6.905]

-2.040
[7.955]

-2.863
[5.697]

1.256
[9.541]

College graduates

-0.507
[0.661]

0.093
[0.568]

-0.712
[0.492]

0.473
[0.725]

-0.177
[0.499]

0.748
[1.058]

Foreigners

-0.400
[0.339]

-0.178
[0.339]

-0.311
[0.330]

-0.255
[0.339]

-0.395
[0.310]

-0.129
[0.395]

Employment rate

0.002
[0.006]

-0.003
[0.006]

-0.000
[0.005]

-0.002
[0.004]

0.005
[0.005]

-0.001
[0.004]

Unemployment rate

-0.001
[0.005]

0.004
[0.004]

0.001
[0.004]

0.000
[0.004]

-0.001
[0.005]

0.003
[0.004]

Home ownership

0.011
[0.025]

-0.028
[0.038]

-0.012
[0.030]

-0.023
[0.025]

-0.012
[0.027]

-0.003
[0.025]

Notes. Observations: 95 precincts. OLS coefficients reported; dependent variables in row headings and treatment groups in
column headings. All variables are imputed at the precinct level from information on the 2001 Census cells. Males, Married
people, College graduates, and Foreigners capture the average number of individuals with that attribute at the precinct level.
Employment rate, Unemployment rate, and Home ownership are expressed as shares. In particular, home ownership is the share
of houses occupied by the owner. Robust standard errors clustered at the polling place level in brackets. Significance at the
10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

44

Table A4 – Evaluating Potential Spillovers, All Groups
Reference group: no message
Ideology
Ideology
by phone
by mail
spillovers
spillovers

Valence
by phone
spillovers

Valence
by mail
spillovers

Double
by phone
spillovers

Double
by mail
spillovers

Turnout

0.032
[0.048]

-0.034
[0.055]

0.010
[0.044]

0.047
[0.060]

0.003
[0.042]

0.028
[0.054]

Incumbent
share

0.099
[0.077]

-0.113
[0.082]

0.064
[0.080]

-0.020
[0.100]

0.124
[0.076]

0.005
[0.099]

Incumbent
parties

0.081
[0.079]

-0.147
[0.098]

-0.035
[0.096]

-0.118
[0.104]

0.038
[0.089]

0.006
[0.115]

Notes. Observations: 1,455 eligible voters (turnout); 1,306 actual voters (vote shares). OLS coefficients reported; dependent
variables in row headings and treatment groups in column headings. Each spillovers variable captures the share of observations
who received the corresponding treatment in the same polling place of every observation. Average values are: 0.135 (valence by
phone); 0.099 (valence by mail); 0.151 (ideology by phone); 0.106 (ideology by mail); 0.135 (double by phone); 0.113 (double by
mail). Fixed effects for survey date included. Robust standard errors clustered at the precinct level in brackets. Significance at
the 10% level is represented by *, at the 5% level by **, and at the 1% level by ***.

45

Table A5 – Model Estimates with Heterogeneous Preference Parameters
Model description
Copula family:
Same alpha:
Rho specification:

FGM
No
Standard

Frank
No
Standard

Indp
No
-

FGM
Yes
Standard

FGM
Yes
Hetero

FGM
Yes
Restricted

Frank
Yes
Standard

Frank
Yes
Hetero

Frank
Yes
Restricted

Indp
Yes
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.08
(0.23)
1.11
(0.14)
0.36
(0.13)
0.34
(0.22)
0.00
(0.49)
1.03
(0.33)
0.18
(0.15)
0.02
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.38
(0.15)
0.38
(0.32)
0.59
(0.06)
0.51
(0.10)
0.58
(0.17)
0.38
(0.20)
0.71
(0.23)
0.69
(0.30)
-1.00
(10.62)
-1.00
(18.42)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.08
(0.23)
1.11
(0.14)
0.37
(0.13)
0.34
(0.22)
0.00
(0.49)
1.03
(0.32)
0.18
(0.15)
0.02
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.37
(0.15)
0.37
(0.32)
0.58
(0.06)
0.51
(0.10)
0.58
(0.16)
0.38
(0.20)
0.71
(0.23)
0.69
(0.30)
-13.67
(261.31)
-30.00
(2035.20)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.07
(0.21)
1.11
(0.14)
0.36
(0.13)
0.34
(0.21)
0.00
(0.48)
1.00
(0.32)
0.18
(0.14)
0.02
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.40
(0.15)
0.40
(0.31)
0.59
(0.07)
0.51
(0.10)
0.59
(0.16)
0.38
(0.20)
0.72
(0.24)
0.69
(0.30)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.09
(0.23)
1.10
(0.14)
0.36
(0.13)
0.34
(0.22)
0.00
(0.48)
1.02
(0.32)
0.19
(0.15)
0.03
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.37
(0.15)
0.37
(0.29)
0.56
(0.05)
0.57
(0.16)
0.37
(0.20)
0.70
(0.18)
-1.00
(10.37)
-1.00
(17.90)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.09
(0.23)
1.11
(0.14)
0.35
(0.13)
0.34
(0.22)
0.00
(0.47)
1.04
(0.33)
0.19
(0.15)
0.03
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.37
(0.16)
0.37
(0.30)
0.56
(0.05)
0.57
(0.16)
0.36
(0.20)
0.69
(0.18)
-1.00
(11.69)
1.00
(134.16)
1.00
(15.42)
-1.00
(18.95)
1.00
(190.48)
-1.00
(42.58)

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.09
(0.22)
1.11
(0.14)
0.35
(0.13)
0.34
(0.22)
0.00
(0.47)
1.02
(0.32)
0.18
(0.15)
0.03
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.05)
0.36
(0.16)
0.36
(0.29)
0.56
(0.05)
0.57
(0.16)
0.37
(0.20)
0.70
(0.18)
-1.00
(11.58)
1.00
(136.54)
-1.00
(13.53)
1.00
(195.53)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.10
(0.23)
1.10
(0.14)
0.35
(0.13)
0.33
(0.21)
0.00
(0.49)
1.03
(0.32)
0.19
(0.15)
0.02
(0.09)
-0.04
(0.04)
0.36
(0.15)
0.36
(0.28)
0.56
(0.05)
0.57
(0.16)
0.37
(0.19)
0.69
(0.18)
-8.24
(90.46)
-30.00
(1952.30)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.10
(0.23)
1.12
(0.15)
0.33
(0.14)
0.33
(0.21)
0.00
(0.45)
1.10
(0.33)
0.20
(0.15)
0.04
(0.10)
-0.05
(0.04)
0.36
(0.16)
0.36
(0.28)
0.56
(0.05)
0.55
(0.15)
0.33
(0.19)
0.68
(0.17)
-30.00
(1703.1)
14.17
(4054.00)
30.00
(786.89)
-30.00
(1969.40)
8.43
(2618.30)
-30.00
(5325.70)

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.08
(0.22)
1.11
(0.15)
0.37
(0.13)
0.34
(0.22)
0.00
(0.45)
0.98
(0.31)
0.19
(0.15)
0.04
(0.09)
-0.03
(0.05)
0.40
(0.16)
0.40
(0.30)
0.56
(0.06)
0.56
(0.15)
0.37
(0.19)
0.70
(0.18)
-30.00
(1717.1)
13.22
(4003.60)
-29.99
(1796.20)
8.23
(3160.70)
-

0.76
(0.01)
0.99
(0.01)
1.08
(0.21)
1.10
(0.14)
0.37
(0.13)
0.34
(0.21)
0.00
(0.49)
0.98
(0.32)
0.18
(0.14)
0.02
(0.09)
-0.03
(0.05)
0.40
(0.15)
0.40
(0.28)
0.56
(0.05)
0.58
(0.16)
0.38
(0.19)
0.71
(0.19)
-

-1043.20
1,306

-1042.90
1,306

-1043.30
1,306

-1043.40
1,306

-1043.30
1,306

-1043.40
1,306

-1043.10
1,306

-1042.60
1,306

-1043.10
1,306

-1043.60
1,306

Parameter
βA =Pr(response|A)
βB =Pr(response|B)
γ/γ L
γC
γR
ζ/ζ L
ζC
ζR
χ/χL
χC
χR
φV,3
φV,2
αV /αV,3
αV,2
φP,3
φP,2
αP /αP,3
αP,2
ρA /ρL
A
ρC
A
ρR
A
ρB /ρL
B
ρC
B
ρR
B
Loglikelihood
Observations

Notes. Asymptotic standard errors in brackets. Preference parameters are allowed to vary with voter’s ideology (L,C,R); based on LR tests, our
preferred specification is with independent copula and same alpha. Copula family: “FGM” stands for Farlie-Gumbel-Morgensen; “Frank” stands
for Frank family; “Indp” for . Same alpha: “yes” forces skew of marginals to be the same for each level of stated uncertainty; “no” allows the
skew to differ. Rho specification: “standard” means baseline ρA and ρB ; “hetero” allows ρA and ρB to vary with voter’s ideology; “restricted”
R
R
L
forces ρL
A = ρB and ρA = ρB .

Table A6 – Model Estimates without Heterogeneous Preference Parameters
Model description
Copula family:
Same alpha:
Rho specification:

FGM
No
Standard

Frank
No
Standard

Indp
No
-

FGM
Yes
Standard

FGM
Yes
Hetero

FGM
Yes
Restricted

Frank
Yes
Standard

Frank
Yes
Hetero

Frank
Yes
Restricted

Indp
Yes
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.91
(0.09)
0.65
(0.14)
0.05
(0.05)
0.40
(0.17)
0.40
(0.30)
0.54
(0.07)
0.50
(0.11)
0.60
(0.17)
0.60
(0.33)
0.80
(0.26)
0.69
(0.42)
-1.00
(18.09)
1.00
(29.21)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.90
(0.09)
0.68
(0.14)
0.06
(0.05)
0.35
(0.16)
0.35
(0.29)
0.54
(0.06)
0.50
(0.10)
0.58
(0.15)
0.55
(0.32)
0.77
(0.23)
0.65
(0.35)
-30.00
(1993.00)
29.99
(1633.70)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.88
(0.09)
0.69
(0.14)
0.05
(0.05)
0.35
(0.15)
0.35
(0.29)
0.54
(0.06)
0.50
(0.10)
0.61
(0.15)
0.61
(0.32)
0.81
(0.27)
0.70
(0.44)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.88
(0.09)
0.69
(0.14)
0.04
(0.05)
0.34
(0.15)
0.34
(0.24)
0.51
(0.05)
0.65
(0.17)
0.65
(0.27)
0.81
(0.28)
-1.00
(22.79)
1.00
(37.36)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.90
(0.09)
0.68
(0.14)
0.04
(0.05)
0.40
(0.17)
0.40
(0.30)
0.52
(0.06)
0.65
(0.17)
0.65
(0.28)
0.82
(0.28)
-1.00
(38.48)
1.00
(53.29)
-1.00
(41.50)
-1.00
(51.93)
1.00
(86.81)
-1.00
(81.43)

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.91
(0.09)
0.65
(0.14)
0.05
(0.05)
0.34
(0.17)
0.34
(0.25)
0.52
(0.05)
0.60
(0.15)
0.60
(0.26)
0.77
(0.22)
1.00
(24.90)
1.00
(41.32)
-1.00
(22.23)
1.00
(63.35)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.91
(0.09)
0.66
(0.14)
0.06
(0.05)
0.34
(0.16)
0.34
(0.28)
0.52
(0.05)
0.61
(0.16)
0.61
(0.26)
0.77
(0.23)
-30.00
(2120.70)
29.99
(3674.60)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.91
(0.09)
0.66
(0.14)
0.06
(0.05)
0.34
(0.16)
0.34
(0.29)
0.52
(0.05)
0.58
(0.15)
0.58
(0.27)
0.74
(0.20)
-30.00
(3038.50)
30.00
(1849.70)
-30.00
(2997.90)
-30.00
(4066.60)
22.42
(6915.90)
-30.00
(7895.00)

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)
0.89
(0.09)
0.68
(0.14)
0.06
(0.05)
0.34
(0.16)
0.34
(0.29)
0.52
(0.05)
0.62
(0.15)
0.61
(0.26)
0.77
(0.23)
29.99
(2786.20)
29.60
(7268.40)
-30.00
(2467.70)
27.94
(11627.00)
-

0.77
(0.01)
0.98
(0.01)

-1057.70
1,306

-1057.40
1,306

-1057.70
1,306

-1057.90
1,306

-1057.94
1,306

-1057.70
1,306

-1057.50
1,306

-1057.50
1,306

-1057.40
1,306

Parameter
βA =Pr(response|A)
βB =Pr(response|B)
γ/γ L 0.89
γC
γR
ζ/ζ L
ζC
ζR
χ/χL
χC
χR
φV,3
φV,2
αV /αV,3
αV,2
φP,3
φP,2
αP /αP,3
αP,2
ρA /ρL
A
ρC
A
ρR
A
ρB /ρL
B
ρC
B
ρR
B
Loglikelihood
Observations

(0.09)
(0.14)
0.05
(0.05)
0.34
(0.16)
0.34
(0.28)
0.52
(0.05)
0.65
(0.15)
0.65
(0.26)
0.81
(0.27)
-1057.90
1,306

Notes. Asymptotic standard errors in brackets. Unlike Table A3, preference parameters are not allowed to vary with voter’s ideology (L,C,R);
based on LR tests, these are not our preferred specifications but we report them for completeness. Copula family: “FGM” stands for FarlieGumbel-Morgensen; “Frank” stands for Frank family; “Indp” for . Same alpha: “yes” forces skew of marginals to be the same for each level of
stated uncertainty; “no” allows the skew to differ. Rho specification: “standard” means baseline ρA and ρB ; “hetero” allows ρA and ρB to vary
R
R
L
with voter’s ideology; “restricted” forces ρL
A = ρB and ρA = ρB .

Table A7 – LR Tests: Restriction of Preference Parameters
To Be the Same across Voter’s Ideology
Copula
FGM
Frank
Independent

Test statistic
28.94
28.86
28.62

P-value
0.00
0.00
0.00

Notes. Skew restricted to be the same across levels of stated uncertainty. Standard ρ specification.

Table A8 – LR Tests: Restriction of Skew
To Be the Same across Levels of Uncertainty
Preferences
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous

Copula
FGM
Frank
Indp
FGM
Frank
Indp

Test statistic
0.29
0.37
0.38
0.49
0.39
0.54

P-value
0.86
0.83
0.83
0.78
0.82
0.76

Notes. Standard ρ specification.

Table A9 – Vuong Tests: Copula Comparisons
Preferences
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Homogeneous
Homogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Homogeneous
Homogeneous

Copula
comparison
Frank vs. FGM
Independent vs. FGM
Independent vs. Frank
Frank vs. FGM
Independent vs. FGM
Independent vs. Frank
Independent vs. FGM
Independent vs. Frank
Independent vs. FGM
Independent vs. Frank
Independent vs. FGM
Independent vs. Frank
Independent vs. FGM
Independent vs. Frank

Rho
specification
Standard
Standard
Standard
Standard
Standard
Standard
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Heterogeneous
Restricted
Restricted
Restricted
Restricted

Notes. Skew restricted to be the same across level of stated uncertainty.

48

Test
statistic
0.76
39.48
17.93
1.05
22.67
12.61
52.08
26.59
12.9
35.93
37.19
30.78
40.57
34.77

P-value
0.45
0.00
0.00
0.29
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Preferred
copula
Frank
Independent
Independent
Frank
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent
Independent

Figure A1 – Campaign Flyer with the Valence Message

Figure A2 – Campaign Flyer with the Ideology Message

49

