                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THIS IS ONLY A TEST? LONG-RUN IMPACTS OF PRENATAL EXPOSURE TO
                           RADIOACTIVE FALLOUT

                                      Sandra E. Black
                                       Aline Bütikofer
                                      Paul J. Devereux
                                      Kjell G. Salvanes

                                     Working Paper 18987
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w18987


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          April 2013, Revised October 2017




We thank Tone D. Bergan at the Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority for providing us with
the data she digitalized from the original archives at the Norwegian Defense Research
Establishment (FFI), and for her help in clarifying measurement issues. The authors thank the
Norwegian Research Council for financial support. We also appreciate comments from
presentations at the NBER Summer Institute, Bocconi, Columbia University, MIT, Northwestern
University, Boston College, National University of Ireland Maynooth, Oxford University,
University of Essex, University of Toronto, Simon Fraser University, Harrison School Chicago
University, Northwestern University, Statistics Norway, Stockholm School of Economics,
University of Bern, University of British Columbia, University of California Santa Barbara,
University of California San Diego, University of St. Gallen, Trinity College Dublin, and a
workshop at the Norwegian School of Economics. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Sandra E. Black, Aline Bütikofer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
This Is Only a Test? Long-Run Impacts of Prenatal Exposure to Radioactive Fallout
Sandra E. Black, Aline Bütikofer, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 18987
April 2013, Revised October 2017
JEL No. I20,J01,J3

                                          ABSTRACT

Research increasingly shows that differences in endowments at birth need not be genetic but
instead are influenced by environmental factors while the fetus is in the womb. In addition, these
differences may persist well beyond childhood. In this paper, we study one such environmental
factor – exposure to radiation – that affects individuals across the socio-economic spectrum. We
use variation in radioactive exposure throughout Norway in the 1950s and early 60s, resulting
from the abundance of nuclear weapon testing during that time period, to examine the effect of
nuclear exposure in utero on outcomes such as IQ scores, education, earnings, and adult height, as
well as whether these effects persist into the next generation. We find that exposure to low-dose
nuclear radiation, specifically during months 3 and 4 in utero, leads to a decline in IQ scores of
men aged 18. Moreover, radiation exposure leads to declines in education attainment, high school
completion, and earnings among men and women. We are also able to examine whether these
effects persist across a second generation. Importantly, we find that the children of persons
affected in utero also have lower cognitive scores, suggesting a persistent intergenerational effect
of the shock to endowments. Given the lack of awareness about nuclear testing in Norway at this
time, our estimates are likely to be unaffected by avoidance behavior or stress effects. These
results are robust to the choice of specification and the inclusion of sibling fixed effects.


Sandra E. Black                                  Paul J. Devereux
Department of Economics                          School of Economics
University of Texas at Austin                    and Geary Institute
Austin, TX 78712                                 University College Dublin
and IZA                                          Belfield, Dublin 4
and also NBER                                    Ireland
sblack@austin.utexas.edu                         and IZA and CEPR
                                                 devereux@ucd.ie
Aline Bütikofer
Department of Economics                          Kjell G. Salvanes
Norwegian School of Economics                    Department of Economics
Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen                        Norwegian School of Economics
Norway                                           Hellev. 30, N-5035 Bergen
aline.buetikofer@nhh.no                          Norway
                                                 and IZA and CEPR
                                                 kjell.salvanes@nhh.no
Introduction

              There is a large literature documenting the substantial persistence in early childhood

endowments. Increasingly, the evidence shows that differences in endowments at birth need not

be genetic but instead are influenced by environmental factors while the fetus is in the womb.

This includes studies on the effects of the 1918 flu epidemic (Almond, 2006), the 1957 Asian flu

pandemic (Kelly, 2011), the 1959 to 1961 Chinese famine (Almond, Edlund, Li, and Zhang,

2010), the Dutch famine in 1945-46 (Scholte, van den Berg, and Lindeboom 2012), birth weight

effects (Black, Devereux and Salvanes, 2007), and the effects of maternal smoking and drinking

(Currie, Neidell and Schmieder, 2009; Fertig and Watson, 2009).2 In this paper, we study one

such environmental factor – exposure to radiation. Importantly, unlike other factors that

disproportionately affect one part of society, nuclear exposure affects members of all

socioeconomic groups.

              This paper uses variation in radioactive exposure throughout Norway in the 1950s and

early 1960s resulting from the extensive nuclear testing during that time period to examine the

effect of low-dose nuclear exposure in each month in utero on later-life outcomes such as IQ

scores, education, height, and earnings. We then examine the effect of the radiation on IQ scores

of the next generation, enabling us to identify the extent to which the shock to endowments

persists across generations.

              Norway provides an ideal laboratory for this type of analysis; because of its geographical

location and topography, with high precipitation in coastal areas, Norway received considerable

radioactive fallout from Russian atmospheric nuclear weapons tests in the 1950s and 60s

(Storebø, 1958, Hvinden and Lillegraven, 1961). Regional fallout was determined by wind,

rainfall, and topography; we use this variation across Norway and over time for identification.
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
#
    !See Currie (2011) for a review.!


!                                                                                                          2
       Since the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the effect of nuclear fallout on health and

on the cognitive ability of children in utero during the bombings was studied by the medical

literature (see, e.g., Otake and Schull, 1984). More closely related on our work are the studies

that have examined the impact of the Chernobyl disaster on children who were in utero when it

occurred. One important study was by Almond, Edlund and Palme (2009), who find that low-

dose exposure in utero leads to lower test scores in school. Our paper adds to this literature by

focusing on the long-run effects of low doses of radiation from global nuclear fallout resulting

from nuclear weapon testing. Because we are able to incorporate both cross-sectional as well as

time-series variation in exposure over a longer period of time, we are able to identify which

months of pregnancy are most sensitive to exposure. Finally, we also add to the literature by

studying cognitive scores of the second generation (the children of the generation affected in

utero) and thus show that there are intergenerational effects of exposure to radiation.

       We find that exposure to nuclear fallout in the air or on the ground, even in low doses,

leads to a decline in men’s IQ scores at age 18, completed years of education, and earnings at age

35. Among women, radiation exposure leads to declines in educational attainment and high

school completion, and lower earnings at age 35. Additionally, there is evidence that the children

of the affected generation also have lower cognitive scores, and we are able to calculate the

degree of intergenerational transmission. Importantly, we are able to demonstrate that, consistent

with the medical literature based primarily on higher doses of radioactive exposure, it is exposure

in months 3 and 4 in utero that is most important for low-dose exposure. These results are robust

to the choice of specification, tests of selection, and the inclusion of sibling fixed effects.

       Unlike the nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 and the accident in the

nuclear power plant in Fukushima in 2012, there was very little public awareness in Norway of




!                                                                                                   3
the exposure to nuclear fallout resulting from nuclear testing taking place in foreign countries.3

Moreover, the first medical studies analyzing the effect of nuclear fallout on cognitive

achievement were only published in the 1980s (see, e.g., Otake and Schull, 1984).4 Therefore,

there is no reason to expect that avoidance behavior is important. This additionally implies that

our health effects cannot be explained as resulting from stress due to worry about the effects of

radiation.5

              The paper unfolds as follows. Section II describes the relevant history of nuclear testing

affecting Norway. Section III describes our empirical strategy and Section IV describes our data.

Section V presents the results for the effects of exposure on children in utero along with a variety

of robustness checks, and Section VI presents results for the second generation—the children of

these children. Section VII then concludes.



II. Background

Nuclear Testing

              There was intensive nuclear weapon testing worldwide in the periods 1952–1954, 1957–

1958, and 1961–1962 (see Appendix Figure A1), with deposition rates peaking in 1963.6

According to the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation

(UNSCEAR), 520 tests were conducted in the atmosphere - most of them prior to 1963. These

atmospheric nuclear weapons tests are considered to be the most significant source of radioactive

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
3
   It was not the Norwegian government that established test stations in Norway during the 1950s but the US and
British military who were interested in collecting information about test activity in the Soviet Union.
4
   There were indicative studies prior to this suggesting health risks from radiation. However, there was no broad
public knowledge about this.
$
  !Stress during pregnancy has been linked to poor infant health outcomes (Kuzawa and Sweet, 2009; Black,
Devereux, and Salvanes 2013).!
%
  On October 10, 1963, a partial test ban treaty came into force, banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, underwater
and in space. The treaty was not signed by France and China; as a result, the last atmospheric explosion was
performed by China as late as October 1980. !


!                                                                                                                       4
fallout; contamination resulting from underground nuclear weapon testing is, from a global

perspective, negligible.

              A nuclear weapon test produces about 150 fission products with half-lives long enough to

contribute to radioactive fallout. In general, the fallout can be divided into three components: 1.

large particles that are deposited from the atmosphere within hours of the test, 2. smaller particles

that remain in the troposphere only a few days, and 3. longer-lived particles such as Cesium (CS-

137), Strontium (Str-90), Rubidium (Ru-103), Xenon (Xe-133), Iodine (I-131) and Barium (Ba-

140), that are injected into the stratosphere (Bergan, 2002). Radioactive debris injected into the

stratosphere -- so-called “global fallout” -- trickles down slowly to the troposphere; from there,

debris is deposited on the ground mainly through precipitation. Differences in the rate of

deposition across locations can thus primarily be explained by temporal and spatial variation in

precipitation. Because the fallout cloud disperses with time and distance from the explosion, and

radioactivity decays over time, the highest radiation exposures are generally in areas of local

fallout.7

              Immediately following a nuclear explosion, the activity of short-lived radionuclides is

much greater than that of long-lived radionuclides. However, the short-lived radionuclides decay

substantially during the time it takes the fallout cloud to reach distant locations like Norway, and

the long-lived radionuclides become relatively more important. In the polar region, radionuclides

remain in the stratosphere on average from 3 to 12 months (UNSCEAR, 1982).8 Bergan (2002)



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
&
  !According to UNSCEAR (1993) fallout activity deposited close to the test sites accounts for 12% of total fallout,
tropospheric fallout, which is deposited in a band around the globe at the latitude of the test site, for 10%, and global
fallout, which is mainly deposited in the same hemisphere as the test site, for 78%. As most tests were carried out in
the northern hemisphere, most of the radioactive contamination is also found there.!
'
  !The polar region is down to the 60 degree latitude (about where Bergen is located in south west Norway), and most
of the time the radionuclides from the test sites in Northern Russia were transported in this zone.!



!                                                                                                                       5
estimates the average age of the fallout in Norway to be between 3 and 5 months during the

intensive testing periods.

              The western Norwegian coast line was particularly exposed to atomic fallout coming from

nuclear testing taking place in Novaya Zemlya in the Russian arctic archipelago, one of the most

intense test regions between 1955 and 1962. The macro weather system is the primary force that

moved long-lived radionuclides from Russian test stations to their ultimate deposition along the

Norwegian coast: cold air over the poles creates high pressure zones taking the air to lower

latitudes.9

              Figure 1 shows estimates of the in situ total Beta fallout in each municipality in Norway

in 1958, 1960, 1962, and 1964.10 The activity of fallout in the air or on the ground or other

surfaces is measured in becquerels (Bq), which is defined as the number of radioactive

disintegrations per second.11 The fallout varies significantly by municipality and also over time.

There was an international moratorium on nuclear testing from November 1958 to September

1961 so Norway received almost no fallout in the second half of 1959, in 1960, and throughout

most of 1961. The partial test ban treaty in October 1963 led to very little fallout in 1964 or in

subsequent years. However, there is significant fallout in 1957 and 1958 and, even more so, in

1962 and 1963 because the explosions after the expiration of the moratorium were much larger

than before. This results in substantial time series variation in addition to that across

municipalities.

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
(
 !Due to the Coriolis forces, the cold dry air moves away from the pole twisting westward resulting in the so-called
polar easterlies. Thus, these winds carry air from Northern Russia southwest towards the Norwegian Sea and Iceland.
At around 60 degrees north, the airstream enters the low pressure zone and the air is brought eastwards again towards
the Norwegian coast. Moreover, the polar jet streams located right below the stratosphere at around 60 degrees north
also distributed long-lived nuclear debris over the globe.!
10
   We use the phrase “in situ” to denote nuclear fallout that has been deposited to the ground (as distinct from being
suspended in the air).
""
  !The initial measurements in Norway were made in picoCurie. We have converted these into Bq as this is the
current standard unit of measurement.!


!                                                                                                                   6
Prenatal Radiation Exposure and Cognitive Damage

       Following the deposition of fallout into the air and on the ground, there are different

means by which people absorb radiation. Irradiation might come from penetrating gamma rays

emitted by particles in the air and on the ground. In this case, simply staying inside a building

reduces exposure. Moreover, people inhale fallout or absorb it through skin. A further source is

the consumption of contaminated food. Vegetation can be contaminated when fallout is directly

deposited on the surface of plants, or when it is deposited on the ground and plants absorb it

through their roots. People can also be exposed when they eat meat and drink milk from animals

grazing on contaminated vegetation or if they drink contaminated water.

       It is well-established that ionizing radiation can lead to molecular, cellular, and tissue

damage (see, e.g., Hall, 2009). Importantly, actively dividing cells are known to be more

sensitive to ionizing radiation than cells that have completed division (see, e.g., ICRP, 1986). As

cell cycling and division occur more rapid early in life, the age at the time of exposure to ionizing

radiation is an important factor in determining the damage to the developing brain.


       While formation of most human organs is largely complete by the 8th week after

conception, the development of the cerebral cortex occurs rapidly from weeks 8 to 15 post-

conception. The neocortex is the part of the cerebral cortex that is involved in higher functions

such as sensory perception and generation of conscious thought and language, and medical

evidence suggests prenatal exposure to ionizing radiation is particularly harmful if it occurs

during this 2-month period of time (see, e.g., Otake and Schull, 1998). By the 16th week of

pregnancy, the normal number of neurons in the cerebral neocortex of the human adult has been

established (see Dobbing and Sands, 1973). During weeks 16 to 25 after conception, the



!                                                                                                     7
differentiation of cells accelerates, and after the 25th week, the central nervous system becomes

quite resistant to radiation. At that point, major fetal brain damage becomes highly improbable

(see, e.g. ICRP, 1991; Otake and Schull, 1998).


       The first studies indicating that iodizing radiation causes cognitive abnormalities were

analyses of individuals exposed in utero to diagnostic X-ray procedures in the 1980s (see, e.g.,

Brent, 1989). Although quite removed from our framework given the extreme circumstances,

most evidence on the effects of acute exposure to ionizing radiation has, however, been obtained

from studies on the survivors of the atomic bombs at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Different studies

using a variety of measures of cognitive function, such as the occurrence of severe mental

retardation, the intelligence quotient (IQ) and school performance, find a significant effect on

individuals exposed during weeks 8 to 15 and weeks 16 to 25 after conception. However, no

evidence of a radiation effect has been seen among children exposed prior to the 8th week or

subsequent to the 25th week after conception (see, e.g., Otake and Schull, 1984; Otake,

Yoshimaru, and Schull, 1989; Miller and Mulvihill, 1956). Moreover, Otake and Schull (1998)

report that the risk of severe mental retardation was 5-times greater for persons exposed during

weeks 8 to 15 post-conception than for individuals exposed during weeks 16 to 25 post-

conception.


       However, these survivor studies are limited in that they analyze the effects of a single,

relatively high dose and not of small, intermittent, or continual doses typical of medical,

professional, or environmental exposure. Studies evaluating the impact of smaller doses of

radiation, such as those experienced in Sweden after the reactor incident in Chernobyl, on health

outcomes such as spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, length of gestation, birth weight, and neonatal

mortality, are not conclusive. Some find effects of prenatal exposure, while others do not (see,


!                                                                                                    8
e.g., Lüning et al., 1989; Ericson and Källén, 1994; Sperling et al., 1994; Scherb, Weigelt, and

Brüske-Hohlfeld, 1999; Auvinen et al., 2001, Laziuk et al., 2002). However, studies focusing on

cerebral dysfunctions do suggest that the prenatal exposure to radioactive fallout after Chernobyl

resulted in detectable brain damage or lower schooling performance and fetal death (see, e.g.,

Nyagu et al., 2004; Almond et al., 2009, Halla and Zweimuller, 2012).


              The potential to extrapolate the Japanese or Ukrainian findings to those from the nuclear

weapon testing fallout is limited. The global fallout from the testing yielded no fatal doses in

Norway, but during periods of the 50s and 60s the population was continuously exposed to

radionuclides. In contrast, the Japanese population was acutely irradiated by γ-rays and neutrons

and the Ukrainian population also received a high dose of radioiodine. Because of the different

situations, it is not easy to predict the radiobiological effect of the global fallout received by

Norway from the Japanese or Ukrainian results. Importantly, unlike most of the literature, we

focus on determining the effect of low-dose exposure in each month of pregnancy to empirically

determine the timing of exposure that matters.12


III. Empirical Strategy

              To measure the long-run effects of nuclear fallout on cognitive test scores, height,

education and income, we exploit the variation in radioactive fallout in Norway within

geographic areas over time. We use a similar approach to that in the Chernobyl study of Almond

et al. (2009) but incorporate the fact that we have variation over a relatively long period of time

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"#
  !Oftedal (1989) evaluates the effect of radiation exposure on scholastic achievement of the 1965 cohort in Norway
by hypothesizing that children from the west of Norway should have been more exposed than those from the east and
the degree of exposure should vary by season of birth. He compares school test grades from a 10 percent sample of
seventh graders in the two regions and finds deviations by region that differ by month-of-birth. He concludes that
scholastic achievement is reduced in children exposed in utero to radiation. However, given he studies only one
cohort that is born two years after the test-ban treaty, and given that he has no measures of geographic dispersion of
radiation, these findings can be viewed as suggestive at best.!


!                                                                                                                   9
as well as across space in order to identify the relevant months of exposure in utero as opposed to

picking a predetermined window. The amount of fallout experienced by any individual depends

on their month of birth, year of birth, and municipality of birth.



Basic Specification

              We estimate the following equation:

                                                !!"# ! !! ! !! !!" ! !!!" ! !! ! !! ! !!"# !!!!!!!!

Here !!"# represents outcomes such as education, IQ score, height and earnings for child i born in

municipality c at time t. We will use the same specification in the intergenerational analysis

where !!"# then represents the outcomes of the offspring of the exposed children. ! is a vector

indicating fallout in each month of pregnancy, beginning 3 months before conception (as a

placebo) and ending three months post-birth. X is a vector of controls that includes parental

education, the county level unemployment rate when the child was in utero, and birth order

indicators (family size at birth of child). We also include controls for year of birth by month of

birth indicators (!! ! and municipality fixed effects (!! ); we are therefore comparing individuals

born within the same municipality but born in different month/year of birth (and thus exposed to

different levels of radiation in utero).13 We use OLS estimation; in the case of high school

completion, we are estimating a linear probability model.



Specification with Municipality-Specific Trends



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
")
  !An alternative to this difference-in-difference type strategy is to use time-series variation in fallout. We have tried
this approach by replacing the year of birth by month of birth dummies with a time trend and found effects that have
the same sign and statistical significance but smaller magnitudes. Because this is a period of rapid changes in
educational infrastructure and in compulsory schooling laws, we have more faith in specifications that include cohort
effects.!


!                                                                                                                      10
              One concern might be that our results are driven by different trends in municipalities that

are exposed to high doses of radiation relative to those that are not. While we examined this

directly and found no evidence of differential trends in the observable control variables during

this time period, we also report estimates from a specification that allows for municipality-

specific linear trends.14 These trends are included in addition to the year of birth by month of

birth indicators.



Specification with Interactions

              As a further robustness check, we also estimate a richer model that adds interactions of

the municipality dummies with month of birth (to allow for seasonal factors that differ by area)

and interactions of the municipality dummies with year of birth (to allow cohort effects to differ

by municipality). Note that we cannot include the interaction of year of birth by month of birth by

municipality, as that is our identifying variation. Letting y denote year of birth and m denote

month of birth, we estimate

                                        !!"# ! !! ! !! !!" ! !!!" ! !! ! !!" ! !!" ! !!"# !!!!!!!!

This model is still well identified as there is much variation in fallout over the course of any

particular year that is not driven by seasonal factors but instead by the timing of nuclear tests in

the Soviet Union.



Sibling Fixed Effects Model

              While exposure is arguably exogenous to family and neighborhood characteristics within

municipalities, one might still worry that non-random migration might change the composition of


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
14
     Results on differential trends for control variables are available from the authors upon request.


!                                                                                                        11
people in the municipality over time. Furthermore, the composition of the sample could be

correlated with the fallout if there are changes over time and region in the types of people who

give birth and these are, by chance, correlated with fallout levels.15 While we have no evidence

that this is the case, we also estimate a specification that includes sibling fixed effects. Variation

is then based on differences in exposure within families across children, thereby differencing out

anything that is constant within families such as socio-economic status.16



IV. Data

       Data are compiled from a number of different sources. Our primary data source is the

Norwegian Registry Data, a linked administrative dataset that covers the population of

Norwegians up to 2009 and is a collection of different administrative registers such as the

education register, family register, and the tax and earnings register. These data are maintained

by Statistics Norway and provide information about educational attainment, labor market status,

earnings, and a set of demographic variables (age, gender) as well as information on families.17

We include data for cohorts born 1956-1966.

       Using month and year of birth, and assuming that a pregnancy lasts 266 days, we can identify

the months of pregnancy (ranging from 1-9). Importantly, we assume that exposure to low-dose

radiation does not affect the duration of a pregnancy, which is consistent with the findings of the




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"$
  !In the U.S., birth selectivity by socio-economic status has been found to differ by month of birth (Buckles and
Hungerman, 2010) and by economic conditions (Dehejia and Lleras-Muney, 2004).!
16
   Because nuclear radiation may affect later fertility, as a specification check, we have estimated the sibling fixed
effects model on a subset where the exposed child is not the first-born and compare this child to existing children and
find similar results. We also look at fertility directly and find no effects of exposure on later fertility behavior; this is
unsurprising, given the lack of knowledge about exposure at the time.
17
   See Møen, Salvanes and Sørensen (2004) for a description of these data.



!                                                                                                                         12
Chernobyl study of Almond et al. (2009).18 We allocate a municipality to each child born

between 1956 and 1964 using the 1960 Census by assuming that the municipality during

pregnancy is the mother’s municipality of residence in 1960. For individuals born in 1965 and

1966, we are able to use register data on the exact municipality where the mother lived when the

child was born.



Military Data

              The IQ score and height data are taken from the Norwegian military records that cover all

the cohorts we study. Before young men enter the service, their medical and psychological

suitability is assessed; this occurs for the great majority between their eighteenth and twentieth

birthday. In Norway, military service is compulsory for every male; as a result, we have military

data for men only.

               The IQ measure is the mean score from three IQ tests -- arithmetic, word similarities, and

figures (see Sundet et al. [2004, 2005] and Thrane (1977) for details). The arithmetic test is quite

similar to the arithmetic test in the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) (Sundet et al.

2005; Cronbach 1964), the word test is similar to the vocabulary test in WAIS, and the figures

test is similar to the Raven Progressive Matrix test (Cronbach 1964). The IQ score is reported in

stanine (Standard Nine) units, a method of standardizing raw scores into a nine point standard

scale that has a discrete approximation to a normal distribution, a mean of 5, and a standard

deviation of 2.19


Education


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
"'
  !If radiation did decrease gestational length, this would cause us to overestimate the effects of radiation in later
months and understate it in earlier months.!
"(
  !The correlation between this IQ measure and the WAIS IQ score has been found to be 0.73 (Sundet et al., 2004).


!                                                                                                                    13
              We measure educational attainment in 2009 and use two measures of education

achievement. High school graduation is an indicator equal to one if the child obtained a three-

year high school diploma. We also consider the years of education completed by the individual.

The data are based on school reports sent directly to Statistics Norway by educational institutions,

thereby minimizing any measurement error due to misreporting.


Earnings

       Earnings are measured as annual earnings for taxable income as reported in the tax registry

when the individual is aged 35. These are not topcoded and include labor earnings, taxable sick

benefits, unemployment benefits, parental leave payments, and pensions.20


Data on Nuclear Fallout


              In the period from 1956 to 1984, the Norwegian Defense Research Establishment (FFI)

monitored radioactivity in the air and on the ground at 13 stations across Norway.21 They

collected two primary measures of radiation: (i) a measure of the total beta radiation in the air

expressed as Bq/m3, and (ii) a measure of the total beta radiation in situ (ie on the ground)

expressed in Bq/m2.22 Radioactivity in the air was measured 2 meters above ground level using

air filters, and the filters were changed every 24 hours. The samples were sent to the main

laboratory of FFI near Oslo, and a Geiger-Müller counter measured the total beta activity 72




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
20
   An individual is labeled as employed if currently working with a firm, on temporary layoff, on up to two weeks of
sickness absence, or on maternity leave. We later test the sensitivity of our results to the choice of income measure.
#"
  !The locations of measurement stations for radioactivity are (from North to South in Norway): Vadsø, Tromsø,
Bardufoss, Bodø, Værnes (close to Trondheim in mid Norway), Røros, Ålesund, Bergen, Finse, Sola (close to
Stavanger), Gardermoen (close to Oslo), Kjeller (also close to Oslo), Kjevik (close to Kristiansand).
##
  !We obtained the raw data collected for deposition in air and ground measured in picoCurie/m3 and picoCurie/m2,
respectively. Bergan digitalized the original protocols to obtain the radiation data (Bergan, 2002, 2010, Bergan and
Steenhuisen, 2012).


!                                                                                                                   14
hours after the samples were collected.23 Precipitation (rain, snow) and dry particles were also

collected at each test station for the measure of ground deposition.24 Beta activity came from

many isotopes with half-lives of less than a year such as Rubidium (Ru-103), Xenon (Xe-133),

Iodine (I-131) and Barium (Ba-140), and also longer-lived ones such as Strontium (Str-90) and

Cesium (CS-137), with half-lives of 28 and 30 years respectively.

              These two measures of deposition (air and ground) have a correlation coefficient of 0.75,

implying that they are highly -- but far from perfectly -- correlated. Figures 2a and 2b show the

two measures for Oslo and Bergen. One can see that the temporal pattern differs for the two

measures. This is not surprising as ground deposition is largely determined by rainfall while

fallout in the air is more related to the presence of centers of high air pressure as well as influxes

of warm subtropical air (Bergan and Steenhuisen, 2012).

              There are 13 test stations and about 730 municipalities in Norway during this period. To

minimize the measurement error in our measure of nuclear fallout, we limit our sample to

municipalities within 20km of a test station.25 We have tested the sensitivity of our results to

different distance cutoffs and find the results are insensitive to this choice.

              For radiation in the air, we estimate the fallout for each municipality in our sample in each

month by using the fallout at the geographically closest measuring station. For radiation on the

ground, we estimate the fallout for each municipality in each month by using the fallout at the

geographically closest measuring station and then weight that by the precipitation in that month



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
23
   This implies that the short-lived radioisotopes from the decay of Radon had already died out. This is important
since Radon is not randomly distributed across regions and its presence might contaminate our estimates of the
effects of the fallout from the nuclear tests.
#*
  !These samples were sent to the same laboratory and total beta activity was measured with the Geiger-Müller
counter. In order to identify the source of the radioactive rays, a gamma ray spectrometer was used to identify the
different isotopes. See Bergan (2002) for further details about radiation measurement.!
#$
  !See Table 1 for a comparison of our sample to the total population.


!                                                                                                                     15
in the municipality relative to the precipitation in that month at the measuring station.26 This is

equivalent to:

                                                                            !!"
                                                                !!" ! !!"       !!!!! !
                                                                            !!"

where !!" measures the nuclear fallout in municipality ! at time t and !!" represents the nuclear

fallout at the closest test station s at time t. !!" measures the precipitation in month t in

municipality c or s. The reason for weighting by the precipitation relative to that at the test

station is that the measured ground deposition is already affected by the amount of rain in the test

station area. The re-weighting implies that there will be more fallout in areas of relatively

heavier rain and less in areas of relatively less rain.27

              The rain measures come from the Norwegian Meteorological Institute and are available

by month for each municipality. The precipitation map of Norway (Figure A2) demonstrates that

there are large differences in annual precipitation; precipitation is higher along the west and north

coast of the country. Some of the measuring stations along the west coast have more than

3000mm average precipitation per year, while other stations measure yearly precipitation of less

than 400mm. This massive variation in rainfall (as shown in Figure A2) is due to the mountain

range that divides the country; this resulted in large local variations in deposited radioactivity.28




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
26
   Hvinden, Lillegraven and Lillesæter (1965) claim that removal of debris from the troposphere is proportional to
precipitation in Norway and tropospheric concentration (see also Lillegraven and Hvinden, 1982). Moreover, Bergan
(2002) states that “The fallout is correlated to the amount of precipitation and concentration in air, and the deposited
radioactivity is proportional to monthly precipitation.” (page 206).
27
   We have also tried using the in situ total beta directly without weighting by the relative rainfall and obtained very
similar results. This is unsurprising as we only include municipalities that are within 20km of a test station.
#'
  !Similarly Mattsson and Vesanen (1988) report that 99% of deposition from Chernobyl in western Sweden was due
to rainfall (see Almond et al., 2009).


!                                                                                                                    16
              In Figure 3a and 3b we present the monthly beta fallout at the measuring stations in or

close to 5 Norwegian cities from 1956 to 1975.29 The figures show substantial variation over

time and location.

              Summary statistics for our first-generation sample are presented in Table 1a, along with

descriptive statistics for the whole country. Because our sample is disproportionately urban,

education levels are higher in our sample than in the country as a whole. Table 1b presents

summary statistics for the sons of the exposed generation (second generation) and describes the

sample we use to analyze whether our findings persist into the next generation.



V. Results-First Generation

Basic Specification

              We first present the results for IQ scores for men using the two different measures of

radiation exposure (in separate regressions), the beta radiation from the air and the in situ, or

ground, radiation. For ease of interpretation, when included in regressions, both measures of

radioactive exposure are standardized to have mean zero and variance one.

              Table 2 presents the results for men when IQ score is the outcome. Each column is a

separate regression that includes the standardized measure of exposure in each month of

pregnancy, in the 3 months before conception and the 3 months after birth. The first 4 columns

present the results using in situ exposure and the second 4 columns use air exposure.

              Each regression also includes individual control variables, including indicators for

mother’s and father’s education, birth order controls, and the unemployment rate in the year of


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
29
  There is a measuring station located within the municipality border of Bergen, Røros (central Norway) and Vadsø
(northern Norway). The measuring station close to Stavanger is located in the Sola municipality, a neighboring
municipality of Stavanger, and is located about 10km from the city center of Stavanger. The measuring station in
Kjeller is the closest to Oslo and it is about 20 km away from the city center.!!


!                                                                                                              17
birth in the county of birth. However, the results are insensitive to the inclusion of these

controls.30 As the IQ score is taken from the Norwegian military records and military service is

compulsory only for men, this analysis is restricted exclusively to men. We cluster the standard

errors by municipality and so allow arbitrary correlations of the error terms for people born in the

same municipality.

              Columns 1 and 5 present results from our basic specification that controls for municipality

and month of birth by year of birth fixed effects. Columns 2 and 6 then show the results when we

add municipality-specific time trends. Columns 3 and 7 present the results from the most

saturated model, including municipality-specific month of birth and municipality-specific year of

birth controls. In all specifications, we find that radioactive exposure in months 3 and 4 of

pregnancy, even the relatively small doses experienced in Norway from the Russian nuclear

testing in the 1950s and 1960s, appears to have a significant negative effect on the IQ score of

exposed males. This is true regardless of the measure of exposure that we use. To get a sense of

the magnitude from the standardized measure, a one standard deviation increase in ground

exposure leads to a decline in the IQ score of about 0.04. Given the standard deviation of the IQ

score is about 2, this is an effect size of about 0.02 of a standard deviation. The effect of air

exposure is larger with a one standard deviation increase in exposure leading to about 0.06 of a

standard deviation fall in the IQ score. This is equivalent to about 1 IQ point on a standard IQ

scale.

              The other key finding from this table is that there is no systematic evidence of effects of

radiation exposure in any other pregnancy month. One partial exception to this is that there is



!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
30
  For parsimony, we don’t report results without controls in the tables. These are available from the authors upon
request.!


!                                                                                                                    18
some evidence for a smaller adverse effect from radiation in month 5. However, in general, the

findings are consistent with adverse effects of radiation being confined to months 3 and 4.



Sibling Fixed Effects

              We also estimate a specification that includes sibling fixed effects, restricting the sample

to families in which there are at least two children born during the period.31 The control variables

included in these fixed effects estimates are birth order, the unemployment rate, and year of birth

by month of birth dummies. These results are presented in Columns 4 and 8 of Table 2.32 The

sibling fixed effects results are similar to our earlier findings, with IQ score at age 18

significantly affected by exposure in months 3 and 4 but with little evidence of any effects in

other months.



Other Outcomes

              Given the robustness of our IQ score results to our choice of specification, the remaining

tables present the results from the primary specification that includes both year by month of birth

fixed effects and municipality fixed effects.

              Tables 3a and 3b present the results for the other outcomes for both men and women

(estimated separately) with the two different measures of exposure—Table 3a uses in situ

exposure and Table 3b uses air exposure. Importantly, it is clear again that it is months 3 and 4 in

utero when exposure has a significant effect on education and earnings. When we look at the

results for educational attainment and high school completion, we find that radioactive exposure

seems to have a negative and statistically significant effect on education among men. Similarly,
!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
31
   We also restrict the sample to siblings who were born in the same municipality. This restriction affects very few
families and has little impact on the results.
)#
  !We do not report OLS estimates for the fixed effects sample, but they are similar to those for the full sample.


!                                                                                                                      19
there is a significantly negative effect of exposure on the educational attainment of women;

again, this is robust to the measure of exposure used. The magnitudes suggest that a one standard

deviation increase in ground exposure during months 3 and 4 reduces educational attainment by

0.08 years for men and 0.1 years for women, with effects on high school completion of less than

1 percentage point for men and about 1 percentage point for women. We also find statistically

significant negative effects on earnings at age 35 for both men and women.33

              For boys, we can also study height at around age 18. The evidence for adverse effects on

height is much weaker, with little evidence of a consistent pattern. These weaker results for

height are unsurprising as the scientific research speaks to the effects of radiation on cognitive

rather than physical development.

              Given that there is no guidance from the medical literature as to the appropriate functional

form, we also estimate our results using the log of fallout as the variable of interest. These results

are presented in Tables 4a and 4b. The same pattern of results emerges with exposure in months 3

and 4 having a negative effect on IQ score, education, and earnings. However, there is no

evidence that radiation during these months affects male height. Also, there is little evidence for

any effect of radiation during other months on any of the outcomes. The magnitudes are such that

a 10% increase in in situ radiation reduces education by about .01 of a year and decreases

earnings by about one fifth of a percentage point.



Further Robustness Checks

              We also conducted a number of further robustness checks. In one case, we include a

direct measure of rainfall in addition to the other controls in our regressions. If one worries that it

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
33
  Our findings on educational outcomes are consistent with Oftedal’s (1989) results for the effect of radioactive
fallout on scholastic achievement at age 14.


!                                                                                                                   20
is the rainfall itself, and not the associated fallout, that is driving our results, this would address

that concern. (Note that the municipality-specific month of birth effects would likely pick up

these effects already, to the extent that this is a seasonal effect.) Not surprisingly, the results are

largely unaffected by the inclusion of this variable.

              We also tested the sensitivity of our results to the choice of income measure. One might

be concerned about the arbitrary nature of our choice of income at age 35. As a robustness

check, we estimated results with the average income between ages 30 and 35 and average income

between 35 and 40. The results are very similar.

              Finally, we also tried including both measures of fallout (air and ground) in the same

regression. For ease of exposition, in the following results, we limit our measure of exposure to

the average of that in months 3 and 4 of the pregnancy. These results are presented in Table 5.34

Surprisingly given the high correlation between the two measures, we find statistically significant

effects for both measures. This suggests that there may be adverse effects both from inhaling

radiation from the air, and from ingesting ground radiation through food or water.



Tests for Selection

              One possible selection issue arises if fallout exposure leads to miscarriages, stillbirths, or

infant mortality. To the extent that the weakest fetuses are affected, this would tend to lead to an

underestimate of the negative effect of exposure. Although there are no birth registers for the

cohorts we study, we do have some data that allow us to study whether exposure to radiation

affected the probability of survival of children in-utero. Using county-level data (there are 19

counties in Norway) from the Norwegian vital statistics, we find no effects of average radioactive

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
)*
 !For these and all other results going forward, we are using the original specification with municipality dummies
and year of birth by month of birth effects.!


!                                                                                                                    21
fallout in the air or in situ on the live birth/still birth ratio or the gender ratio at birth in that

county in that year. This is consistent with the findings of Almond et al. (2009), who found no

evidence that the Chernobyl radiation had an impact on birth outcomes in Sweden.

        To the extent that radioactive exposure during one pregnancy changes future fertility

decisions, estimates of the effects of radioactive exposure (especially those using sibling fixed

effects) may be biased. To test for this, we used administrative registry data to examine whether

future childbearing decisions were affected by in-utero exposure of existing children. We found

that radioactive exposure of the first or second child has no significant effect on completed family

size or on later fertility. It is not surprising that we find no evidence of fertility effects, as, at the

time, there was no public awareness of the dangers arising from nuclear testing, particularly

testing taking place so far away.



Nonlinearities and Heterogeneous Effects

Quintiles

        While we have already estimated specifications with two different functional forms of the

fallout measure, we next examine whether there might be other non-linearities in the effects. To

do so, we estimate a specification where we split fallout levels into quintiles. Again, for ease of

exposition, we limit our measure of exposure to the average of that in months 3 and 4. These

results are presented in Table 6 using the original specification (with municipality dummies and

year of birth by month of birth effects). We find little evidence for non-linearities, in that the

estimates are monotonically increasing in magnitude with quintile and it is only for quintiles 3-5

of exposure that there are any significant negative impacts of radioactive fallout. This result is the

same for men and women and for both air and ground fallout.




!                                                                                                        22
Varying Intensity of Exposure

       One might expect effects to be larger in months with more sunlight when individuals are

more likely to be outside. As another check, we also estimate specifications where we include an

interaction indicating whether the exposure (during months 3 and 4 in utero) occurred during

spring or summer months (April-September). Table A1 presents these results. We find

statistically significant interaction effects for both ground and air fallout, suggesting that

exposure is more harmful during spring and summer months.

Family Background

       Finally, the negative effect of poor childhood health on human capital accumulation is

often found to be stronger for individuals growing up in a less educated or low-income family

(see, e.g., Currie and Hyson, 1999; Currie and Moretti, 2007; Currie, 2011; Almond and Currie,

2010). When we interact the nuclear fallout measures with an indicator variable equal to one if

the individual’s mother had a high school degree or more, we find that the interaction term is not

statistically significant in most cases and the coefficient on the level effect of exposure is quite

similar to the earlier estimates (see Table A2). Interestingly, the effect of exposure is actually

greater for individuals born to more highly educated parents when we look at years of education

for both men and women. This is contrary to what the existing literature would suggest but given

the general insignificance of the interaction terms we do not put too much weight on this finding.



Magnitudes

       While what we observe is the nuclear radiation in the environment, the most important

issue for health effects is the estimated dose individuals absorb. The basic unit to characterize this

type of radiation dose is the Sievert (Sv), which is designed to measure biological effects of




!                                                                                                      23
ionizing radiation. Unfortunately, this dose is very difficult to measure. Bergan and Steenhuisen

(2012) estimate that the annual doses of radiation that resulted from the nuclear fallout in Norway

in the 1960s were about 23mSv in Bergen, 5mSv in Stavanger and 4mSv in Oslo. To put this into

perspective, the external dose received from natural sources of radiation—from primordial

radionuclides in the earth’s crust and from cosmic radiation—is of the order of 2mSv per year.

The dose from a whole-body computed tomography (CT) examination is about 10mSv, and the

external dose from a mammogram breast X-ray is about 0.4mSv.


        To get a sense of how our results compare to the existing research, such as that by

Almond et al. (2009), it is important to first understand the relative magnitude of the exposure to

radioactive fallout. The maximum total beta deposited per month in Norway is lower than the

maximum CS-134 fallout in Sweden after Chernobyl. To give a better sense of this: The highest

ground deposition of CS-134 Almond et al. (2009) report is 54kBq/m2. The highest level of

monthly total beta fallout reported by the measuring station in Bergen is 32.7kBq/m2 in January

1962, 29.9kBq/m2 in Kristiansand in October 1961, and 16.3kBq/m2 in Trondheim in October

1958. Moreover, the Swedish population was also exposed to other radionuclides in 1986.


        While our estimates are not directly comparable to those of Almond et al. (2009), as their

main specifications use discrete measures of the degree of exposure of particular regions and they

use different measures of radioactive fallout, it is still useful to try to get a sense of relative

magnitudes. When they study the effect of log fallout (both air and ground) on compulsory

school math scores, they estimate coefficients that are similar in magnitude to the standard

deviation of the dependent variable. Our log coefficients for IQ score are about -.04 for ground

and about -.25 for air. These are approximately 2% and 12% of a standard deviation of the




!                                                                                                     24
dependent variable. This suggests that our magnitudes are much smaller than those of Almond et

al. (2009) although they are more precisely estimated.35




VI. Results-Second Generation

              Our rich dataset allows us to link across generations and provides a rare opportunity to

examine the effects of in-utero exposure to a pollutant on the children of those exposed in utero.36

To avoid confusion, we will refer to persons in-utero between 1956 and 1966 as the first

generation and refer to their children as the second generation. As mentioned earlier, we have

data on IQ test scores for men at age 18/19 up through 2010. This allows us to study the effect of

nuclear fallout on IQ for second-generation men (i.e. for sons of the first generation, but not for

their daughters).

              Of our sample of persons born between 1956 and 1966, 23% of men and 30% of women

have at least one male child that has taken the military tests by 2010. A likely explanation for

this disparity is that women have children at a younger age than men do, increasing their

likelihood of having sons who are old enough to be in our sample.37

              One issue that arises in this analysis is whether there is selection into the sample. To

address this, Appendix Table A3 shows that the exposure in pregnancy months 3 and 4 has no

effect on the probability of having a son that has taken the military exams by 2010 and thereby on

the probability of having a child in the second-generation sample. In addition, we find that the

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
)$
  !There are multiple reasons why these differences might arise: the age at which the outcome is measured is
different, there are differences in the chemical composition of the nuclear fallout, and the estimated specifications
differ.!
36
   Almond et al. (2010) estimate what they describe as “echo effects” of the 1959-61 Chinese famine on birth weight
and sex composition of babies born to women who were in-utero during the famine. We are unaware of any study
that has looked at cognitive scores of children born to parents who were exposed to adverse conditions in-utero.
)&
  !In our sample the mean age at first child is 28.8 for men and 25.9 for women.!


!                                                                                                                  25
fertility behavior (i.e. the probability of having children, number of children, and age at first

birth) of the first generation is not affected by the exposure to nuclear fallout.

              We report estimates for the second generation for two specifications. The first includes

the same control variables that we used when studying outcomes for the first generation. These

are pre-determined at the time of the fallout. The second specification includes additional

controls for child-specific factors that are likely to have direct effects on IQ scores (family size,

birth order, year of birth). While we have found no systematic effects of fallout on fertility

behavior of the first generation, there may still be some variation in these control variables that is

correlated with exposure of the first generation to radiation. For comparability of the estimates,

the regressions are weighted such that each first generation parent gets equal weight. We run

separate regressions for the sons of first generation men and women.38

              It is of some interest to contrast the effect of fallout on IQ scores of the first and second

generations. To the extent that radiation exposure mostly affects cognitive function (as is

suggested by the medical literature), the ratio of the two effects will approximate the

intergenerational transmission coefficient for IQ. A lot is known about intergenerational

correlations of IQ scores (see, for example, Black, Devereux and Salvanes (2009) for estimates

for Norway), but little is known about causal intergenerational effects of increasing (or reducing)

cognitive abilities in one generation. Not all first generation men have sons in our sample so we

also include estimates for the IQ scores of the first generation where the sample includes only

those men who have sons in our sample. Note that we studied the effects of radiation exposure

for both men and women of the first generation but, because our IQ score comes from military


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
38
  We would ideally like to include exposure of both parents in the same regression. Unfortunately, because we only
have radiation measurements for municipalities close to measuring stations and for a limited set of cohorts, the
radiation data are only available for both parents for a relatively small sample size and estimates are very imprecise.


!                                                                                                                    26
tests, it is available only for second generation men (i.e. for sons of the first generation but not for

their daughters).


       Our intergenerational results are in Table 7a (for in-situ radiation) and Table 7b (for

radiation in the air). Note again that the results are showing the effect of exposure of parents in

utero on the outcomes of their children. Column (1) has results with the same controls as before

in the regression for the first generation while column (2) adds the additional second generation

controls (year of birth dummies, birth order dummies, and family size). For in-situ radiation, we

find statistically significant negative effects of exposure of first generation men in months 3 and 4

in-utero on IQ test scores of the second generation. For women, the effects are also negative and

statistically significant for month 4 but not month 3. The addition of the extra controls in column

(2) makes very little difference to the estimates. For exposure through air, the magnitudes are

similar but the standard errors are higher so the effects are generally not statistically significant.


       In order to compare the effects on the first and second generations, column (3) provides

first generation estimates for the common sample of men. Given the imprecision of the estimates

for air exposure, we focus on the estimates for in situ radiation in Table 7a. The second

generation estimates are about -0.025; the first generation ones are about -0.04. Taken together,

these suggest an intergenerational transmission coefficient of about 0.625. Importantly, this

suggests that a large proportion of the adverse cognitive effects of radiation exposure is passed on

from fathers to sons.




VI. Conclusion




!                                                                                                    27
              A large literature has shown that shocks in utero can have lasting effects on children. In

this paper, we study one such environmental factor – exposure to radiation—that affects members

of all socioeconomic groups. Using variation in radioactive fallout that was generated by nuclear

weapons testing in the northern hemisphere and local differences in precipitation and wind

patterns in Norway, we find negative long-run effects of exposure to nuclear fallout on cognitive

tests, education, and earnings at age 35. While the existing literature has suggested that there are

effects on cognitive development, we are the first to show that there are other, persistent effects

on children’s outcomes. In addition, our data also allow us to verify the findings in the medical

literature that individuals exposed to radiation during weeks 8 to 16 post conception are the most

vulnerable.

              Another contribution we make is showing that there are intergenerational effects on

cognitive scores for the second generation (the children of persons exposed in utero).

Importantly, the initial shock to IQ of men exposed to fallout in utero is passed along to their

sons, and the transmission is approximately 0.65, suggesting very high persistence. As far as we

are aware, this is the first causal evidence on the intergenerational transmission of IQ.

              Given the lack of knowledge about the fallout in Norway at the time, our estimates are

unaffected by avoidance behavior or by maternal stress. Interestingly, and contrary to the

existing literature, we find no evidence that high income families are able to offset these negative

effects.

              While high doses of radiation are rare and confined to persons in the immediate vicinity of

nuclear explosions or accidents, lower levels of radiation exposure are more commonplace. 39 Our

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
)(
  !In particular, computed tomography (CT) scans are a large source of radioactivity and deliver 100 to 500 times the
radiation associated with an ordinary X-ray. The radiation exposure levels of a chest X-ray, for example, are 0.1
mSv, a CT scan of the pelvic or abdomen, however, exposes an individual to about 15 mSv. As the fetus is exposed
to the radiation dose during a short time interval when the mother receives a CT scan, the treatment should be more


!                                                                                                                  28
findings of adverse effects on the fetus--even at radiation levels that are too low to make the

mother sick--have important potential public policy implications. There is a wide range of

possible exposure to anthropogenic releases of radioactivity today: A very recent example is the

large amount of radioactivity that was discharged after damage to the cooling systems of several

reactors in the Fukushima nuclear power plant in March 2011. Our results suggest that the

fluctuating levels of radiation near the malfunctioning nuclear reactors may have had long-term

effects on children who were in utero in Fukushima and its adjacent prefectures including Tokyo

(see, e.g., Yasunari et al., 2011).




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
harmful than exposure to similar doses from nuclear fallout from nuclear weapon testing or a power plant accident
(Brenner et al., 2003). To put this into perspective, the total dose received people living near the Fukushima Daiichi
Nuclear Power Station in Japan during the first four months after the reactors were damaged by a devastating
tsunami was about 10mSv and the average external exposure in Norway from 1955 to 1975 was about 6mSv. Other
possible sources of radiation are cosmic radiation during flights (the annual exposure of an airline crew flying New
York to Tokyo polar route is about 9mSv) or also background radiation from radon gas (about 2 mSv per year).! !


!                                                                                                                                                                                              29
Bibliography

Almond, D. 2006. "Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long‐Term Effects of In Utero
Influenza Exposure in the Post‐1940 U.S. Population." Journal of Political Economy, 114(4):
672-712.
Almond, D.and J. Currie. 2010. "Human Capital Development Before Age Five." In Handbook of
Labor Economics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Almond, D., L. Edlund and M. Palme. 2009. "Chernobyl's Subclinical Legacy: Prenatal Exposure
to Radioactive Fallout and School Outcomes in Sweden." The Quarterly Journal of Economics
124: 1729-1772.
Almond, D., L. Edlund, H. Li, and J. Zhang. 2010. “Long-Term Effects of the 1959–61 China
Famine: Mainland China and Hong Kong.” In The Economic Consequences of Demographic
Change in East Asia, NBER-EASE Vol. 19, ed. T. Ito and A. Rose: 321–350. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Auvinen, A., M. Vahteristo, H. Arvela, M. Suomela, T. Rahola, M. Hakama, and T. Rytömaa.
2001. "Chernobyl Fallout and Outcome of Pregnancy in Finland." Environmental Health
Perspectives, 109(2): 179-185.
Bergan, T.D. 2002. "Radioactive fallout in Norway from atmospheric nuclear weapons tests."
Journal of Environmental Radioactivity, 60(1-2): 189-208.
Bergan, T.D. 2010. "Oversikt over total beta-målinger i luft og nedbør utført ved Forsvarets
forskningsinstitutt i perioden 1956-1982." memo, Statens strålevern.
Bergan, T.D. and F. Steenhuisen. 2012. "Deposition of radioactive fallout in Norway due to
atmospheric nuclear weapons testing." memo, Norwegian Directorate of Civil Protection and
Emergency Planning.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes. 2007. “From the cradle to the labor market? The
effect of birth weight on adult outcomes.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122: 409–439.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes. 2009. "Like father, like son? A note on the
intergenerational transmission of IQ scores." Economics Letters, 105, 138-140.
Black, S.E., P.J. Devereux, and K.G. Salvanes. 2013. “Does grief transfer across generations? In-
utero deaths and child outcomes." Mimeo.
Brenner, D. J., R. Doll, D. T. Goodhead, E. J. Hall, C. E. Land, J. B. Little, J. H. Lubin, D. L.
Preston, R. J. Preston, J. S. Puskin, E. Ron, R. K. Sachs, J. M. Samet, R. B. Setlow, and M.
Zaider. 2003. “Cancer Risks Attributable to Low Doses of Ionizing Radiation: Assessing What
We Really Know.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100(13):761–766.
Brent, R.L. 1989. "The effect of embryonic and fetal exposure to x-ray, microwaves, and
ultrasound: counseling the pregnant and nonpregnant patient about these risks." Seminars in
Oncology, 16(5):347-68.
Buckles, K. and D.M. Hungerman. 2011. "Season of Birth and Later Outcomes: Old Questions,
New Answers." NBER Working Papers 14573.
Cronbach, L.J. 1964. Essentials of Psychological Testing, 2nd Edition, London, UK: Harper and
Row.



!                                                                                             30
Currie, J. and E. Moretti. 2007. "Biology as Destiny? Short- and Long-Run Determinants of
Intergenerational Transmission of Birth Weight." Journal of Labor Economics 25: 231–263.
Currie J, M. Neidell, and J.F. Schmieder. 2009. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: Lessons from
New Jersey.” Journal of Health Economics, 28(3); 688-703.
Currie, J. and R. Hyson. 1999. "Is the Impact of Shocks Cushioned by Socioeconomic Status?
The Case of Low Birth Weight." American Economic Review, 89: 245–250.
Currie, J. 2011. "Inequality at Birth: Some Causes and Consequences." Ely Lecture. American
Economic Review, 101(3): 1-22.
Dehejia, R. and A. Lleras-Muney. 2004. “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 119: 1091–1130.
Dobbing, J. and J. Sands. 1973. "Quantitative growth and development of human brain." Archives
of Disease in Childhood, 48(10): 757–767.
Ericson, A. and B. Källén. 1994. "Pregnancy Outcome in Sweden after the Chernobyl Accident."
Environmental Research, 67: 149–159.
Fertig, A.R. and T. Watson. 2009. “Minimum Drinking Age Laws and Infant Health Outcomes.”
Journal of Health Economics, 28(3): 737-747.
Hall, E.J. 2009. "Radiation biology for pediatric radiologists." Pediatric Radiology, 39(1): 57–64.
Halla, M. and M. Zweimüller. 2012. “The Social Gradient in the Impact of the Chernobyl
Accident: The Case of Austria.” Working Paper No. 1104, University of Linz.
Hvinden, T. and A. Lillegraven. 1961. "Cæsium-137 and Strontium-90 in precipitation, soil and
animals in Norway." Nature 192(4808): 1144–1146.
Hvinden, T., A. Lillegraven, and O. Lillesæter. 1965. "Precipitation as a cause of seasonal and
latitudinal variations in radioactive fall-out." Nature, 206(4983), 461–463.
ICRP. 1986. "Developmental effects of irradiation on the brain of the embryo and fetus." A
Report of a Task Group of Committee 1 of the International Commission on Radiological
Protection. Publication 49, Pergamon Press, Oxford.
ICRP. 1991. "Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection."
International Commission on Radiological Protection, 21(1–3):1–201.
Kelly, E. 2011. " The Scourge of Asian Flu: in utero Exposure to Pandemic Influenza and the
Development of a Cohort of British Children." Journal of Human Resources, 46(4), 669-694.
Kuzawa, C. W.and E. Sweet. 2009. "Epigenetics and the Embodiment of Race: Developmental
Origins of US Racial Disparities in Cardiovascular Health." American journal of Human Biology,
21: 2–15.
Laziuk, G. I., I. O. Zatsepin, P. Verger, V. Gagniere, E. Robert, Z. P. Kravchuk, and R. D. Khme.
2002. "Down Syndrome and Ionizing Radiation: Causal Effect or Coincidence." Radiatsionnaia
Biologiia, Radioecologiia, 42: 678–683.
Lillegraven, A. and T. Hvinden. 1982. Measurements of cesium-137 in Norwegian soil samples
1960–1979 (in Norwegian with English summary). Norwegian Defence Research Establishment,
FFI/Report-82.
Lüning, G., J. Scheer, M. Schmidt, and H. Ziggel. 1989. "Early Infant Mortality in West
Germany before and after Chernobyl." Lancet, 8671: 1081–1083.
Mattsson, S. and R. Vesanen. 1988. “Patterns of Chernobyl Rainfall in Relation to Local Weather
Conditions.” Environment International, 14: 177–180.


!                                                                                               31
Miller, R.W. and J.W. Mulvihill. 1956. "Small head size after atomic irradiation." Teratology,
14:355–358.
Møen, J., K.G. Salvanes, and E.Ø. Sørensen. 2004. “Documentation of the Linked Empoyer-
Employee Data Base at the Norwegian School of Economics.” Mimeo, The Norwegian School of
Economics and Business Administration.
Nyagu, A. I., K. N. Loganovsky, T. K. Loganovskaja, V. S. Repin, and S. Y. Nechaev. 2004.
"Intelligence and Brain Damage in Children Acutely Irradiated in Utero As a Result of the
Chernobyl Accident."
Oftedal, P. 1989. "Scholastic achievement in relation to fetal exposure to radioactive fallout in
Norway." In Low Dose Radiation, by K. F. Baverstock and J.W. Stather: 323-353. London:
Taylor & Francis.
Otake, M. and W.J. Schull. 1984. "In Utero Exposure to A-Bomb Radiation and Mental
Retardation. A Reassessment." British Journal of Radiology 57(677):409-414.
Otake, M. and W.J. Schull. 1998. "Review: Radiation-related Brain Damage and Growth
Retardation Among the Prenatally Exposed Atomic Bomb Survivors." International Journal of
Radiation Biology, 74(2): 159-171.
Otake, M., H. Yoshimaru, and W.J. Schull. 1989. "Prenatal exposure to atomic radiation and
brain damage." Congenital Abnormalities, 29:309-20.
Scherb, H., E. Weigelt, and I. Brüske-Hohlfeld. 1999. "European Still-Birth Proportions before
and after the Chernobyl Accident." International Journal of Epidemiology, 28: 932–940.
Scholte, Robert S., Gerard J. van den Berg, and Maarten Lindeboom, 2012. "The Long-Run
Effects of Gestation During the Dutch Hunger Winter Famine on Labor Market and
Hospitalization Outcomes." IZA Working Paper #6307, January.
Sperling, K., J. Pelz, R.-D. Wegner, A. Dorries, A. Gruters, and M. Mikkelsen. 1994. "Significant
Increase in Trisomy 21 in Berlin Nine Months after the Chernobyl Reactor Accident: Temporal
Correlation or Causal Relation?" British Medical Journal,309: 158–162.
Storebø, P. B. 1958. "On nuclear bomb debris deposition in Norway." In Norwegian Defence
Research Establishment, Internal Report F-0372. Oslo, Norway.
Sundet, J.M., D.G. Barlaug, and T.M. Torjussen. 2004. "The End of the Flynn Effect? A Study of
Secular Trends in Mean Intelligence Test Scores of Norwegian Conscripts During Half a
Century." Intelligence , XXXII: 349-362.
Sundet, J.M., K. Tambs, J.R. Harris, P. Magnus, and T.M. Torjussen. 2005. “Resolving the
Genetic and Environmental Sources of the Correlation Between Height and Intelligence: A Study
of Nearly 2600 Norwegian Male Twin Pairs,” Twin Research and Human Genetics, VII: 1-5.
Thrane, V.C. 1977. “Evneprøving av Utskrivingspliktige i Norge 1950-53,” Arbeidsrapport nr.
26, INAS.
UNSCEAR. 1982. "Ionizing Radiation: Sources and Biological Effects." In United Nations
Scientific Committee on the effects of Atomic Radiation. UN, New York.
UNSCEAR. 1993. "The 1993 Report." In United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of
Atomic Radiation. UN, New York.
Yasunari, T. J., A. Stohl, R.S. Hayano, J.F. Burkhart, S. Eckhardt, T. Yasunari. 2011. "Cesium-
137 deposition and contamination of Japanese soils due to the Fukushima nuclear accident."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (49): 19530-19534.



!                                                                                             32
Figure 1: Total Beta Fallout in situ per Community in 1958, 1960, 1962, and 1964




Source: Bergan (2002)




!                                                                                  33
!
                                               +!
                                                        $+++!
                                                                  "++++!
                                                                              "$+++!
                                                                                               #++++!
                                                                                                           #$+++!
                                                                                                                      )++++!
                                                                                                                               )$+++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            #+++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      *+++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                %+++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '+++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "++++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          "#+++!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "*+++!
                                        "($%,+'!                                                                                                                                                                                                "($&,+(!                                                                      "%+++!
                                        "($&,+%!                                                                                                                                                                                                "($',+%!
                                        "($',+*!                                                                                                                                                                                                "($(,+)!
                                        "($(,+#!                                                                                                                                                                                                "($(,"#!
                                        "($(,"#!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%+,+(!




     Source: Bergan (2002)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: Bergan (2002)
                                        "(%+,"+!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%",+%!
                                        "(%",+'!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%#,+)!
                                        "(%#,+%!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%#,"#!
                                        "(%),+*!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%),+(!
                                        "(%*,+#!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%*,+%!
                                        "(%*,"#!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%$,+)!
                                        "(%$,"+!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%$,"#!




                             -.!/-01!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.!/-01!
                                        "(%%,+'!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%%,+(!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%&,+%!
                                        "(%&,+%!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%',+)!
                                        "(%',+*!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%',"#!
                                        "(%(,+#!




                             2-3!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2-3!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(%(,+(!
                                        "(%(,"#!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&+,+%!
                                        "(&+,"+!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&",+)!
                                        "(&",+'!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&","#!
                                        "(&#,+%!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&#,+(!
                                        "(&),+*!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&),+%!
                                        "(&*,+#!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 2a: Monthly Total Beta Fallout in Oslo (in situ and air).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&*,+)!
                                        "(&*,"#!
                                                                                                                                        Figure 2b: Monthly Total Beta Fallout in Bergen (in situ and air).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&*,"#!
                                        "(&$,"+!                                                                                                                                                                                                "(&$,+(!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       +!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +,"!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +,#!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +,)!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +,*!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   +,$!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +,%!




                                               +,++!
                                                       +,+$!
                                                                +,"+!
                                                                           +,"$!
                                                                                       +,#+!
                                                                                                   +,#$!
                                                                                                              +,)+!
                                                                                                                       +,)$!
                                                                                                                               +,*+!




34
Figure 3a: Monthly Total Beta in situ fallout in 5 Norwegian cities from 1956 to 1975.

 )$+++,++!

 )++++,++!

 #$+++,++!
                                                                  4536/!
 #++++,++!
                                                                  70282.9:3!
 "$+++,++!                                                        ;2</5!

                                                                  =/>6!
 "++++,++!
                                                                  ?:39:.!
  $+++,++!

     +,++!
             "($%,+(!
             "($&,+(!
             "($',+(!
             "($(,+(!
             "(%+,+(!
             "(%",+(!
             "(%#,+(!
             "(%),+(!
             "(%*,+(!
             "(%$,+(!
             "(%%,+(!
             "(%&,+(!
             "(%',+(!
             "(%(,+(!
             "(&+,+(!
             "(&",+(!
             "(&#,+(!
             "(&),+(!
             "(&*,+(!
             "(&$,+(!
Source: Bergan (2002)



Figure 3b: Monthly Total Beta fallout in air in 5 Norwegian cities from 1956 to 1975.

 (++,++!
 '++,++!
 &++,++!
 %++,++!                                                          4536/!
 $++,++!                                                          70282.9:3!
 *++,++!
                                                                  ;2</5!
 )++,++!
 #++,++!                                                          =/>6!

 "++,++!                                                          ?:39:.!
   +,++!
           "($%,+(!
           "($&,+(!
           "($',+(!
           "($(,+(!
           "(%+,+(!
           "(%",+(!
           "(%#,+(!
           "(%),+(!
           "(%*,+(!
           "(%$,+(!
           "(%%,+(!
           "(%&,+(!
           "(%',+(!
           "(%(,+(!
           "(&+,+(!
           "(&",+(!
           "(&#,+(!
           "(&),+(!
           "(&*,+(!
           "(&$,+(!




Source: Bergan (2002)




                                             35
                                             Table 1a: Summary statistics
                                        Men               Men                Women                          Women
                                   (20km Sample)          (All)           (20km Sample)                       (All)
                                   Mean   Standard   Mean    Standard     Mean   Standard                Mean    Standard
                                          deviation         deviation            deviation                      deviation
Control variables
Father high school degree          0.425       0.494      0.301      0.458       0.417       0.493       0.296    0.457
Mother high school degree          0.326       0.469      0.229      0.420       0.319       0.466       0.225    0.417
Unemployment rate at birth         0.010       0.009      0.013      0.009       0.010       0.009       0.013    0.009
Birth year                         1961        3.121      1961       3.152       1961        3.169       1961     3.188

Radioactive fallout
(months 3 and 4)
Mean monthly. Total Beta air       0.042       0.059                             0.042       0.059
(Bq/m3)
Total month. Total Beta ground     2.532       3.789                             2.537       3.810
(kBq/m2)

Outcome variables
IQ at age 18 (scale: 1-9)          5.264     1.995      5.011     1.999
Height at age 18 in cm             179.7     6.376      179.4     6.387
Years of education                 12.34     2.609      12.11     2.482           12.36      2.663        12.15   2.591
High school completed              0.731     0.443      0.714     0.452           0.682      0.466        0.653   0.476
Earnings at age 35 in NOK         150146 108704        140258 102672             83191       59831       78658    55350
Observations                            100354               297947              102373                  305347


                                  Table 1b: Summary Statistics, Second Generation Sons
                                                               Fathers            Women
                                                           (20km Sample)      (20km Sample)
                                                          Mean Standard      Mean      Standard
                                                                   deviation           deviation
                         Control variables
                         Grandfather high school degree   0.420      0.494   0.406       0.491
                         Grandmother high school degree   0.321      0.467   0.305       0.461
                         Unemployment rate at birth of    0.010      0.009   0.010       0.009
                         father
                         Birth year of father             1961       2.871    1961       2.879
                         Birth year                       1985       3.191    1984       3.710
                         Number of siblings               1.684      0.996   1.663       0.976

                         Father or mothers exposure to
                         radioactive fallout (months 3
                         and 4)
                         Mean monthly. Total Beta air        0.043       0.059      0.042        0.055
                         (Bq/m3)
                         Total month. Total Beta ground      2.937       3.743      2.882        3.353
                         (kBq/m2)

                         Father’s IQ
                         IQ at age 18 (scale: 1-9)           5.760       1.809

                         Outcome variable
                         IQ at age 18 (scale: 1-9)           5.014       1.682      5.054        1.690
                         Observations                                24281                  36947



                                                              36
                                       Table 2: Effect of Fallout by Month on Men’s IQ - Total Beta Fallout in situ and in the air
                                                           in situ                                                              air
                                   (1)              (2)                 (3)         (4)               (5)               (6)                                   (7)                 (8)
3 month prior to                 0.0029            0.003             0.0011       0.0023           -0.0149           -0.0131                               -0.0135             -0.0143
      pregnancy                 (0.0055)         (0.0150)           (0.0050)     (0.0061)         (0.0191)          (0.0194)                              (0.0112)            (0.0079)
2 month prior to                -0.0116          -0.0108             -0.0099      0.0013           -0.0269           -0.0348                               -0.0143             -0.0251
      pregnancy                 (0.0083)         (0.0057)           (0.0090)     (0.0060)         (0.0138)          (0.0240)                              (0.0161)            (0.0196)
1 month prior to                -0.0153          -0.0138             -0.0142      -0.0158          -0.0628           -0.0603                               -0.0515             -0.0552
      pregnancy                 (0.0155)         (0.0084)           (0.0161)     (0.0083)         (0.0519)          (0.0619)                              (0.0310)            (0.0460)
Pregnancy month 1               -0.0177          -0.0158             -0.0207      -0.0122          -0.0381           -0.0404                               -0.0546             -0.0501
                                (0.0101)         (0.0094)           (0.0122)     (0.0100)         (0.0278)          (0.0380)                              (0.0419)            (0.0304)
Pregnancy month 2               -0.0201          -0.0175             -0.0162      -0.0297          -0.0778           -0.0629                               -0.0735             -0.0612
                                (0.0107)         (0.0099)           (0.0095)     (0.0178)         (0.0462)          (0.0333)                              (0.0437)            (0.0347)
Pregnancy month 3              -0.0393**        -0.0375**          -0.0539**    -0.0439**        -0.1274**         -0.1422**                             -0.1421**           -0.1092**
                                (0.0088)         (0.0080)           (0.0145)     (0.0100)         (0.0521)          (0.0687)                              (0.0610)            (0.0499)
Pregnancy month 4              -0.0431**        -0.0409**          -0.0584**    -0.0346**         -0.0932*         -0.1122**                             -0.1247**            -0.1021*
                                (0.0111)         (0.0102)           (0.0155)     (0.0107)         (0.0467)          (0.0581)                              (0.0499)            (0.0511)
Pregnancy month 5                0.0054           0.0081            -0.0141*     -0.0102*           -0.046           -0.0517                              -0.0208*              -0.051
                                (0.0053)         (0.0045)           (0.0071)     (0.0052)         (0.0271)          (0.0384)                              (0.0293)            (0.0306)
Pregnancy month 6                0.0101           0.0124             0.0112       0.0143           -0.0832           -0.0762                               -0.0633             -0.0548
                                (0.0063)         (0.0058)           (0.0075)     (0.0078)         (0.0637)          (0.0395)                              (0.0983)            (0.0323)
Pregnancy month 7                0.0134           0.0066             0.0145       0.0005           -0.0496            -0.053                                0.0626              0.0701
                                (0.0153)         (0.0051)           (0.0056)     (0.0087)         (0.0668)          (0.0364)                              (0.0481)            (0.0406)
Pregnancy month 8               -0.0142          -0.0104             -0.0141      -0.0024          -0.0432           -0.0508                               -0.0419              -0.046
                                (0.0089)         (0.0079)           (0.0111)     (0.0091)         (0.0311)          (0.0321)                              (0.0403)            (0.0514)
Pregnancy month 9               -0.0073          -0.0029              -0.003      -0.0019           -0.019           -0.0165                               -0.0257             -0.0289
                                (0.0072)         (0.0270)           (0.0079)     (0.0024)         (0.0125)          (0.0193)                              (0.0192)            (0.0230)
Month of birth                   0.0051           0.0118             0.0084       0.0034           -0.0567           0.0609                                 0.0524              0.0317
                                (0.0041)         (0.0073)           (0.0053)     (0.0031)         (0.0301)          (0.0406)                              (0.0313)            (0.0223)
After pregnancy 1                0.0066          -0.0007             -0.0035      -0.0146           0.0369           0.0352                                 0.0274              0.0233
                                (0.0059)         (0.0066)           (0.0067)     (0.0088)         (0.0288)          (0.0267)                              (0.0158)            (0.0203)
After pregnancy 2               -0.0122          -0.0061             -0.0087      -0.0003          -0.0351           0.0301                                -0.0422              0.0311
                                (0.0072)         (0.0066)           (0.0068)     (0.0060)         (0.0382)          (0.0174)                              (0.0305)            (0.0219)
After pregnancy 3               -0.0089           -0.003              -0.005      -0.0065          -0.0209            -0.027                               -0.0202             -0.0223
                                (0.0061)         (0.0061)           (0.0079)     (0.0086)         (0.0780)          (0.0185)                              (0.0177)            (0.0193)
Observations                     89892            89892               89892        54164            94649             94649                                 94649               83509
   The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in air refers to air deposition measured
   in kBq/m3. Total beta in situ refers to ground deposition measured in kBq/m2. The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each column represents
   a separate regression that includes controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental
   education, birth order, and the municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at
   5% level.


                                                                                             37
                                                                 Table 3a: Total Beta Fallout (in situ) by Month
                                                                         Men                                                                           Women
                                   IQ               Height            Years of       High school       Log earnings               Years of          High school        Log earnings
                                                                     education        completed               35                 education          completed                35
3 month prior to                  0.0029             0.0263              0.008          -0.0009            0.0005                    0.005             -0.0021             0.0059
pregnancy                       (0.0055)           (0.0248)           (0.0111)         (0.0016)          (0.0025)                 (0.0092)            (0.0017)           (0.0045)
   2 month prior to              -0.0116            -0.0031             0.0162           0.0015           -0.0032                  -0.0288             -0.0034            -0.0067
pregnancy                       (0.0083)           (0.0250)           (0.0103)         (0.0021)          (0.0028)                 (0.0117)            (0.0017)           (0.0049)
   1 month prior to              -0.0153            -0.0102             0.0283           0.0032            0.0016                   0.0136             0.0009              0.0019
pregnancy                       (0.0155)           (0.0296)           (0.0197)         (0.0017)          (0.0026)                 (0.0158)            (0.0019)           (0.0048)
Pregnancy month 1                -0.0177             0.0639            -0.0063           0.0013           -0.0003                  -0.0045             0.0045              0.0025
                                (0.0101)           (0.0345)           (0.0124)         (0.0010)          (0.0050)                 (0.0109)            (0.0026)           (0.0040)
Pregnancy month 2                -0.0201            -0.0563            -0.0171          -0.0028           -0.0004                   0.0515           -0.0063**             0.0045
                                (0.0107)           (0.0301)           (0.0147)         (0.0022)          (0.0066)                 (0.0296)            (0.0020)           (0.0046)
Pregnancy month 3              -0.0393**            -0.0678          -0.0748**          -0.0024          -0.0068*                -0.0999**            -0.0093*            -0.0057
                                (0.0088)           (0.0358)           (0.1970)         (0.0020)          (0.0034)                 (0.0326)            (0.0046)           (0.0038)
Pregnancy month 4              -0.0431**          -0.0934**          -0.0824**        -0.0076**           -0.0059                -0.1069**           -0.0106**          -0.0113*
                                (0.0111)           (0.0196)           (0.0222)         (0.0027)          (0.0043)                 (0.0325)            (0.0031)           (0.0057)
Pregnancy month 5                 0.0054             0.0177          -0.0621**           0.0022           -0.0051                   0.0215             -0.0028             0.0058
                                (0.0053)           (0.0264)           (0.0169)         (0.0021)          (0.0051)                 (0.0191)            (0.0016)           (0.0058)
Pregnancy month 6                 0.0101             0.0917            -0.0008          -0.0015             0.002                   0.0002             0.0041              0.0015
                                (0.0063)           (0.0511)           (0.0078)         (0.0021)          (0.0077)                 (0.0119)            (0.0021)           (0.0043)
Pregnancy month 7                 0.0134            -0.0196              0.027           0.0048            0.0007                  -0.0001             -0.0044            -0.0101
                                (0.0153)           (0.0310)           (0.0165)         (0.0026)          (0.0051)                 (0.0117)            (0.0037)           (0.0054)
Pregnancy month 8                -0.0142           -0.0525*            -0.0033          -0.0035            -0.007                  -0.0296             0.0056              0.0163
                                (0.0089)           (0.0240)           (0.0136)         (0.0025)          (0.0044)                 (0.0193)            (0.0036)           (0.0150)
Pregnancy month 9                -0.0073            -0.0177             -0.003          -0.0034            0.0013                   0.0175             0.0017             -0.0044
                                (0.0072)           (0.0375)           (0.0148)         (0.0031)          (0.0033)                 (0.0099)            (0.0024)           (0.0042)
Month of birth                    0.0051            -0.0212             0.0033           0.0059            -0.006                  -0.0046             -0.0027            -0.0114
                                (0.0041)           (0.0329)           (0.0129)         (0.0035)          (0.0034)                 (0.0140)            (0.0021)           (0.0066)
After pregnancy 1                 0.0066             0.0512             0.0064          -0.0024            0.0063                  -0.0194             -0.0006            -0.0165
                                (0.0059)           (0.0302)           (0.0126)         (0.0020)          (0.0049)                 (0.0121)            (0.0024)           (0.0154)
After pregnancy 2                -0.0122             0.0211            -0.0117          -0.0003            0.0064                   -0.023             -0.0033            -0.0017
                                (0.0072)           (0.0234)           (0.0095)         (0.0017)          (0.0036)                 (0.0127)            (0.0020)           (0.0053)
After pregnancy 3                -0.0089             0.0332            -0.0136         -0.0051*            0.0013                  -0.0011             -0.0024             -0.012
                                (0.0061)           (0.0234)           (0.0106)         (0.0025)          (0.0029)                 (0.0148)            (0.0016)           (0.0072)
Observations                      89892              89892              94827            95280             88024                    95781               96288              83509
   The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in situ refers to ground deposition
   measured in kBq/m2. The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each column represents a separate regression that includes controls for
   municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the municipality
   unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.



                                                                                           38
                                                                  Table 3b: Total Beta Fallout (Air) by Month
                                                                         Men                                                                           Women
                                   IQ               Height            Years of      High school      Log earnings                  Years of         High school        Log earnings
                                                                     education       completed              35                    education         completed                 35
3 month prior to                 -0.0149             0.0306            -0.0391         -0.0036          -0.0046                     -0.0065            0.0003              0.0028
      pregnancy                 (0.0191)           (0.0567)           (0.0222)        (0.0024)         (0.0027)                    (0.0110)           (0.0018)           (0.0033)
2 month prior to                 -0.0269            -0.0545             -0.015          0.0005           0.0025                      0.0028            -0.0009             -0.007
      pregnancy                 (0.0138)           (0.0374)           (0.0214)        (0.0029)         (0.0032)                    (0.0121)           (0.0022)           (0.0061)
1 month prior to                 -0.0628             0.0039            -0.0344         -0.0078           0.0041                      0.0001            -0.0002             0.0025
      pregnancy                 (0.0519)           (0.0432)           (0.0247)        (0.0022)         (0.0052)                    (0.0124)           (0.0021)           (0.0064)
Pregnancy month 1                -0.0381             0.0057            -0.0203          -0.004           -0.004                     -0.0089            -0.0021              0.004
                                (0.0278)           (0.0455)           (0.0116)        (0.0027)         (0.0039)                    (0.0149)           (0.0030)           (0.0075)
Pregnancy month 2                -0.0778           -0.0771*            -0.0329          -0.001           0.0059                     -0.0291           -0.0055*            -0.0061
                                (0.0462)           (0.0373)           (0.0151)        (0.0027)         (0.0056)                    (0.0167)           (0.0021)           (0.0057)
Pregnancy month 3              -0.1274**            -0.0111          -0.1904**       -0.0168**          -0.0059                   -0.1181**          -0.0114**            -0.0078
                                (0.0521)           (0.0342)           (0.0353)        (0.0023)         (0.0039)                    (0.0315)           (0.0038)           (0.0045)
Pregnancy month 4               -0.0932*            -0.0285          -0.1719**       -0.0136**         -0.0084*                   -0.1352**          -0.0097**          -0.0097*
                                (0.0467)           (0.0386)           (0.0346)        (0.0033)         (0.0042)                    (0.0325)           (0.0030)           (0.0049)
Pregnancy month 5                 -0.046            -0.0043            -0.0108          0.0003           0.0039                     -0.0145            -0.0008            -0.0035
                                (0.0271)           (0.0042)           (0.0208)        (0.0034)         (0.0032)                    (0.0184)           (0.0026)           (0.0060)
Pregnancy month 6                -0.0832             0.0785             -0.041         -0.0068           0.0014                     -0.0227            -0.0031            -0.0059
                                (0.0637)           (0.0452)           (0.0241)        (0.0038)         (0.0042)                    (0.0127)           (0.0020)           (0.0048)
Pregnancy month 7                -0.0496            -0.0424            -0.0151          0.0018           0.0011                    -0.0295*            -0.0031             -0.001
                                (0.0668)           (0.0287)           (0.0133)        (0.0022)         (0.0055)                    (0.0113)           (0.0032)           (0.0066)
Pregnancy month 8                -0.0432             -0.059             0.0035         -0.0031           0.0067                      0.0096            -0.0024            -0.0009
                                (0.0311)           (0.0364)           (0.0162)        (0.0022)         (0.0062)                    (0.0140)           (0.0028)           (0.0057)
Pregnancy month 9                 -0.019             0.0053            -0.0193         -0.0047           0.0031                      -0.006             -0.004            -0.0015
                                (0.0125)           (0.0364)           (0.0135)        (0.0026)         (0.0041)                    (0.0181)           (0.0028)           (0.0056)
Month of birth                   -0.0567            -0.0023             0.0054         -0.0017           0.0096                     -0.0026            -0.0008            -0.0071
                                (0.0301)           (0.0431)           (0.0141)        (0.0025)         (0.0058)                    (0.0148)           (0.0023)           (0.0052)
After pregnancy 1                 0.0369            -0.0121             0.0017          0.0005            0.002                     -0.0183            -0.0015            -0.0107
                                (0.0288)           (0.0588)           (0.0139)        (0.0017)         (0.0039)                    (0.0132)           (0.0021)           (0.0067)
After pregnancy 2                -0.0351            -0.0183            -0.0328         -0.0014          -0.0001                     -0.0258            -0.0048             0.0104
                                (0.0382)           (0.0389)           (0.0192)        (0.0033)         (0.0062)                    (0.0139)           (0.0025)           (0.0057)
After pregnancy 3                -0.0209            -0.0601            -0.0166         -0.0007           0.0061                      -0.019            -0.0063            -0.0051
                                (0.0780)           (0.0375)           (0.0132)        (0.0021)         (0.0043)                    (0.0123)           (0.0041)           (0.0056)
Observations                      94649              94649              93275           93723            86544                       94018              94511              81984
   The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in air refers to air deposition measured
   in kBq/m3. The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each column represents a separate regression that includes controls for municipality
   dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the municipality unemployment rate.
   Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.



                                                                                           39
                                                            Table 4a: Log Total Beta Fallout (in situ) by Month
                                                                       Men                                                                             Women
                                   IQ                Height         Years of     High school       Log earnings                    Years of          High school        Log earnings
                                                                   education      completed               35                      education          completed                35
3 month prior to                  0.0082            -0.0142          -0.0118         0.0000             0.0008                       0.0164             0.0049             -0.0008
      pregnancy                 (0.0099)           (0.0408)         (0.0137)       (0.0026)           (0.0040)                     (0.0107)            (0.0032)           (0.0034)
2 month prior to                 -0.0199           -0.0608*           0.0378         0.0079             0.0018                      -0.0169            -0.0023             -0.0035
      pregnancy                 (0.0113)           (0.0269)         (0.0202)       (0.0062)           (0.0046)                     (0.0120)            (0.0020)           (0.0040)
1 month prior to                 -0.0214             0.0012          -0.0247         0.0024            -0.0004                      -0.0059            -0.0114            -0.0192*
      pregnancy                 (0.0188)           (0.0444)         (0.0221)       (0.0045)           (0.0030)                     (0.0151)            (0.0121)           (0.0090)
Pregnancy month 1                -0.0007            -0.0075           0.0105        -0.0126             0.0055                       0.0171             0.0148             -0.0042
                                (0.0111)           (0.0398)         (0.0139)       (0.0076)           (0.0052)                     (0.0137)            (0.0087)           (0.0057)
Pregnancy month 2                 0.0131            -0.0130           0.0495         0.0130            -0.0011                       0.0322             0.0009              0.0007
                                (0.0116)           (0.0318)         (0.0378)       (0.0127)           (0.0037)                     (0.0217)            (0.0031)           (0.0074)
Pregnancy month 3              -0.0325**            -0.0124        -0.1408**      -0.0232**          -0.0178**                    -0.1499**           -0.0249**            -0.0075
                                (0.0185)           (0.0350)         (0.0541)       (0.0075)           (0.0054)                     (0.0290)            (0.0088)           (0.0041)
Pregnancy month 4              -0.0421**            -0.0221        -0.1402**      -0.0283**            -0.0139                    -0.1518**           -0.0290**          -0.0179**
                                (0.0198)           (0.0367)         (0.0526)       (0.0056)           (0.0075)                     (0.0222)            (0.0075)           (0.0051)
Pregnancy month 5                 0.0205             0.0148         -0.0562*         0.0119           -0.0163*                       0.0285             0.0147              0.0097
                                (0.0179)           (0.0277)         (0.0287)       (0.0072)           (0.0081)                     (0.0176)            (0.0125)           (0.0057)
Pregnancy month 6                 0.0141             0.0221           0.0084         0.0001             0.0066                      -0.0111            -0.0037             -0.0061
                                (0.0159)           (0.0363)         (0.0239)       (0.0031)           (0.0046)                     (0.0140)            (0.0027)           (0.0070)
Pregnancy month 7                -0.0191            -0.0659          -0.0143         0.0135            -0.0030                      -0.0155            -0.0127              0.0019
                                (0.0108)           (0.0350)         (0.0326)       (0.0118)           (0.0061)                     (0.0218)            (0.0081)           (0.0071)
Pregnancy month 8                -0.0065             0.0252          -0.0074         0.0001            -0.0011                      -0.0102             0.0020             -0.0003
                                (0.0097)           (0.0329)         (0.0101)       (0.0022)           (0.0031)                     (0.0154)            (0.0019)           (0.0078)
Pregnancy month 9                -0.0088             0.0497          -0.0250        -0.0056             0.0008                      -0.0132             0.0027             -0.0022
                                (0.0090)           (0.0382)         (0.0359)       (0.0076)           (0.0048)                     (0.0118)            (0.0028)           (0.0053)
Month of birth                    0.0000            -0.0302          -0.0029         0.0014            -0.0023                      -0.0075            -0.0046             -0.0111
                                (0.0062)           (0.0351)         (0.0178)       (0.0051)           (0.0040)                     (0.0119)            (0.0030)           (0.0089)
After pregnancy 1                -0.0165             0.0062          -0.0161        -0.0016             0.0008                      -0.0208            -0.0048             -0.0015
                                (0.0104)           (0.0270)         (0.0232)       (0.0023)           (0.0024)                     (0.0128)            (0.0032)           (0.0073)
After pregnancy 2                -0.0106            -0.0434          -0.0037         0.0011             0.0076                     -0.0307*            -0.0005             -0.0027
                                (0.0109)           (0.0332)         (0.0113)       (0.0021)           (0.0040)                     (0.0115)            (0.0021)           (0.0050)
After pregnancy 3                -0.0197             0.0078         -0.418**        -0.0042             0.0005                       0.0181             0.0005             -0.0001
                                (0.0113)           (0.0404)         (0.0141)       (0.0035)           (0.0040)                     (0.0168)            (0.0022)           (0.0046)
Observations                      82706              86767            94827          87670              80856                        87015              87457               76011
   The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Each column represents a separate regression that
   includes controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the
   municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.




                                                                                           40
                                                                Table 4b: Log Total Beta Fallout (Air) by Month
                                                                         Men                                                                            Women
                                   IQ                Height           Years of      High school      Log earnings                  Years of          High school        Log earnings
                                                                     education       completed             35                     education          completed                35
3 month prior to                  0.0059             0.0897            -0.0446         -0.0049          -0.0079                     -0.0464             -0.0033             0.0052
      pregnancy                 (0.0336)           (0.0699)           (0.0339)        (0.0033)         (0.0051)                    (0.0276)            (0.0036)           (0.0113)
2 month prior to                 -0.0145           -0.1483*            -0.0210          0.0035          -0.0013                      0.0144             0.0027             -0.0008
      pregnancy                 (0.0350)           (0.0646)           (0.0317)        (0.0035)         (0.0049)                    (0.0173)            (0.0039)           (0.0091)
1 month prior to                 -0.0475            -0.0654            -0.0092         -0.0116           0.0045                     -0.0319             0.0022             -0.0063
      pregnancy                 (0.0238)           (0.0667)           (0.0279)        (0.0066)         (0.0058)                    (0.0185)            (0.0034)           (0.0093)
Pregnancy month 1                -0.0328             0.0307            -0.0286         -0.0057           0.0051                      0.0122             -0.0025             0.0023
                                (0.0210)           (0.0709)           (0.0325)        (0.0038)         (0.0065)                    (0.0285)            (0.0041)           (0.0086)
Pregnancy month 2                 0.0702            -0.0573             0.0214          0.0120           0.0109                      0.0452             0.0035             -0.0063
                                (0.0436)           (0.0797)           (0.0488)        (0.0070)         (0.0057)                    (0.0280)            (0.0047)           (0.0121)
Pregnancy month 3              -0.2302**            -0.0390          -0.2693**       -0.0566**        -0.0220**                   -0.3885**           -0.0540**          -0.0250*
                                (0.0343)           (0.0697)           (0.0733)        (0.0148)         (0.0046)                    (0.0590)            (0.0065)           (0.0122)
Pregnancy month 4              -0.2963**            -0.0951          -0.3348**       -0.0425**          -0.0111                   -0.4301**           -0.0553**            -0.0114
                                (0.0488)           (0.0616)           (0.0616)        (0.0139)         (0.0060)                    (0.0454)            (0.0071)           (0.0098)
Pregnancy month 5                 0.0740             0.0292            -0.0985          0.0094          -0.0022                    -0.0909*            -0.0135*             0.0090
                                (0.0429)           (0.0496)           (0.0594)        (0.0054)         (0.0049)                    (0.0446)            (0.0066)           (0.0067)
Pregnancy month 6                -0.0280             0.0912            -0.0168         -0.0052           0.0094                     -0.0278             -0.0044            -0.0033
                                (0.0210)           (0.0545)           (0.0201)        (0.0039)         (0.0050)                    (0.0244)            (0.0042)           (0.0056)
Pregnancy month 7                -0.0013           -0.1095*            -0.0323         -0.0037           0.0128                     -0.0429             -0.0009            -0.0071
                                (0.0174)           (0.0483)           (0.0410)        (0.0031)         (0.0083)                    (0.0265)            (0.0066)           (0.0090)
Pregnancy month 8                -0.0342             0.0326            -0.0353         -0.0100           0.0034                      0.0058             0.0044              0.0035
                                (0.0191)           (0.0544)           (0.0250)        (0.0052)         (0.0056)                    (0.0248)            (0.0040)           (0.0135)
Pregnancy month 9                -0.0290            -0.0545            -0.0226         -0.0034          -0.0042                     -0.0468            -0.0140*            -0.0101
                                (0.0182)           (0.0363)           (0.0210)        (0.0026)         (0.0045)                    (0.0248)            (0.0055)           (0.0109)
Month of birth                    0.0411             0.0075           -0.0465*        -0.0075*           0.0065                     -0.0137             -0.0043            -0.0002
                                (0.0240)           (0.0661)           (0.0215)        (0.0033)         (0.0080)                    (0.0155)            (0.0040)           (0.0092)
After pregnancy 1                -0.0102            -0.0886            -0.0120         -0.0031           0.0041                     -0.0248             -0.0020             0.0083
                                (0.0283)           (0.0455)           (0.0234)        (0.0033)         (0.0050)                    (0.0399)            (0.0056)           (0.0081)
After pregnancy 2                -0.0426            -0.0144            -0.0368         -0.0046           0.0070                     -0.0488             -0.0083             0.0019
                                (0.0183)           (0.0748)           (0.0297)        (0.0060)         (0.0087)                    (0.0252)            (0.0052)           (0.0098)
After pregnancy 3                 0.0195            -0.0122             0.0068          0.0064           0.0074                     -0.0443             -0.0027            -0.0098
                                (0.0173)           (0.0539)           (0.0215)        (0.0039)         (0.0096)                    (0.0246)            (0.0038)           (0.0107)
Observations                      74796              78367              78848           79216            72948                       77597               77985              67864
   The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Each column represents a separate regression that
   includes controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the
   municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.




                                                                                           41
                                                                  Table 5: Controlling for Both Fallout Types
                                                                Men                                                                           Women
                            IQ            Height          Years of        High school      Log earnings        Years of                    High school        Log earnings 35
                                                         education         completed            35            education                    completed
Total Beta in situ      -0.037**          0.018          -0.098**           -0.005**         -0.007*          -0.140**                      -0.012**              -0.022**
                         (0.012)         (0.028)          (0.025)            (0.002)         (0.003)           (0.039)                       (0.004)               (0.005)

Total Beta in Air       -0.151**          -0.061         -0.367**             -0.028**              -0.009              -0.337**            -0.031**              -0.024**
                         (0.041)         (0.045)          (0.079)              (0.006)             (0.007)               (0.093)             (0.009)               (0.009)
Observations              88446           92793            93275                93723               86544                 95781               96288                 83509
        The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in air refers to air deposition measured
        in kBq/m3 during months 3 and 4 in utero (the average value over the two months). Total beta in situ refers to ground deposition measured in kBq/m2 during months 3 and 4 in utero
        (the average value over the two months). The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each set of estimates (column) comes from a separate
        regression with controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order,
        and the municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                42
                                                                 Table 6: Quintile of Fallout, in situ and in air
                                                                  Men                                                                                Women
                            IQ               Height             Years of       High school        Log earnings               Years of             High school          Log earnings 35
                                                               education        completed               35                  education             completed
Total Beta in situ
Quintile 2                 -0.112            0.012                -0.187               -0.015              -0.022              -0.122                -0.022                  -0.019
                          (0.059)           (0.110)              (0.106)              (0.009)             (0.019)             (0.125)               (0.012)                 (0.015)

Quintile 3                 -0.116            -0.065             -0.422**             -0.029**              -0.028              -0.271                -0.039                  -0.023
                          (0.059)           (0.150)              (0.132)              (0.011)             (0.015)             (0.239)               (0.020)                 (0.030)

Quintile 4               -0.264**            -0.163             -0.560**             -0.034**             -0.046*            -0.610**              -0.054**                -0.073**
                          (0.059)           (0.194)              (0.125)              (0.011)             (0.018)             (0.215)               (0.020)                 (0.028)

Quintile 5               -0.373**            -0.06              -0.992**             -0.069**             -0.053*            -1.005**              -0.081**                -0.091**
                          (0.045)           (0.210)              (0.096)              (0.011)             (0.021)             (0.201)               (0.021)                 (0.036)

Total Beta in air
Quintile 2                 -0.09             -0.101               -0.192               -0.021              -0.024              -0.145                -0.039                  -0.033
                          (0.046)           (0.136)              (0.118)              (0.013)             (0.014)             (0.119)               (0.029)                 (0.020)

Quintile 3                 -0.16             -0.296             -0.469**              -0.043*              -0.048              -0.308               -0.043*                  -0.046
                          (0.090)           (0.178)              (0.218)              (0.021)             (0.028)             (0.239)               (0.021)                 (0.025)

Quintile 4               -0.279**            -0.446             -0.636**             -0.067**             -0.069*            -0.780**              -0.077**                 -0.058*
                          (0.116)           (0.243)              (0.308)              (0.027)             (0.030)             (0.310)               (0.028)                 (0.029)

Quintile 5               -0.504**           -0.678*             -1.097**             -0.109**             -0.083*            -1.176**              -0.111**                -0.101**
                          (0.164)           (0.302)              (0.423)              (0.030)             (0.037)             (0.439)               (0.039)                 (0.034)
Observations               94649             99367                99850               100332               92778              101783                102343                   88633
       The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in air refers to air deposition measured
       in kBq/m3 during months 3 and 4 in utero (the average value over the two months). Total beta in situ refers to ground deposition measured in kBq/m2 during months 3 and 4 in utero
       (the average value over the two months). The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each set of quintile estimates comes from a separate
       regression with controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order,
       and the municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                43
                                       Table 7a: Effect of Fallout (in situ) by Month on the Second Generation, male offspring
                                                                 Father exposed                                        Mother exposed
                                                Son’s IQ                  Son’s IQ          Father’s IQ            Son’s IQ                                    Son’s IQ
                                                    (1)                       (2)                (3)                   (1)                                        (2)
3 month prior to pregnancy                        -0.002                     0.001              0.010                -0.012                                     -0.017
                                                 (0.022)                   (0.023)            (0.023)               (0.017)                                     (0.017)
2 month prior to pregnancy                         0.016                     0.015             -0.005                 0.001                                      0.000
                                                 (0.022)                   (0.021)            (0.022)               (0.021)                                     (0.021)
1 month prior to pregnancy                         0.018                     0.027             0.021*                -0.015                                     -0.012
                                                 (0.019)                   (0.020)            (0.009)               (0.019)                                     (0.019)
Pregnancy month 1                                  0.015                     0.007             -0.045                 0.025                                      0.021
                                                 (0.018)                   (0.018)            (0.029)               (0.013)                                     (0.013)
Pregnancy month 2                                  0.004                     0.006              0.009                 0.005                                      0.005
                                                 (0.030)                   (0.030)            (0.025)               (0.008)                                     (0.008)
Pregnancy month 3                               -0.024**                  -0.028**            -0.042*                -0.023                                     -0.024
                                                 (0.007)                   (0.008)            (0.018)               (0.017)                                     (0.016)
Pregnancy month 4                                -0.027*                   -0.030*             -0.043               -0.030*                                    -0.030*
                                                 (0.013)                   (0.013)            (0.026)               (0.013)                                     (0.013)
Pregnancy month 5                                 -0.039                    -0.029              0.012                -0.017                                     -0.013
                                                 (0.021)                   (0.022)            (0.025)               (0.015)                                     (0.015)
Pregnancy month 6                                 0.043*                     0.038              0.019                 0.000                                     -0.000
                                                 (0.021)                   (0.023)            (0.023)               (0.011)                                     (0.011)
Pregnancy month 7                                  0.015                     0.014              0.046                -0.027                                     -0.029
                                                 (0.020)                   (0.022)            (0.026)               (0.021)                                     (0.021)
Pregnancy month 8                                  0.027                     0.034             -0.005                0.038*                                     0.037*
                                                 (0.023)                   (0.022)            (0.023)               (0.017)                                     (0.016)
Pregnancy month 9                                 -0.033                    -0.031             -0.027                -0.012                                     -0.010
                                                 (0.024)                   (0.023)            (0.023)               (0.014)                                     (0.013)
Month of birth                                    -0.012                    -0.006              0.011                -0.013                                     -0.014
                                                 (0.019)                   (0.020)            (0.025)               (0.016)                                     (0.016)
After pregnancy 1                                 -0.001                     0.001              0.001                 0.029                                      0.031
                                                 (0.020)                   (0.019)            (0.026)               (0.027)                                     (0.028)
After pregnancy 2                                  0.008                     0.008              0.004               0.032**                                    0.033**
                                                 (0.020)                   (0.019)            (0.014)               (0.008)                                     (0.008)
After pregnancy 3                                  0.014                     0.011              0.001                 0.003                                      0.004
                                                 (0.015)                   (0.014)            (0.026)               (0.012)                                     (0.012)
Observations                                      24281                     24281              19079                 36947                                       36947
The sample includes parents born between 1956 and 1966 in municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. All regressions are weighted so each parent gets equal
weight. Each column represents a separate regression that includes controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth, controls for parental education, birth
order, and the municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level. (1):
only pre 1960 controls included, (2): also includes controls for the second generation, (3): Comparative estimates for first generation men who have at least one son in the sample.



                                                                                          44
                                       Table 7b: Effect of Fallout (in air) by Month on the Second Generation, male offspring
                                                                 Father exposed                                         Mother exposed
                                               Son’s IQ                  Son’s IQ          Father’s IQ             Son’s IQ                                    Son’s IQ
                                                   (1)                       (2)                (3)                    (1)                                         (2)
3 month prior to pregnancy                       -0.030                    -0.022              0.006                 -0.028                                      -0.031
                                                (0.030)                   (0.034)            (0.040)                (0.020)                                     (0.020)
2 month prior to pregnancy                       -0.000                     0.002             -0.012                  0.007                                       0.009
                                                (0.025)                   (0.027)            (0.031)                (0.020)                                     (0.020)
1 month prior to pregnancy                        0.014                     0.020              0.009                  0.015                                       0.021
                                                (0.033)                   (0.033)            (0.019)                (0.019)                                     (0.019)
Pregnancy month 1                                -0.014                    -0.015             -0.011                 -0.034                                      -0.029
                                                (0.039)                   (0.037)            (0.024)                (0.022)                                     (0.023)
Pregnancy month 2                               0.014*                    0.014*              -0.008                 -0.031                                      -0.030
                                                (0.006)                   (0.005)            (0.026)                (0.025)                                     (0.025)
Pregnancy month 3                                -0.030                    -0.036             -0.045               -0.027**                                    -0.028**
                                                (0.027)                   (0.027)            (0.025)                (0.010)                                     (0.010)
Pregnancy month 4                                -0.077                    -0.077             -0.042                 -0.026                                      -0.026
                                                (0.041)                   (0.041)            (0.040)                (0.017)                                     (0.017)
Pregnancy month 5                                 0.009                     0.013             -0.030                  0.023                                       0.026
                                                (0.037)                   (0.034)            (0.034)                (0.024)                                     (0.023)
Pregnancy month 6                                -0.013                    -0.007              0.005                  0.024                                       0.027
                                                (0.053)                   (0.051)            (0.027)                (0.030)                                     (0.029)
Pregnancy month 7                                 0.008                     0.009             -0.020                  0.006                                       0.006
                                                (0.031)                   (0.029)            (0.027)                (0.019)                                     (0.017)
Pregnancy month 8                                 0.026                     0.027              0.007                  0.008                                       0.008
                                                (0.028)                   (0.026)            (0.021)                (0.021)                                     (0.020)
Pregnancy month 9                                 0.016                     0.010              0.015                 -0.007                                      -0.001
                                                (0.028)                   (0.030)            (0.028)                (0.023)                                     (0.022)
Month of birth                                    0.054                     0.053             -0.004                  0.001                                       0.004
                                                (0.038)                   (0.037)            (0.021)                (0.023)                                     (0.023)
After pregnancy 1                                -0.010                    -0.009              0.028                  0.012                                       0.012
                                                (0.029)                   (0.030)            (0.028)                (0.031)                                     (0.030)
After pregnancy 2                                 0.015                     0.015             -0.005                 -0.024                                      -0.019
                                                (0.035)                   (0.033)            (0.025)                (0.024)                                     (0.024)
After pregnancy 3                                 0.013                     0.012             -0.008                  0.007                                       0.009
                                                (0.028)                   (0.028)            (0.026)                (0.023)                                     (0.023)
Observations                                     23378                     23378              18412                  35745                                       35745
The sample includes parents born between 1956 and 1966 in municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. All regressions are weighted so each parent gets equal
weight. Each column represents a separate regression that includes controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth, controls for parental education, birth
order, and the municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level. (1):
only pre 1960 controls included, (2): also includes controls for the second generation, (3): Comparative estimates for first generation men who have at least one son in the sample.



                                                                                          45
Appendix

                       Figure A1: Location of Atmospheric Nuclear Test Sites




Source: Bergan, 2002




                                                46
Figure A2: Annual Precipitation per Municipality




Source: Norwegian Meteorological Institute


                                                   47
                                               Table A1: Interaction with Season of Exposure (Summer: April - September)

                            IQ             Height              Years of           High school          Log earnings           Years of            High school           Log earnings 35
                                                              education           completed                 35               education            completed
Total Beta in situ
Total beta              -0.041**            0.029             -0.105**              -0.006**              -0.006             -0.131**               -0.010**                -0.019**
in situ                  (0.011)           (0.030)             (0.022)               (0.002)              (0.004)             (0.024)                (0.003)                 (0.004)

Summer                    0.196             0.04                0.135                 0.025                0.025              -0.076                  0.022                   0.074
                         (0.117)           (0.476)             (0.104)               (0.024)              (0.048)             (0.126)                (0.021)                 (0.054)

Interaction             -0.106**           -0.154*            -0.276**              -0.018**               -0.02             -0.402**               -0.044**                -0.040**
term                     (0.020)           (0.072)             (0.060)               (0.005)              (0.011)             (0.047)                (0.006)                 (0.014)
Total Beta in air
Total beta              -0.113**            0.001             -0.234**              -0.018**               0.002             -0.220**               -0.019**                -0.021*
in air                   (0.037)           (0.045)             (0.065)               (0.006)              (0.006)             (0.077)                (0.007)                (0.009)

Summer                    0.14              0.062              -0.291                -0.039                0.026               -0.03                 -0.003                  -0.017
                         (0.111)           (0.521)             (0.252)               (0.048)              (0.047)             (0.206)                (0.021)                 (0.060)

Interaction             -0.238**           -0.283*            -0.794**              -0.055**             -0.065**            -0.814**               -0.077**                -0.043*
                         (0.068)           (0.118)             (0.173)               (0.014)              (0.021)             (0.149)                (0.009)                (0.021)

Observations              94649             99367               99850                100332                92778              101783                 102343                  88633
       The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in air refers to air deposition measured
       in kBq/m3 during months 3 and 4 in utero (the average value over the two months). Total beta in situ refers to ground deposition measured in kBq/m2 during months 3 and 4 in utero
       (the average value over the two months). The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each set of estimates comes from a separate regression with
       controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the
       municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.




                                                                                               48
                                                                 Table A2: Interaction with Mother’s Education
                                                                          Men                                                                              Women
                                       IQ              Height        Years of         High school     Log earnings                    Years of           High school          Log earnings
                                                                    education         completed            35                        education           completed                 35
Total Beta in situ                 -0.050**             0.021        -0.111**          -0.008**         -0.007                       -0.164**             -0.015**             -0.023**
                                    (0.013)            (0.031)        (0.032)           (0.002)         (0.004)                       (0.040)              (0.005)              (0.005)

Mother has                          1.019**           1.006**          1.362**               0.144**              0.106**             1.470**               0.178**              0.164**
high school                         (0.021)           (0.036)          (0.044)               (0.005)              (0.005)             (0.025)               (0.004)              (0.008)

Interaction term                     -0.01             -0.033          -0.096**               -0.003               -0.006             -0.045*                0.000               -0.001
                                    (0.009)            (0.057)          (0.026)               (0.003)              (0.005)            (0.022)               (0.002)              (0.004)
Total Beta air                     -0.158**            -0.053          -0.371**              -0.029**              -0.008            -0.363**              -0.034**             -0.030**
                                    (0.042)            (0.047)          (0.084)               (0.006)              (0.007)            (0.104)               (0.010)              (0.011)

Mother has                          1.017**           1.004**          1.355**               0.144**              0.105**             1.468**               0.177**              0.165**
high school                         (0.022)           (0.036)          (0.049)               (0.005)              (0.005)             (0.029)               (0.004)              (0.008)

Interaction term                    -0.007              -0.01           -0.079*                0.001                -0.01             -0.024                 0.001                0.005
                                    (0.015)            (0.039)          (0.030)               (0.004)              (0.006)            (0.022)               (0.002)              (0.007)
Observations                         89892              94339            94827                 95280                88024              95781                 96288                83509
         The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Total beta in air refers to air deposition measured
         in kBq/m3 during months 3 and 4 in utero (the average value over the two months). Total beta in situ refers to ground deposition measured in kBq/m2 during months 3 and 4 in utero
         (the average value over the two months). The fallout measures are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation 1. Each set of estimates comes from a separate regression with
         controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the
         municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level.** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level.




                                                                                                 49
                                    Table A3: Effect of Fallout by Month on Having a Son in the Second Generation Sample
                                                                           Men                             Women
                                                                   in situ         air             in situ          air
                                  3 month prior to pregnancy       -0.003        -0.002            0.001          -0.005
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  2 month prior to pregnancy       0.003         0.005*            0.001          0.000
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  1 month prior to pregnancy      -0.005*         0.003           -0.002          0.001
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.004)
                                  Pregnancy month 1                0.002         -0.001           -0.001          0.001
                                                                  (0.001)        (0.003)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  Pregnancy month 2                -0.000         0.001           0.009*          -0.001
                                                                  (0.001)        (0.002)          (0.004)        (0.002)
                                  Pregnancy month 3                0.000          0.005           -0.001          -0.002
                                                                  (0.001)        (0.003)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  Pregnancy month 4                -0.003         0.003            0.003          0.005
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.004)
                                  Pregnancy month 5                0.001          0.004           -0.001          0.001
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.003)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  Pregnancy month 6                0.004          0.001            0.004          0.002
                                                                  (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.003)        (0.003)
                                  Pregnancy month 7                -0.002        -0.000            0.001          0.005
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  Pregnancy month 8                0.004          0.004           -0.002          0.003
                                                                  (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.002)        (0.003)
                                  Pregnancy month 9                -0.002         0.004            0.008          0.006
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.003)          (0.005)        (0.003)
                                  Month of birth                   0.006          0.003           -0.005         0.011*
                                                                  (0.004)        (0.003)          (0.003)        (0.005)
                                  After pregnancy 1                -0.001         0.004            0.006          0.006
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.003)          (0.004)        (0.003)
                                  After pregnancy 2                0.003          0.002           -0.006          0.006
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.004)        (0.004)
                                  After pregnancy 3                -0.003         0.003            0.003          0.006
                                                                  (0.002)        (0.002)          (0.003)        (0.003)
                                  Observations                     89892          88446            96316          94538
The sample includes persons born between 1956 and 1966 and includes municipalities within a radius of 20km of the test stations. Each column represents a separate regression that
includes controls for municipality dummies and year of birth by month of birth dummies. Also included in each specification are controls for parental education, birth order, and the
municipality unemployment rate. Standard errors are clustered at the municipality level. ** implies significant at the 1% level. * implies significant at 5% level




                                                                                        50
