NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS SOURCES OF VOLATILITY IN HOUSING MARKETS:
THE JOINT BUYER-SELLER PROBLEM
Elliot Anenberg
Patrick Bayer
Working Paper 18980
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18980
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

The analysis and conclusions set forth are those of the authors and do not indicate concurrence by
other members of the research staff or the Board of Governors. We thank Steven Laufer, Plamen Nenov,
and seminar and conference participants at AEA Meetings, Econometric Society Meetings, Bank of
Canada, UC Berkeley (Haas), CEMMAP Housing Conference, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
NY Fed, Wharton and Wisconsin for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Elliot Anenberg and Patrick Bayer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Sources of Volatility in Housing Markets: The Joint Buyer-Seller Problem
Elliot Anenberg and Patrick Bayer
NBER Working Paper No. 18980
April 2013, Revised February 2015
JEL No. E32,R0,R21,R3,R31
ABSTRACT
This paper presents new empirical evidence that internal movement - selling one home and buying
another - by existing homeowners within a metropolitan housing market is especially volatile and
the main driver of fluctuations in transaction volume over the housing market cycle. We develop a
dynamic search equilibrium model that shows that the strong pro-cyclicality of internal movement
is driven by the cost of simultaneously holding two homes, which varies endogenously over the cycle.
We estimate the model using data on prices, volume, time-on-market, and internal moves drawn from
Los Angeles from 1988-2008 and use the fitted model to show that frictions related to the joint buyerseller problem: (i) substantially amplify booms and busts in the housing market, (ii) create countercyclical build-ups of mismatch of existing owners with their homes, and (iii) generate externalities
that induce significant welfare loss and excess price volatility.
Elliot Anenberg
Federal Reserve, Board of Governors
Washington, DC
elliot.anenberg@frb.gov
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu

1

Introduction

The major boom and bust over the 2000s has drawn attention to the volatility of the US
housing market and its implications for the broader economy. While the national scope
of this most recent cycle was unusual, metropolitan and regional housing markets, as well
those of smaller countries, exhibit cyclical behavior on a very regular basis.1 Booms and busts
generally occur over protracted periods of time and are characterized by large fluctuations
in price, transaction volume, and time-to-sell.
While these facts about housing cycles are well-established, explanations for their size and
duration are not as obvious. Several studies have shown that movements in fundamentals like
income, wages, and rents are not large enough to explain the observed fluctuations in house
prices (see Head et al. [2014] and Case and Shiller [1989]). Excess housing price volatility is
perhaps even more puzzling when one considers that a large fraction of transactions consist of
homeowners moving within a metro area. Even if aggregate volatility is driven by fluctuations
in external demand – from new migrants or first-time home buyers – one might expect the
supply and demand for housing by “internal movers” selling one house and buying another
at about the same time to be less sensitive to the price level and, therefore, a stabilizing
force on the local market. Yet, in this paper, we will argue that the timing of the buying and
selling decisions of these internal movers has exactly the opposite e↵ect, greatly amplifying
price fluctuations over the cycle rather than smoothing them.
We begin the paper by using detailed records on the universe of transactions in the Los
Angeles metropolitan area from 1992-2008 to establish a series of new empirical facts about
the nature of housing transactions over the cycle. Following homeowners as they buy and sell
houses, we first show that internal transaction volume is incredibly volatile and indeed much
more pro-cyclical than external volume.2 In particular, internal transaction volume at the
peak of the boom in 2003-2005 is three times greater than in the preceding trough in 1993
and four times greater than in the subsequent trough in 2008, while external transaction
volume varies in a much more narrow band. As a result, the fraction of homes sold by
1
2

See Burnside et al. [2011] for empirical evidence.
An internal transaction is defined as one in which the seller buys another property within the metro

area. An external transaction is defined as one in which the seller does not.

2

internal movers is highly pro-cyclical, ranging from a low of 20 percent in the trough years
to over 40 percent in the peak years. We demonstrate that similar patterns hold for internal
transaction volume in various volatile housing markets across the country3 and that the
substantial volatility of internal movement over the cycle holds for households with both low
and high loan-to-value ratios.4
To gauge the economic and welfare implications of the volatility of internal movement,
we develop and estimate a dynamic equilibrium search model in which the complementarity
of internal movers’ buying and selling decisions has the potential to amplify fundamental
cyclical forces. Our framework is a simple search model in the spirit of Mortensen and Pissarides [1994] and Pissarides [2000], in which some agents in the economy (internal movers)
are actively searching on both sides of the market as buyers and sellers simultaneously.5 The
novel features of our model are (i) that the decision of internal movers to buy before selling, or vice versa, is endogenous and (ii) that the consumption value of holding two homes
simultaneously is less than the sum of the values of residing in each property individually
(e.g., a household gets little consumption value from holding a second house empty while
awaiting a suitable buyer). In the model, an exogenous mismatch shock provides the impetus for homeowners to move or exit the metropolitan area. The fundamental source of
equilibrium volatility is the exogenous fluctuation in external demand to purchase a home
in the metropolitan area housing market.
We estimate the model using data on prices, volume, time-on-market (TOM), and internal
moves drawn from our Los Angeles sample. The estimated model fits the equilibrium comovements of these variables, the level of price volatility, and the new empirical facts that
we document related to internal movement over the cycle very well.
In the estimated model, the attractiveness of buying-before-selling varies endogenously
3

We show internal movement patterns for MSAs outside Los Angeles using the FRBNY/Equifax Con-

sumer Credit Panel data.
4
As we discuss in more detail in Section 2, volatility in the internal movement of households with high
LTVs may also be related to lock-in e↵ects of equity constraints, while such considerations should not play
a role for households with substantial equity remaining in their homes (low LTVs).
5
Other classic search markets, such as labor or retail markets, are characterized by the presence of a
distinct set of agents on each side of the market.

3

over the cycle in a way that amplifies boom-bust episodes and contributes to the procyclicality of internal movement. To see how, consider a “buyer’s market” in which prices
are declining and time-to-sell is high. In these market conditions, existing homeowners are
especially unwilling to buy before selling. Such an action would put the household in a
position of owning two assets declining in value – but only receiving the consumption benefits from one of them – in a market in which houses are generally taking a long time to
sell. Collectively, as existing owners hold out to sell before purchasing, internal transaction
volume slows considerably, further cooling the market. Over time, the pool of households
mismatched with their homes builds and when the market begins to heat up again, these
mismatched households are able to move at a faster pace.
We conduct two counterfactual simulations to show how the presence of agents simultaneously active on both sides of a search market a↵ects market volatility. In the first
simulation, we assume that all agents exit the metropolitan area upon selling their home
so that all selling decisions are made without regard to buyer market conditions. This simulation distinguishes the role of basic search and matching frictions from the role of the
joint buyer-seller problem in driving market volatility. Relative to a setting in which just
search and matching frictions operate, the results imply that the joint buyer-seller problem
increases the volatility of transaction volume and time on market by about 10 percent and
more than doubles the price volatility.
The increase in price volatility associated with the joint buyer-seller problem is directly
related to the e↵ective cost of holding two homes simultaneously, which, not surprisingly,
is estimated to be quite high. We show this with a second counterfactual simulation that
re-introduces the joint buyer-seller problem, but allows homeowners to realize more of the
consumption benefits from a second home, so that they are more willing to buy before selling
in equilibrium. When the e↵ective cost of holding two properties is small enough (as might
be the case if a short-term tenant were available), we demonstrate that aggregate price and
volume volatility can, in fact, be lower than in the first counterfactual simulation. In this
case, internal demand helps to dampen fluctuations in external demand – e.g., when there is
a negative shock to the pool of external buyers, demand from internal movers rises because
buying conditions are favorable. When the cost of owning two homes is higher, however,
4

a drop in external demand leads to a decline in internal demand as internal movers are
reluctant to buy until they have sold. At the parameters that best fit the data, this thin
market e↵ect dominates the smoothing e↵ect, and the joint buyer-seller problem leads to a
substantial increase in price volatility.
We close the paper by considering the welfare consequences of a policy intervention that
lowers aggregate volatility by reducing volatility in the fraction of homes sold by internal
movers. The policy induces substantially lower volatility by subsidizing the cost of remaining
on the market for sellers who have high holding costs according to the estimated model –
i.e. internal movers who hold two homes and external sellers. We constrain the policy to be
revenue neutral, and so we also impose a transaction tax to o↵set the cost of the subsidies.
We find that the policy increases discounted lifetime utility by an equivalent variation of
$4200 per transaction. Since our model does not account for the interactions between the
housing market and the broader economy and since buyers and sellers in our model are
assumed to be risk neutral, this welfare estimate abstracts from the potentially large welfare
benefits that accrue directly from the substantially reduced volatility. The welfare gains that
we estimate arise from improved efficiency of matches between buyers and homes, suggesting
that the sources of excess volatility in internal movement that are at the heart of this paper
generate sizable welfare losses that extend beyond the direct e↵ects of reduced volatility.
Our paper contributes to a growing literature starting with Wheaton [1990] that applies
search theory to housing markets. From a methodological perspective, our paper extends
the existing housing search literature by developing and estimating a dynamic equilibrium
model with endogenous cycling. The vast majority of the existing literature selects parameter
values to convey the broad intuition of the model’s predictions (e.g. Krainer [2001],NovyMarx [2009]) or calibrates the model based on steady state predictions. While some recent
papers consider the non-steady state dynamics of their models, we are not aware of any other
papers in the housing search literature that fits the model using the dynamics of the key
market variables in the data, as we do. In this respect, our empirical approach is related
to Shimer [2005] and Robin [2011] in the labor search literature, which estimate models
using the dynamics of unemployment, wages, and vacancies. From an empirical perspective,
we contribute to the growing literature on the causes and consequences of housing market
5

cycles by highlighting a new mechanism – the joint buyer-seller problem – that is capable of
matching the key stylized facts about equilibrium market dynamics, as well as the new facts
that we document related to internal movement over the cycle.6

2

Motivating Empirical Facts

Before describing our model, we begin by establishing a series of new empirical facts that
suggest that the dual buyer-seller roles of agents in the market may be an important source
of market friction. We also summarize a few other key features of housing market dynamics
that have been well-documented in the literature. These facts will both motivate the key
elements of the model and serve as moments for the GMM estimator that we develop below.

2.1

Data

The data for this section of the paper are drawn from detailed records on the universe of
housing transactions in the Los Angeles metropolitan area from January 1988-June 2009.
The counties included are LA, Orange, Ventura, Riverside, and San Bernardino. Dataquick
is the provider of these data. The records include precise information on the property and
structure, the transaction price, the date of the transaction, and, most importantly, the
names of the buyer(s) and seller(s). When spouses purchase houses jointly, both names are
observed on the property record.
By matching the names of individuals who are observed to sell and buy a house within
a limited time frame, we are able to follow existing homeowners as they move within the
metropolitan area. We classify a transaction as an internal move if 1) the seller appears
as the buyer on a di↵erent transaction and 2) the transactions are within 12 months of
6

A number of recent papers emphasize alternative mechanisms that may be complementary to the joint

buyer-seller problem. For example, Burnside et al. [2011] model heterogeneous expectations and social dynamics in a search environment; Head et al. [2014] focus on the interaction between an endogenous construction sector and search and matching frictions; Piazzesi and Schneider [2009] focus on the role of optimistic
investors on prices in a simple search framework; and Ngai and Tenreyro [2014] focuses on increasing returns
to scale in the search technology. Other related studies include Krainer [2001],Carrillo [2012],Albrecht et al.
[2007],Diaz and Jerez [2013],Genesove and Han [2012],Novy-Marx [2009],Caplin and Leahy [2011].

6

each other.7 Because of abbreviations, marriages, name changes, etc., the name match is
not straightforward and some arbitrariness is introduced when determining a match quality threshold. After familiarizing ourselves with the data, we decided that an appropriate
minimum criteria for a match is that the last names of the buyer(s) and seller(s) match
exactly and the first three letters of the first name(s) match exactly. We verified that the
main empirical facts described below are robust to alternative choices for the match quality
threshold and the maximum length of the window between moves. As described below, we
also use the FRBNY/Equifax Consumer Credit Panel data as a robustness check and to
provide external validity.
Before examining the data on transactions and movement, it is helpful to characterize
the market cycles in the LA metropolitan area over this time period. To this end, Figure 1
presents a real housing price index for the LA metropolitan area from 1988-2008, calculated
using a repeat sales analysis similar to Shiller [1991]. The underlying data for this and
the other figures presented in this section are shown in Table 1. The Los Angeles market
experienced booms in the late 1980s and in the early 2000s. In between these booms, the
market experienced a substantial bust with real housing prices falling by 45 percent from
1990-1996. Much like the US housing market as a whole, the Los Angeles metropolitan area
experienced a major bust following the early 2000s boom. Figure 1 also shows transaction
volume and the median TOM over the cycle.8 Like prices, transaction volume and TOM
are quite volatile over time, and they are positively and negatively correlated with prices,
respectively.

2.2

Internal Movement

As shown in Table 1 and Figure 2, internal movement is highly pro-cyclical and volatile,
much more so than external transaction volume. The volume of internal transactions in7

Unfortunately, we cannot break out total transaction volume into internal and external movement during

the years before 1992 because the buyer and seller names are severely truncated in the Dataquick data for
those years.
8
Dataquick does not report any information about the house listing such as TOM. The TOM data
presented here comes from the California Association of Realtors (CAR) for LA county. Data provided to
authors by Oscar Wei, Senior Research Analyst at CAR.

7

creased three-fold over the price run-up in the late 1990’s and early 2000’s, and fell by a
comparable level during the most recent bust. External transaction volume was much steadier in comparison: it increased by about 50 percent during the run-up and fell by about
50 percent during the bust. Most of the pro-cyclicality of total transaction volume comes
from the pro-cyclicality of internal volume. As a result, “the internal mover share” (i.e. the
fraction of transactions where the seller is an internal mover) shown in Table 1 is strongly
pro-cyclical and volatile, ranging from a low of 20 percent in the trough years to almost 40
percent in the peak years.9
To ensure that our results on internal movement are not unique to Los Angeles or dependent on the assumptions of our name-matching algorithm, we also examine internal
movement using the FRBNY/Equifax Consumer Credit Panel data. Using these data, we
can track when homeowners throughout the country move using a household id (i.e. we do
not need to match names) and we can see whether they move within or outside their MSA.
Owner occupancy is not observed directly but is inferred based on whether the individual has
a mortgage. We find that the level of the internal mover share is comparable in the Equifax
data during the years in which the two datasets overlap. In Equifax, the average internal
mover share for MSAs in California between 2001-2008 is 38 percent, versus 35 percent for
Los Angeles using the Dataquick data. We not only find that the internal mover share is
positively correlated with the house price cycle for MSAs in California; we also find that
across MSAs in the U.S., di↵erences in the volatility of the internal mover share over time
are strongly related to across MSA di↵erences in house price dynamics, as illustrated in Appendix Figure 1. The details of the Equifax data and the analyses are discussed in Appendix
A. Appendix A also discusses a third robustness check we conduct using the American Housing Survey for Los Angeles. This dataset is more limited, but it confirms our finding that
most housing transactions are indeed external.
Returning to the Los Angeles housing transaction data, Figure 3 plots the distribution
of sell date minus purchase date for internal movers. It is much more common for internal
9

Slightly changing the definition of an internal transaction to 1) the buyer appears as a seller on a

di↵erent transaction and 2) the transactions are within 12 months of each other results in essentially no
change in the dynamics of the internal mover share.

8

movers to close on the sale of their existing home before closing on the purchase of their
next home; over 70 percent of the mass lies to the left of zero, inclusive. We find evidence
that selling-before-buying is more common using the Equifax data as well, as described in
Appendix A. An explanation for this empirical fact is that buying-before-selling temporarily
puts the homeowner in a position of owning two homes, but only receiving the consumption
benefits from one of the homes. Recouping the consumption value of the vacant home by
renting it out for a short period of time is usually not feasible given that renters prefer
predictable and longer term leases due to large moving costs. Furthermore, households
may also face binding borrowing constraints that make it difficult to hold two mortgages
simultaneously for a considerable length of time. Thus, the holding costs of owning two
homes simultaneously are high, which discourages agents from taking this position, all else
being equal.10
One prediction of a model in which the holding cost of a second home is high is that
the sales price for homes sold by owners holding two positions should be lower, all else
equal. The reason is that in an illiquid market, higher holding costs should translate into
lower reservation prices for sellers and, therefore, lower transactions prices. Table 2 tests
this prediction in the data. In particular, we estimate a regression in which the dependent
variable is the di↵erence between the log sales price and a log “predicted market” price
and the regressors are dummy variables for each window of “sell date - purchase date” from
Figure 3. The sample includes all internal movers, so that the comparison is between internal
movers who buy and sell at various times. The log predicted market price is calculated in
a first stage through a repeat sales analysis.11 The first column shows that homes sold by
sellers who bought first sell for about 2 percent less than the predicted price on average. To
10

Contingency clauses (i.e. agreeing to buy contingent on being able to sell) does not circumvent the cost

of buying-before-selling. These contracts typically allot a finite period of time for the home to be sold, which
e↵ectively increases the holding costs of the second home.
11
For each house, we apply the level of appreciation or depreciation estimated by the Case Shiller house
price index for Los Angeles to the previous purchase price. Transactions that do not have a previous price
during our sample window are excluded from the second stage regression. We also exclude transactions with
extreme prices, extreme residuals from the first stage, and transactions where the previous transaction for
that home was less than six months ago.

9

the extent that our name matching algorithm commits some type 1 errors, then this estimate
should be biased toward zero due to measurement error. Indeed, Appendix Table A1 shows
that when we strengthen the minimum name matching criteria to reduce type 1 errors, then
we find an e↵ect that is about -3 percent. Returning to Table 2, the second column shows
that there is much less of a di↵erence between internal movers who buy versus sell first in
the price that they pay for the new home that they purchase. The theory in this case is more
ambiguous. We discuss this within the context of our model in Section 4. The final column
of Table 2 compares the prices received by internal sellers (not distinguished by whether they
buy or sell first) relative to the prices received by external sellers. External sellers sell at a
discount of 5 percent relative to internal movers, suggesting they have higher holding costs
than internal sellers on average.

2.3

Alternative Explanations for Internal Transaction Volume Over
the Cycle

The model that we develop below focuses on the high holding costs associated with two
housing positions as an explanation for the pro-cyclicality of the internal mover share. A
potentially important alternative or complementary explanation is that internal moves slow
disproportionately during busts because homeowners looking to buy another home within
the metro area lack sufficient equity to make a down payment on a new home.12 If this
explanation is the primary driver of the overall pro-cyclicality in the internal mover share,
then we would expect the pro-cyclicality of internal movement to be weaker among sellers
with high levels of implied equity in their initial property.
Figure 4 plots the internal mover share for the unrestricted sample and the sample restricted to sellers with outstanding LTV < 80, LTV < 60, and LTV < 40. We calculate
the denominator of LTV (the home value) by applying a zip code level house price index
12

For a theoretical treatment of the e↵ect of equity constraints on the housing market, see Ortalo-Magne

and Rady [2006], Stein [1995]. Several empirical studies have tested whether low equity a↵ects mobility and
the results are mixed (see Chan [1997], Ferreira et al. [2010], Coulson and Grieco [2013], Schulhofer-Wohl
[2011]). We are not aware of any studies that directly examine whether low equity a↵ects the propensity of
a mover to buy another home in the same MSA.

10

computed by CoreLogic to the original purchase price. Transactions that do not have a
previous price during our sample window would thus be excluded altogether from Figure
4. We calculate the numerator (the outstanding loan amount) by amortizing the original
loan amount, including first, second, and third mortgages, assuming a 30 year term at the
prevailing market interest rate for fixed rate mortgages in the quarter of origination for
the West census region.13 We do see refinances in our data, and so we are able to update
the imputed mortgage balance with the actual mortgage balance and the prevailing market
mortgage rate whenever a refinance occurs. As shown in Figure 4, the pro-cyclicality of the
internal mover share is just as strong, if not stronger, for sellers with high levels of implied
equity, suggesting that equity constraints are not driving the pro-cyclicality of the internal
mover share.14
Another alternative explanation to consider is that the volatility in internal movement is
driven by “flippers” who buy and sell multiple houses in a short amount of time. Bayer et al.
[2011] show that flippers may be active in the housing market for a number of reasons and
that their buying-selling problem is likely di↵erent from the one we focus on in this paper.
Thus, we want to make sure that the main stylized facts on internal movement that we use
to motivate and fit the model below are not simply driven by flippers. To this end, Figure
5 reproduces the time-series of the internal mover on a subset of the main sample, which
excludes all transactions purchased by buyers who buy multiple homes within the calendar
year. The figure continues to show a significant amount of volatility and pro-cyclicality in
internal movement, suggesting that flippers are not driving the aggregate data on internal
movement.
13

The source for the interest rate data is the Freddie Mac survey. This may not be an appropriate

assumption for adjustable rate mortgages. Our data do provide a flag for fixed rate or adjustable rate
mortgages, and when we restrict the sample to just fixed rate loans, the results in Figure 4 are similar.
14
A related potential alternative explanation is nominal loss aversion (Genesove and Mayer [2001], Engelhardt [2003], Anenberg [2011]). However, based on the existing literature, there is no reason to expect that
those moving internally are disproportionately susceptible to loss aversion and so loss aversion should not
explain the pro-cyclicality of internal movement.

11

3

Model

3.1

Overview

We now develop a dynamic equilibrium model of housing market search. Our primary goal
is to develop the simplest model necessary to highlight how the complementarity of buying
and selling decisions a↵ects the housing market equilibrium. To this end, we build o↵ of the
classic Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides random search framework. Buyers and sellers in a city
are searching for one another, and each matching generates an idiosyncratic match quality
that describes the buyer’s taste for the particular home. Some sellers are also acting as
buyers (internal movers), whereas other sellers are simply looking to sell their home and exit
the city (external movers). Many features of our model are standard. Prices are determined
through complete information Nash bargaining over the transaction surplus. The matching
function is constant returns to scale as in most of the housing search literature. This ensures
that any amplification of market shocks will come from the joint buyer-seller problem and
not from an assumption on the search technology such as increasing returns to scale.
Two features of the model are unique. First, the decision to buy before selling is endogenous, and, second, we allow the flow utility of being a seller to depend on whether the
seller has already purchased a second home. This extension to a basic search and matching
model is not trivial because it means that buyer and seller value functions can no longer be
written independently. Second, our model generates endogenous cycling through shocks to
the size of the pool of active searchers. This is in contrast to much – but not all – of the
existing housing search models, which investigate dynamics based on a comparison of steady
states.15
15

Krainer [2001] generates endogenous cycling, but only with significant fluctuations in prices when exoge-

nous, aggregate shocks to the housing dividend are highly persistent. We generate cycling with time invariant
housing dividends by allowing the search process to depend on the market tightness; market tightness plays
no role in Krainer [2001] as each seller is automatically matched with one buyer each period.

12

3.2

Environment and Preferences

Time is discrete. Agents discount the future at rate . As in the discussion in Section 2, the
model focuses on activity in a single housing market, which we call a city, and takes activity
outside this area as exogenous. There is a fixed stock of homes in the city normalized
to have measure one. This assumption is motivated by the empirical evidence that large
amounts of volatility occur in cities such as Los Angeles where increases in housing supply
are limited by zoning laws, land scarcity, or infrastructure constraints.16 Agents in the
economy have heterogeneous preferences for these homes. In equilibrium there will be four
types of homeowners. Owners can be matched with one home, mismatched with one home,
matched with one home and mismatched with another, or mismatched with two homes.
Preferences are set such that no other combination of homes will be owned in equilibrium.
The mismatch process works as follows. New owners always begin in the matched state.
Matched homeowners then become mismatched at rate . A fraction 1

⇡ of newly mis-

matched owners also become mismatched with the city and will exit the model economy
upon selling their home. The remaining fraction, ⇡, enter a buyer pool and search for a different home to buy while simultaneously searching to sell the home that they have become
mismatched with.17
Each period,

t

non-homeowners exogenously enter the economy. The inflow process is

assumed to be iid over time. Upon entering the economy, these non-homeowners enter the
buyer pool and begin searching for a home to buy. Thus, the total buyer pool is comprised
of (1) new entrants to the city, (2) homeowners who are currently mismatched with their
home but are still matched with the city and (3) previous homeowners who are still matched
with the city.
We now specify the utilities associated with each of the possible states in equilibrium.
Matched agents receive a time-invariant flow utility, ✏i , that is heterogenous for each agent i.
16
17

See e.g. Quigley and Raphael [2005] and Glaeser et al. [2005].
We also are assuming that a matched owner and agents who become mismatched with the city receive

a large negative utility from being matched with another one of the homes in the economy. Then, assuming
that there are nominal fixed costs to being on the market as a buyer or as a seller, homeowners will not
enter the buyer or seller pools until they are mismatched and agents who get mismatched with the city will
not re-enter the buyer pool.

13

Mismatched owners receive the constant flow utility umm or ummo depending on whether they
are mismatched with their house or mismatched with their house and the city, respectively.
Agents who own two homes, which can occur when a mismatched homeowner buys before
selling, can only realize the utility benefits from one of their homes, reflecting the fact that
households can only live in one home at a time. We assume that they get the benefits from
the house which provides them the greater flow utility. We do, however, allow the flow
utility of owning two homes to be shifted up or down by a parameter ud . This allows for
the possibility that in practice, factors outside of our model like maintenance costs, property
taxes, financing constraints, or the ability to find a short-term tenant make it more or less
costly to hold two positions then our structure here implies. Non-homeowners receive the
flow utility, ub . Agents who exit the economy receive the flow utility uO .
We summarize below the six di↵erent pools of agents in the equilibrium of this economy
and the flow utility associated with being in each pool18 :
• Buyers (b), ub : Non-homeowners searching to buy a home.
• Matched Owners (m), ✏i : Agents that are matched with one home.
• Buyer-Sellers (bs), umm : Agents that are mismatched with a home and have it for sale
while simultaneously searching to buy a home.
• Dual Position Sellers (ms), ✏i

ud : Agents that are matched with one home and

mismatched with another home that is for sale.
• External Sellers (s), ummo : Agents that are mismatched with a home that is for sale.
These agents are also mismatched with the city and will exit the city upon sale.
• Dual Position External Sellers (ss), ummo

ud : Agents that are mismatched with two

homes that are for sale. These agents are also mismatched with the city and will exit
the city upon sale of both homes.
18

We make one minor additional assumption on the mismatch process that gives us six instead of seven

pools. In particular, we assume that any mismatch shock that hits dual position sellers is always one that
leaves them mismatched with the city. This assumption is made for simplicity and is not important for our
results given the parameter values we consider below.

14

The total mass of agents searching to buy at any given time is then B = b + bs and the
total mass of agents searching to sell is S = bs + s + ms + 2ss. Following our definition
when we investigated internal movement in the data in Section 2, we classify a home sale
by a member of bs, ms, or ss as an internal transaction; sales by members of s are external
transactions.

3.3

Meetings

A necessary condition for a house sale is a meeting between a buyer and seller. The number of
meetings is determined through a matching function M (·, ·) which takes as inputs the mass
of buyers, B, and sellers, S. The matching function is increasing in both its arguments,
concave, and homogeneous of degree one. Buyers and sellers experience at most one match
with the opposite type each period. The probability that any buyer (seller) finds a match is
simply M divided by the mass of active buyers (sellers). When a match does occur, given
that search is random, the probability that the match is with a type j seller (buyer) is just
the relative frequency of type j sellers (buyers) among the population of sellers (buyers).
Once a meeting between a buyer and seller occurs, the buyer and seller must decide
whether to pursue the match and observe the associated match quality draw, ✏. The ✏i
shock can be interpreted as the buyer’s idiosyncratic taste for the particular house. It is iid
across time and matches. We assume that the costs to pursuing the match are negligible;
however, to keep the model tractable, we do not allow households to pursue more than one
match per period. A more structural interpretation is that pursuing the match requires an
investment of time (e.g. an inspection) that cannot be done more than once per period. If
and only if both the buyer and the seller decide to pursue the match, ✏i and the type of
match (e.g. a b buyer is matched with a s seller) is revealed to both the buyer and the seller.
The constraint that agents cannot pursue more than one match per period is only ever
binding for members of the bs pool, who are actively searching on both sides of the market,
and for members of the ss pool, who have two homes for sale. In the event that an agent
encounters two matches, he chooses to pursue the match that leads to the higher expected
payo↵. Note that conditional on encountering two matches, members of ss will always be
exactly indi↵erent over which match to pursue because the expected value of each match is
15

ex-ante identical before ✏ or the type of buyer is revealed. The decision for bs to pursue the
match as a buyer or as a seller will vary depending on the state of the economy.

3.4

Trade

Trade occurs whenever the total gains from trade exceed the total gains from continued
search by both parties. Below, we make these transaction thresholds explicit. If a transaction
occurs, the total surplus is split among the buyer and selling according to the weights 1 ✓ and
✓, respectively. Formally, this is the solution to the complete information Nash bargaining
game when the bargaining power of the buyer and seller is 1

✓ and ✓. In order to achieve

this allocation of the surplus, a transfer, p⇤ , is made from one party to the other if necessary.
This transfer can be interpreted as a price.
Figure 6 summarizes the flow of agents between pools. Transitions that occur endogenously through trade are highlighted with double arrows. The remaining transitions are the
result of exogenous mismatch shocks or inflow into the market. In sum, agents can become
mismatched with their homes any number of times - moving within the market when this
happens - until they eventually become mismatched with the market as a whole and leave
the metro area.

3.5

Timing

In each period, the following sequence of events occurs:
1. Buyers meet sellers according to the matching technology.
2. Agents who are confronted with two meetings choose to pursue the meeting that yields
the highest expected payo↵.
3. Idiosyncratic match qualities and the type of buyer/seller involved in the match are
revealed.
4. Bargaining and trade occurs.
5. Agents consume their flow utility.
16

6. Mismatch shocks are realized.
7. Inflow into the city shocks are realized.

3.6

Value Functions

We now characterize the dynamic problem of each type of agent given the vector of state
variables ⌦ = (bt , bst , st , mst , sst ), which characterizes the mass of agents in each pool. Note
that with a fixed housing stock normalized to one, m = 1

2ms

bs

s

2ss so it is

redundant to include m, the mass of matched homeowners, in the state space.
In presenting the value functions, we will make use of the following notation to simplify
the presentation. Let ⇧j,k (⌦t ) be the expected value of the total surplus associated with
a transaction between a type j buyer and a type k seller conditional on the total surplus
being greater than zero, multiplied by the probability that the total surplus is greater than
zero. Let dsell (⌦t ) be the policy function that maps the state of the economy into the binary
choice of bs to pursue a match as a seller, conditional on bs matching with both a buyer
and a seller. In the Appendix, we provide a closed form for ⇧j,k (⌦t ) 8 j, k and dsell (⌦t )
given our parametric assumptions imposed below for estimation. Finally, we abbreviate the
dependence on ⌦t in what follows with the subscript t.
3.6.1

Matched Owners

The expected lifetime utility of being a matched owner given match quality ✏i is
Vtm (✏i )

= ✏i +

Z ✓

bs
⇡Vt+1

+ (1

s
⇡)Vt+1

+ (1

m
)Vt+1
(✏i )

◆

.

(1)

In words, with probability , the matched owner becomes mismatched and either becomes
a member of bs or s with probability ⇡ and 1-⇡, respectively; with probability (1- ), the
owner remains a matched owner, which produces the flow benefit ✏i . Uncertainty is over the
number of new entrants into the buyer pool, .
Iterating on the above expression, we can rewrite (1) as a component that depends on
the match quality, ✏i , and an additively separable component that does not:

17

Vtm (✏i )

=

1

(1

)

✏i
(1
Z

)

+

Z ✓

s
( ⇡Vt+2
+ (1

bs
⇡Vt+1
+ (1
bs
⇡)Vt+2
+ ...)

s
⇡)Vt+1
+
◆

m
= ✏˜i + Ut+1

(2)

where ✏˜i has mean and variance given by:
ũm =

um
(1

1

(3)

)

and
˜2 =
3.6.2

2

(1

(1

))2

.

(4)

Buyers

We write the expected lifetime utility of being in the b pool as:

Vtb

= ub +
bst+1
(1
St+1

Z ✓

✓
mst+1 b,ms st+1 b,s
Mt+1
+
(1 ✓)
⇧
+
⇧ +
Bt+1
St+1 t+1
St+1 t+1
◆◆
Mt+1 sell b,bs 2sst+1
Mt+1 b,ss
+
d )⇧ +
(1
)⇧
Bt+1 t+1 t+1
St+1
2St+1 t+1

b
Vt+1

Mt+1
Bt+1

(5)

We interpret the term within the integral as follows. If there is a match, which occurs
with probability

M
,
B

the buyer receives a share (1

✓) of the expected total surplus of the

transaction conditional on the total surplus being positive (⇧j,k ) in addition to his outside
b
, which is to enter the next period as a buyer.
option, Vt+1

Note that the conditional expected surplus depends on the type of seller that the buyer
meets. Given that search is random, the probability that the match is with a type j seller
is just (j/S). Recall that the structure of our model only allows agents in the economy to
pursue one match at a time. Therefore, if the buyer meets with a type bs or ss seller, then
the probability that the meeting leads to an idiosyncratic match draw is generally less than
one; that is, the bs and the ss sellers may choose to pursue a di↵erent match as a buyer or
as a seller, respectively. The probability that a bs and ss seller choose to pursue the match
18

with a particular buyer is (1

Mt+1
Bt+1

t+1 sell
+M
d ) and (1
Bt+1 t+1

Mt+1
),
2St+1

respectively. The probability

for the bs seller accounts for the events where bs does not match with a seller, or he does
match with a seller but dsell
t+1 = 1 so that he would not choose to pursue that match in any
event. The probability for the ss seller accounts for the events where ss does not match with
another buyer (1

M
),
S

or he does match with another buyer put picks to pursue the match

M
).
with b ( 2S

3.6.3

Dual Position Sellers

The expected lifetime utility of being a dual position seller given match quality ✏i is
✓
✓
Z 
Mt+1
ms
ss
ms
Vt+1 + (1
) Vt+1 (✏i ) +
✓
Vt (✏i ) = ✏i ud +
St+1
◆◆
Mt+1 Mt+1
bt+1 b,ms bst+1
bs,ms
sell
⇧
+
(1
+
(1 dt+1 ))⇧t+1
Bt+1 t+1
Bt+1
St+1
St+1
In words, with probability

(6)

the dual position seller becomes mismatched and becomes a

member of ss. With probability (1

), the dual position seller stays matched and is on the

market as a seller. The intuition for the remaining terms is as described above. As we did
for V m , we can express V ms as a component that depends on the match quality, ✏i , and an
ms
.
additively separable component that does not:˜
✏i + Ut+1

3.6.4

Dual Position External Sellers

The expected lifetime utility of being a dual position external seller is
✓
Z ✓
Mt+1
Mt+1
ss
ss
Vt = ummo ud +
Vt+1 +
(2
)✓
St+1
St+1
◆◆
bt+1 b,ss bst+1
Mt+1 Mt+1
bs,ss
sell
⇧ +
(1
+
(1 dt+1 ))⇧t+1
Bt+1 t+1 Bt+1
St+1
St+1
Note that the probability of a match is

M
(2
S

M
)
S

because dual position external sellers

have two homes to sell and so they have two opportunities to match with a buyer.

19

(7)

3.6.5

External Sellers

The expected lifetime utility of being an external seller is
✓
Z ✓
Mt+1
bt+1 b,s
bst+1
Mt+1 Mt+1
s
s
Vt+1 +
✓
⇧t+1 +
(1
+
(1
Vt = ummo +
St+1
Bt+1
Bt+1
St+1
St+1

bs,s
dsell
t+1 ))⇧t+1

◆◆
(8)

3.6.6

Buyer-Seller

The expected lifetime utility of being a buyer-seller is
✓
Z 
Mt+1
Mt+1 Mt+1 sell
bs
bs
Vt+1 +
(1
+
d )✓
Vt = umm +
St+1
Bt+1
Bt+1 t+1
◆
Mt+1 Mt+1
bt+1 b,bs bst+1
bs,bs
sell
⇧ +
(1
+
(1 dt+1 ))⇧t+1 +
Bt+1 t+1 Bt+1
St+1
St+1
✓
Mt+1 Mt+1
mst+1 bs,ms st+1 bs,s
Mt+1
sell
(1
+
(1 dt+1 ))(1 ✓)
⇧
+
⇧ +
Bt+1
St+1
St+1
St+1 t+1
St+1 t+1
◆
bst+1
Mt+1 Mt+1 sell bs,bs 2sst+1
Mt+1 bs,ss
(1
+
d )⇧
+
(1
)⇧
St+1
Bt+1
Bt+1 t+1 t+1
St+1
2St+1 t+1

(9)

Note that the term multiplying ✓ reflects the case where the buyer-seller matches with
a buyer and decides to pursue the match with a buyer, and the term multiplying (1

✓)

reflects the case where the buyer-seller matches with a seller and decides to pursue the match
with a seller.

3.7

Market Equilibrium

A policy rule is a function

i (⌦, ✏i )

!A

(10)

which maps the state variables and the outcome of the matching process, ✏i , into an action
A for player type i = b, bs, s, ms, ss. Note that ✏ can be the empty set if a match does
not occur. If a match occurs, the action space is either to transact or not transact. Else,
the only action is to not transact. Note that members of bs have an additional policy rule,
sell
bs (⌦)

! A0 , where the action space is to pursue the match as a buyer or as a seller in the

event that bs matches with both a buyer and a seller.
20

A belief is a function
ij (⌦)

! Pr( i = j|⌦, i).

(11)

which maps each state into a probability distribution over the potential actions j for a type
i player. A player’s beliefs do not depend on ✏i because each player is of inconsequential size
relative to the entire economy.
Definition 1 A Markov perfect equilibrium is a collection of policy rules,
of beliefs,

ij (⌦)

i

8i, and a set

8i, j, ⌦, such that

1. The policy rules are optimal.
2. Agents have the correct beliefs about other players’ policy rules.
We focus on a symmetric equilibrium in which all agents have identical beliefs.19

3.8

Equilibrium Price

There are eight possible transaction types in the model economy (four types of sellers by
two types of buyers). The solution to the complete information Nash bargaining problem
for each of the transaction types gives the following prices:
1. b buys from bs
• p⇤ (b, bs) = ✓(U m

V b + ✏˜⇤b,bs )

✓)(V b

(1

V bs )

2. b buys from s
• p⇤ (b, s) = ✓(U m

V b + ✏˜⇤b,s )

(1

✓)( 1uO

V s)

3. b buys from ms
19

In the classic dynamic search models, increasing returns to scale for the matching technology is a neces-

sary condition for multiple equilibria (Pissarides [2000]). While we do not have a formal proof of uniqueness
for our particular model, we note that 1) our matching function is CRS and 2) for the parameter vector that
best fits the data, we searched numerically for other equilibria, but always converged to a unique equilibrium
regardless of the initial conditions.

21

• p⇤ (b, ms) = ✓(U m

V b + ✏˜⇤b,ms )

✓)(V m

(1

V ms )

4. b buys from ss
• p⇤ (b, ss) = ✓(U m

V b + ✏˜⇤b,ss )

✓)(V s

(1

V ss )

5. bs buys from bs
• p⇤ (bs, bs) = ✓(U ms

V bs + ✏˜⇤bs,bs )

✓)(V b

(1

V bs )

6. bs buys from s
• p⇤ (bs, s) = ✓(U ms

V bs + ✏˜⇤bs,s )

✓)( 1uO

(1

V s)

7. bs buys from ms
• p⇤ (bs, ms) = ✓(U ms

V bs + ✏˜⇤bs,ms )

(1

✓)(V m

V ms )

8. bs buys from ss
• p⇤ (bs, ss) = ✓(U ms

V bs + ✏˜⇤bs,ss )

(1

✓)(V s

V ss )

where ✏˜⇤i,j is random variable truncated from below by the value that sets the total surplus associated with the transaction equal to zero. The total surplus associated with each
transaction is described in the Appendix. For each transaction type, the price is equal to
the buyer’s surplus, weighted by the seller’s bargaining power, minus the seller’s surplus,
weighted by the buyer’s bargaining power. The Appendix outlines the equations for the
equilibrium transaction volumes and the laws of motion.

4
4.1

Basic Results and Mechanisms
Price Dispersion

The price equations in Section 3.8 show how the search structure of the model and the very
limited heterogeneity we impose naturally deliver equilibrium price dispersion, which is a
well-established property of housing markets. One source of heterogeneity that generates

22

dispersion is the idiosyncratic match quality, ✏. As shown in Section 3.8, the match quality enters directly into the price equations and so prices will vary across identical homes
depending on how well matched the buyer is to the particular home.
The model can also generate price dispersion precisely from the type of heterogeneity
that was shown to generate dispersion in the data in Section 2. More specifically, the model
generates price di↵erences between external and internal sellers, and price di↵erences between
internal movers who buy versus sell first.
When those sellers leaving the city have higher e↵ective holding costs than those moving
internally – i.e., when umm > ummo – prices will tend to be lower for external versus internal
sales. The reason is that higher holding costs increase the surplus that an external seller
receives from a transaction relative to an internal seller. This increased surplus leads to
lower realized transaction prices through two channels: (i) lowering the price that the seller
receives in Nash bargaining and (ii) reducing the minimum match quality draw, ✏˜⇤ , needed
to generate a positive total surplus.
Likewise, a higher e↵ective cost of holding multiple properties – i.e., a relatively high
value for ud – works in an exactly analogous way to lower the selling price accepted by
internal movers who buy first relative to internal movers who sell first. The reason is that
a higher value of ud increases the surplus for those sellers who are currently holding two
properties, which lowers the price that the seller receives because the two e↵ects on price
(directly through Nash bargaining and indirectly through the reservation match quality)
again work in the same direction to lower average prices.
Interestingly, the net e↵ect of high ud on the price paid by internal movers who buy first
relative to internal movers who sell first is less clear because these two e↵ects now work in
opposite directions. When buying-before-selling, the buyer’s surplus from buying is low due
to the high holding costs associated with owning two homes, which tends to lower the price.
But it also raises the minimum match quality draw, ✏˜⇤ , needed to generate positive total
surplus, which works to raise the average price.

23

4.2

Market Tightness and “Buyer’s” and “Seller’s” Markets

In the model, the stochastic inflow of new buyers generates volatility over time in market
tightness, or the ratio of buyers to sellers, B/S.20 This causes fluctuations in the probability
of a match (M (B, S)/B for buyers and M (B, S)/S for sellers), which enters directly into
the value functions associated with each type of buyer and seller, as shown above.
Our model provides a natural economic analogue to the popular terms “buyer’s” and
“seller’s” markets based on the value of being a buyer or seller in the market at di↵erent
levels of market tightness. For example, a sequence of high realizations of the inflow process
creates a “seller’s” market by increasing market tightness and therefore the value function
associated with being a seller. This can be seen from the value functions presented in Section
3. A large inflow increases the size of the buyer pool, B, which increases the number of
matches, M (B, S) for a fixed stock of sellers, S. Given that sellers in the model are always
flowing into the market at an exogenous rate, the probability that a seller gets matched
with a buyer in any period (M (B, S)/S) is also generally higher. This increases the value
function associated with being a seller because it allows for more sampling of idiosyncratic
match quality draws, ✏, in a given amount of time. Therefore, the seller’s surplus associated
with any transaction is lower because the outside option of not selling the house and staying
on the market is higher. Under Nash bargaining, lower seller surplus increases the price,
as shown in the equilibrium price equations in Section 3.8. Conversely, a sequence of low
realizations of the inflow process lowers market tightness, creating a “buyers” market where
the arrival rate of buyers is low and consequently, prices are lower. Mechanically, this is how
price fluctuations are generated in the economy.

4.3

The Role of Buyer-Sellers

A key focus of this paper is to determine whether the endogenous response of buyer-sellers
(i.e. members of the bs pool) amplifies or dampens “buyer’s” and “seller’s” markets caused
by the exogenous inflow fluctuations. The model presented above actually allows for both
20

Indeed, if the variance of the inflow process were set to zero, the equilibrium would be characterized by

a steady state with zero equilibrium volatility in prices and volume.

24

possibilities and the answer depends on parameter values, especially ud . To understand how,
suppose ud is high so that the flow utility associated with being a dual position seller (ms)
is low. When inflow is low and thus the probability of matching with a buyer is low, sellers
who buy before selling will expect to accrue the low flow utility associated with being a
dual position seller for a relatively long period of time, and so V ms becomes low relative
to V bs . Conversely, when inflow is high and thus the probability of matching with a buyer
is high, V ms is not as sensitive to ud because the expected number of periods of having to
accrue ud is smaller. As a result, it will take a larger value of ✏i to push a buyer-seller to
buy before selling in a “buyer’s” market relative to a “seller’s” market. In this way, demand
from internal movers (i.e. buyer-sellers) can endogenously become correlated with external
demand.
On the other hand, if ud is not that high, then internal demand can actually work to
smooth fluctuations in external demand. To see how, consider the extreme case where ud is
sufficiently low such that all internal movers want to buy before selling. In this case, even
when external demand is low, there is still steady demand from buyer-sellers who become
mismatched and enter the market at a constant, exogenous rate and are immediately ready
to buy. This steady demand by buyer-sellers helps to dampen the fluctuations due to the
fundamental movements in external demand.

4.4

Internal Movement

Whether internal transaction volume is more volatile and pro-cyclical than external transaction volume is closely connected to the endogenous response of buyer-sellers discussed above.
The model can generate more volatility in internal transaction volume when ud is high, and
umm is high relative to ummo . In this case, internal movers will tend to sell when inflow is
high (and prices are generally high) for the reasons discussed above. External movers will
generally sell much sooner upon mismatch – and therefore, their transaction volume will be
steadier – because their e↵ective holding cost of having the house unsold is higher (i.e. low
ummo relative to umm lowers V s relative to V bs ).

25

5

Estimation

5.1

Parametric Assumptions

In taking the model to the data, we make functional form assumptions on the matching
technology, the inflow process, and the idiosyncratic match quality. Following Pissarides
(2000), we assume the Cobb-Douglass form for the matching technology:
M (B, S) = AB ⌘ S 1

⌘

(12)

and so the probability of a match will depend directly on the market tightness, or the ratio
of buyers to sellers.
We assume that the inflow process follows a normal distribution
t

⇠ N (µ ,

2

)

(13)

and that the mean and variance of the inflow distribution are time-invariant.21
We assume that the match quality ✏ is normally distributed:
✏ ⇠ N (um ,

2

).

(14)

The advantage of this normality assumption for computation is that all of the conditional
expectations in the value functions can be expressed as simple functions of normal pdfs and
cdfs using properties of the truncated normal distribution. Further details are provided in
the Appendix.
The parameter values of the model are determined in two steps. In a first step, we make
several exogenous assumptions and calibrate any parameters for which there is a one-to-one
mapping between the parameter value and some feature of the data. Then, the remaining
parameter values are estimated through simulated method of moments. Table 4 summarizes
the parameters of the model.
21

In practice, we truncate the inflow distribution from below at zero so that the probability of a negative

draw equals zero. For our choice of µ ,

2

, the probability of a negative inflow draw is tiny and so truncating

the distribution has little e↵ect on our results.

26

5.1.1

Parameters Calibrated a Priori

We assume that each period in the model is equal to one month. We set the monthly discount
factor, , so that the annual discount rate is 0.95. We assume symmetric bargaining power
(✓ = 0.5). We set the mismatch rate, , so that mismatch occurs about once every 10 years,
which is roughly consistent with the average housing tenure in the American Housing Survey.
We assume that the flow utility associated with exiting the housing market, uO , equals um .
We calibrate the share of newly mismatched owners that also become mismatched with the
city to be (1

⇡) = 1/3 to match the average internal move share calculated from the data

in Table 1. We calibrate the mean of the inflow process, µ , so that average inflows and
outflows of agents in the economy are balanced. At our choice of

and µ , the annual

average transaction volume as a share of the total housing stock predicted by the model
is equal to .08, the average value in the data for the U.S.22 We set the exponent of the
matching function, ⌘, equal to 0.84 to match the contact elasticity for sellers with respect
to the buyer-to-seller ratio estimated in Genesove and Han [2012] based on the National
Association of Realtors survey. We set A = 1/2, which in our simulations generally leads to
match probabilities that lie in the unit interval, although for estimation we also mechanically
bound the probability of a match at one.
5.1.2

Parameters Estimated by Simulated Method of Moments

The remaining unknown parameters are the flow utility parameters um ,
ub ; and the variance of the inflow process,

2

2

, umm , ummo , ud ,

. We normalize ub = 0 and um = 1. We choose

the unknown parameters so as to best match the following moments:
• The mean and coefficient of variation of median time on market, and the correlation
of median time on market with real price changes.
• The coefficient of variation of sales volume, and the correlation of sales volume with
real price changes.
• The coefficient of variation of real price.
22

Source: a HUD report titled “U.S. Housing Market Conditions.” We use a national figure because the

figure for Los Angeles is unavailable.

27

• The mean within-period coefficient of variation of price (i.e. equilibrium price dispersion).23

• The mean of the fraction of internal movers who buy first, and the correlation of this
fraction with real price changes.
• The correlation of the internal move share with real price changes.
• The average price received by external sellers relative to the average price received by
internal sellers.
All of these means, variances, and correlations are taken over the time series. To be
consistent with the data, each variable is aggregated to its annual level first. All changes
are 1 year changes. We set the weighting matrix so that each category of moments, which
are distinguished by the bullet points above, are given equal weight in estimation, and each
moment within a category is given a weight proportional to the number of moments in the
category.24
Simulating the model involves solving for each of the value functions defined above.
We do this through value function iteration combined with linear (in parameters) interpolation, which is necessary because the state space is continuous. Since the integrals are
one-dimensional given our assumption on the inflow process, we use quadrature to approximate them. Note that once we have simulated the value functions, no additional simulation
is required to compute average prices or transaction volume given that the idiosyncratic
component of price and total surplus (i.e. the component that is not deterministic given the
state ⌦t ) is additively separable, as shown in Section 3.8.
23

To calculate within-period price dispersion in the data, we measure the standard deviation of the price

residual after partialing out time-invariant housing quality and year-by-zip code fixed e↵ects using a repeat
sales specification.
24
For example, the correlation of median time on market with real price changes is given a weight equal
to 1/3.

28

6

Model Fit and Discussion

The parameter estimates and the simulated moments we target are reported in Tables 3 and
4.25 The parameter values are sensible: (i) a matched homeowner with a match quality one
standard deviation above the mean receives a flow utility that is 8 percent higher than a
homeowner with the mean match quality, (ii) a mismatched homeowner receives about a 15
percent lower flow utility than a matched homeowner with a match quality one standard
deviation above the mean (iii) the mean flow utility of holding two positions, um

ud , is

significantly lower than that of being either matched well or mismatched with a single home
(iv) a homeowner mismatched with the city receives a 40 percent lower flow utility that a
mismatched homeowner who is still matched with the city (v) the flow utility of owning zero
homes is less than the flow utility of being either matched well or mismatched with a single
home, but it is not so low so as to substantially discourage internal movers from selling
before buying.26
Qualitatively the model fit is also good. The estimated model generates a significant
amount of volatility while fitting the sign of the correlations between price, volume, time
on market, the internal move share, and buy-before-sells observed in the data. The fit on
the moments using time-on-market are the poorest; however, a few studies have noted that
TOM data as reported by realtors is noisy.27 Although the estimated model can generate a
level of price volatility comparable to what is observed in the data, similar to other studies,
we do not generate enough volume volatility over the cycle.
The model performs well on a number of other moments that we do not specifically
target in estimation. The estimated model predicts a correlation between end of year unsold
25

The weighting matrix is calculated using the 2-step procedure described in Lee and Wolpin [2010]. The

variance-covariance matrix of the parameter estimates is given by (G0 W G)

1

, where G is the matrix of

derivatives of the moments with respect to the parameters and W is the weighting matrix.
26
For costs of owning zero homes sufficiently low, agents may actually prefer to buy before selling, particularly in hot markets when it can take a while to find a home as a buyer.
27
See, for example, the discussion in Levitt and Syverson [2008]. This has led to a wide range of calibrations
in the literature. For example, Caplin and Leahy [2011] use an average TOM of 3 months; Burnside et al.
[2011] use 7.5 months.

29

inventory (i.e. mismatch) and real price of -0.92. In the data, the correlation is -0.87.28 The
negative correlation between mismatch and price can be seen in Figure 7, which plots one
twenty year simulation (the length of our sample period) from the estimated model. During
price busts, the pool of mismatched homeowners endogenously builds despite the exogenous,
time-invariant rate of mismatch. This occurs because 1) the probability of matching with
a buyer is relatively low (i.e. the price decline is driven by low inflow into the buyer pool)
and 2) sellers would rather wait until inflow and prices recover to sell. As we will show
below, the high e↵ective holding cost of holding two positions is key for point 2). When
inflow into the market strengthens, mismatch is released as the probability of matching with
a buyer and prices both increase. Note that in Figure 7, the level of internal mismatch (i.e.
members of bs and ms) is comparable to the level of external mismatch (i.e. members of s
and ss) despite the fact that the transition rate into internal mismatch is only one half the
transition rate into external mismatch. The reason is that holding costs for external sellers
are estimated to be higher than those for internal sellers and so it is more costly for external
sellers to wait to sell until prices recover. The steadier outflow of external movers combined
with the endogenous build-up and release of internal movements results in the pro-cyclicality
of the internal move share.
As in the data presented in Table 2, the model predicts that internal movers who buybefore-selling sell for a lower average price relative to internal movers who sell first. However,
the model over predicts the magnitude of the discount (the model generates a 13 percent
discount). The model also successfully predicts that buying-before-selling has a larger impact
on the selling price accepted by internal movers compared to the price paid. But here again,
the model over predicts the magnitude of the di↵erence (the discount on price paid by internal
movers predicted by the model is 7 percent).
28

This correlation is for the aggregate U.S. housing market. The data source is the American Housing

Survey and the National Association of Realtors. Inventory is normalized by the owner-occupied housing
stock.

30

7

Sources of Volatility and the Pro-Cyclicality of Internal Movement

In this section, we quantify the contribution of the two key sources of friction in the model –
1) basic search/matching frictions, 2) frictions due to the joint buying and selling decisions
of internal movers – to market volatility and seek to understand how the e↵ect of the joint
buyer-seller frictions vary with the key parameters of the model. We do so through a series
of counterfactual simulations.29

7.1

Joint Buyer-Seller Versus Search Frictions

To isolate the role of joint buyer-seller frictions, we compare the baseline model to a simulation in which there is no joint buyer-seller problem. Mechanically, we do this by assuming
that there is no internal movement so that upon being mismatched, all sellers receive the
time-invariant and market conditions-invariant lifetime utility V O =

uO
(1 )

upon selling and

there is no re-entry into the buyer pool. As in the baseline model, we continue to assume
there are two types of mismatch shocks each providing a di↵erent level of mismatch flow utility. So in this model, there are four types of agents: buyers, matched owners, mismatched
owners receiving flow utility umm , and mismatched owners receiving flow utility ummo . We
also increase the mean of the inflow process so that inflow into the buyer pool is comparable
to the baseline model.
Table 5 shows volatility (defined as the coefficient of variation) in prices, transaction
volume, and time on market for this counterfactual model relative to the baseline model.
The counterfactual model without joint buyer-seller frictions generates only 35 percent of
the price volatility, 90 percent of the volume volatility, and 80 percent of the time on market
volatility as in the baseline model. This implies that, at the parameter values that best fit
the data, the joint buyer-seller problem increases the volatility of transaction volumes and
time on market by about 10-20 percent and, more importantly, more than doubles the price
volatility. As we discuss below, such an increase in price volatility is likely to have a number
29

In each simulation, the seed for the inflow process is set to be the same so that di↵erences in the simulated

dynamics are not the result of simulation noise.

31

of important welfare consequences for home owners and the economy more generally.

7.2

The Cost of Holding Two Homes and Joint Buyer-Seller Frictions

To better understand how the e↵ective cost of holding two homes gives rise to these important
frictions associated with the joint buyer-seller problem, we conduct another counterfactual
simulation that lowers the cost of holding two homes - ud - in the model. In practice, the
owner of two houses might be able to capture more of the consumption flow of a vacant
home if short-term rental frictions were not as severe. We make these changes relative to
the baseline model, so that the comparison of the results to the baseline model characterizes
how the cost of holding two positions a↵ects equilibrium dynamics in the model.
Table 5 shows volatility for values of ud equal to one-half the baseline estimate, ud equal
to zero, and ud equal to

0.5 ⇤ umm . Market volatility declines monotonically with the

e↵ective cost of holding two positions simultaneously and, interestingly, when the cost of
holding two positions is sufficiently low (e.g., for the simulation where ud =

0.5 ⇤ umm )

volume, time on market, and price volatility fall below the levels associated with the first
counterfactual simulation, which eliminated the joint buyer-seller frictions altogether. In this
case, the presence of internal movers within the metropolitan area actually works to smooth
the fluctuations that come from external demand! For example, when there is a negative
shock to the pool of external buyers, demand from internal movers compensates because
buying conditions are favorable; internal movers buy their next home now and worry about
selling the home with which they are mismatched later.
These results make it clear that the general e↵ect of having agents operating simultaneously on both sides of a market is ambiguous and depends directly on whether the costs of
holding two properties are such that increases in external demand lead to (i) increases in
internal demand due to a thick market e↵ect or (ii) decreases in internal demand due to a
competitive or smoothing e↵ect. Thus, while the results of this paper clearly establish that
the dual buyer-seller problem amplifies price volatility in housing markets, the presence of
these agents might help to smooth price fluctuations in other markets in which the costs (or

32

lack of utility) associated with holding two units simultaneously are not as high.

7.3

Endogenous Variation in Attractiveness of Holding Two Positions

The results presented in Table 5 show that a time invariant cost of holding two positions
significantly amplifies fundamental volatility. The reason is that in the presence of search
frictions, the total attractiveness of taking on two positions depends not only on the perperiod cost of holding two positions but also on the expected length of time that one expects
to incur the cost. This length of time is shorter during booms and longer during busts,
and so the attractiveness of holding two positions is pro-cyclical. Through this mechanism,
internal demand becomes positively correlated with external demand, causing prices to rise
more during booms and fall more during busts than they otherwise would in a market where
agents’ buying and selling decisions are not complementary.
Figure 8 compares the price dynamics for a simulation of the baseline model, the model
without internal movement, and the model in which ud is counterfactually set to equal
0.5 ⇤ umm . The amplification of house price cycles due to the joint buyer-seller problem
when the costs of holding two positions are high is immediately obvious in the figure.
As discussed above, the pro-cyclicality of internal movements comes from the endogenous build up and release of internal movement over the cycle, combined with the steadier
outflow of sellers who are mismatched with the city. Since the cost of holding two positions
exacerbates the build up and release of internal movement, the pro-cyclicality of internal
movement is strongest in the baseline model. Figure 9 illustrates this point. We plot mismatch in the baseline model and mismatch in the model where ud =

0.5 ⇤ umm for the same

20 year period shown in Figure 8. The cost of holding two positions drives the build-up
and release of mismatch over the cycle, which is much more prevalent in the high holding
costs baseline model. The build-up and release of mismatch generates the pro-cyclicality of
internal movement. As a result, the correlation between price and both internal and total
transaction volume is greatest in the baseline model.

33

8

Policy and Welfare

Our results so far suggest that much of the aggregate housing market volatility is related
to the volatility in the internal mover share. In this section, we consider, in the context
of our estimated model, whether a revenue neutral policy intervention can reduce volatility
in internal movement relative to external movement, thereby decreasing aggregate volatility
and potentially increasing welfare.
We consider a policy that subsidizes both the per-period utility of holding two homes
(ud ) and the per-period utility of being mismatched with the city (ummo ). A subsidy to
ud makes the moving decisions of buyer-sellers less sensitive to the cycle and a subsidy to
ummo (which brings ummo closer to umm ) better aligns the costs of staying on the market for
internal and external sellers, which should reduce volatility in internal movement relative
to external movement. To keep the policy intervention revenue neutral, we also impose a
tax on each transaction. We choose the value of the two subsidies and the transaction tax
optimally to maximize social welfare subject to revenue neutrality. We define the social
welfare function in the Appendix. We solve this problem numerically using a constrained
optimization routine.
Table 6 shows that the policy scheme reduces volatility in prices, volume, and time on
market by a comparable amount as the counterfactual simulations presented in Table 5,
and increases welfare per transaction by 4200 dollars. The optimal transactions tax is equal
to 2.24 (3.8 percent of the average price) and the subsidies are such that ud and ummo
e↵ectively become .06 and 1.23, respectively.. The policy intervention a↵ects welfare by
e↵ectively increasing the reservation match quality for buyers and sellers – especially for
members of ms and s who are most directly influenced by the subsidy. This is precisely
what the social planner would like to do in a classic search model with idiosyncratic match
quality. In such a framework, the private benefit of searching for a higher match quality
draw is generally smaller than the social benefit because each agent only receives a share of
the gains from a higher match quality according to his bargaining weight.30 By e↵ectively
30

Additional details are provided in Pissarides [2000]. One di↵erence between our search model and the

canonical labor search models is that in our model, entry of agents into the pool of active buyers and sellers is
exogenous. Thus, we do not get any inefficiency from an entry margin. In the Diamond-Mortenson-Pissarides

34

lowering the cost of waiting for a higher match quality draw, our policy more closely aligns
private and social search incentives, and thus increases welfare.
It is worth emphasizing that our model likely substantially understates the welfare benefits of the policy intervention because it does not fully capture the benefits of reduced price
volatility for market participants (as they are assumed to be risk neutral) and for the broader
economy.31 While real world analogues that replicate the kinds of holding subsidies we consider here are not obvious, these results suggest that a lack of liquidity for high holding
cost sellers is an important source of social welfare loss, and that sizable welfare gains and
decreases in housing price volatility could be achieved through mechanisms that increase
liquidity in the market.

9

Conclusion

Our paper is motivated by new empirical evidence that we document on internal movement
over the metropolitan-area housing-market cycle. We find that a significant share of overall
transaction volume consists of households buying and selling homes at about the same time.
Such internal movement is highly volatile and drives the pro-cyclicality of overall transaction
volume. We show that these and other well-established stylized facts about housing market
cycles can be matched very well with only a modest extension to classical search theory. In
particular, we extend the Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides search model only to (i) endogenize
the decisions of internal movers to buy or sell first and (ii) account for the fact that it is
costly for households to own two homes simultaneously, even for a short amount of time.
With this framework, we show that the joint buyer-seller problem in particular amplifies
fundamental volatility and gives rise to significant welfare loss.
Perhaps an optimistic message from our paper is that a significant portion of housing
framework, welfare is a↵ected by inefficient entry (i.e. too much or too little job creation) depending on the
Hosios condition.
31
See Chan [1997], Ferreira et al. [2010], Campbell et al. [2011], Anenberg and Kung [2014], Melzer [2012],
Case et al. [2005], Mian and Sufi [2011] for evidence and a discussion of the social costs of house price
volatility, including foreclosure externalities, restricted mobility (although the empirical evidence here is
mixed), debt overhang, and consumption volatility.

35

market volatility is not an unavoidable consequence of the existing technology for buying
and selling homes. Our results show that a natural role for homeowners moving with a
metropolitan area is to smooth shocks to external demand and dampen aggregate volatility, if only they could more easily buy and sell homes in a thin market. Indirect policies
or technologies that could alleviate this constraint for internal movers and thus decrease
equilibrium volatility could include 1) making tax and legal policies more accommodative
for flippers who act to provide liquidity to high holding cost sellers, 2) using the internet
to facilitate a market for short term rental32 , and 3) easing financing constraints that may
serve to e↵ectively increase the costs of holding two homes (e.g. make bridge loans more
accessible).

32

Examples of such platforms include www.airbnb.com and www.craigslist.org.

36

References
James Albrecht, Axel Anderson, Eric Smith, and Susan Vroman. Opportunistic matching
in the housing market. International Economic Review, 48(2):641–664, 2007.
Elliot Anenberg. Loss aversion, equity constraints and seller behavior in the real estate
market. Regional Science and Urban Economics, 41(1):67 – 76, 2011.
Elliot Anenberg and Edward Kung. Estimates of the size and source of price declines due
to nearby foreclosures. American Economic Review, 104(8):2527–51, 2014.
Patrick Bayer, Christopher Geissler, and James W. Roberts. Speculators and middlemen:
The role of flippers in the housing market. Working Paper 16784, National Bureau of
Economic Research, February 2011.
Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. Understanding booms and busts in
housing markets. Working Paper 16734, National Bureau of Economic Research, January
2011.
John Campbell, Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak. Forced sales and house prices. American
Economic Review, 101(5):2108–31, 2011.
Andrew Caplin and John Leahy. Trading frictions and house price dynamics. Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, 43:283–303, 2011.
Paul E. Carrillo. An empirical stationary equilibrium search model of the housing market*.
International Economic Review, 53(1):203–234, 2012.
Karl E. Case and Robert J. Shiller. The efficiency of the market for single-family homes.
The American Economic Review, 79(1):125–137, 1989.
Karl E Case, John M Quigley, and Robert J Shiller. Comparing wealth e↵ects: the stock
market versus the housing market. Advances in macroeconomics, 5(1), 2005.
Sewin Chan. Spatial lock-in: Do falling house prices constrain residential mobility? Journal
of Urban Economics, 49(3):567–568, 1997.
37

N. Edward Coulson and Paul L.E. Grieco. Mobility and mortgages: Evidence from the psid.
Regional Science and Urban Economics, 43(1):1 – 7, 2013.
Antonia Diaz and Belen Jerez. House prices, sales, and time on the market : a searchtheoretic framework. International Economic Review, 54(3):837–872, 2013.
Gary Engelhardt. Nominal loss aversion, housing equity constraints, and household mobility:
evidence from the united states. Journal of Urban Economics, 53(1):171–195, 2003.
Fernando Ferreira, Joseph Gyourko, and Joseph Tracy. Housing busts and household mobility. Journal of Urban Economics, 68(1):34 – 45, 2010.
David Genesove and Lu Han. Search and matching in the housing market. Journal of Urban
Economics, 2012.
David Genesove and Christopher Mayer. Loss aversion and seller behavior: Evidence from
the housing market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(4):1233–1260, 2001.
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Raven Saks. Why have housing prices gone up?
The American Economic Review, 95(2):pp. 323–328, 2005.
Allen Head, Huw Lloyd-Ellis, and Hongfei Sun. Search, liquidity, and the dynamics of house
prices and construction. The American Economic Review, 104(4):1172–1210, 2014.
John Krainer. A theory of liquidity in residential real estate markets. Journal of Urban
Economics, 49(1):32 – 53, 2001.
Donghoon Lee and Wilbert Van der Klaauw. An introduction to the frbny consumer credit
panel. Working Paper 479, FRB of New York Sta↵, November 2010.
Donghoon Lee and Kenneth I. Wolpin. Accounting for wage and employment changes in the
us from 1968-2000: A dynamic model of labor market equilibrium. Journal of Econometrics, 156(1):68 – 85, 2010.
Steven D. Levitt and Chad Syverson. Market distortions when agents are better informed:
The value of information in real estate transactions. Review of Economics and Statistics,
90(4):599–611, 2008.
38

Brian Melzer. Mortgage debt overhang: Reduced investment by homeowners with negative
equity. Working paper, August 2012.
Atif Mian and Amir Sufi. House prices, home equity-based borrowing, and the us household
leverage crisis. American Economic Review, 101(5):2132–56, 2011.
Raven Molloy and Hui Shan. The postforeclosure experience of us households. Real Estate
Economics, 2012.
Dale T. Mortensen and Christopher A. Pissarides. Job creation and job destruction in the
theory of unemployment. The Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):397–415, 1994.
L. Rachel Ngai and Silvana Tenreyro. Hot and cold seasons in the housing market. American
Economic Review, 104(12):3991–4026, 2014.
Robert Novy-Marx. Hot and cold markets. Real Estate Economics, 37(1):1–22, 2009.
Francois Ortalo-Magne and Sven Rady. Housing market dynamics: On the contribution of
income shocks and credit constraints. Review of Economic Studies, 73(2):459–485, 2006.
Monika Piazzesi and Martin Schneider. Momentum traders in the housing market: Survey
evidence and a search model. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 99(2):
406–411, 2009.
Christopher Pissarides. Equilibrium unemployment theory. MIT Press, 2000.
John M. Quigley and Steven Raphael. Regulation and the high cost of housing in california.
The American Economic Review, 95(2):pp. 323–328, 2005.
Jean-Marc Robin. On the dynamics of unemployment and wage distributions. Econometrica,
79(5):1327–1355, 2011.
Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. Negative equity does not reduce homeowners’ mobility. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Robert J. Shiller. Arithmetic repeat sales price estimators. Journal of Housing Economics,
1(1):110–126, 1991.
39

Robert Shimer. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. The
American Economic Review, 95(1):pp. 25–49, 2005.
Jeremy C. Stein. Prices and trading volume in the housing market: A model with downpayment e↵ects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(2):379–406, 1995.
William C. Wheaton. Vacancy, search, and prices in a housing market matching model.
Journal of Political Economy, 98(6):pp. 1270–1292, 1990.

A

Robustness of Stylized Facts on Internal Movement

A.1

Equifax Data

This section describes how we use the FRBNY/Equifax Consumer Credit Panel to document internal movement. The panel comprises a nationally representative 5 percent random
sample of US individuals with credit files. A detailed overview of the data can be found
in Lee and Van der Klaauw [2010]. We observe credit information for each individual at
a quarterly frequency. We classify an individual as having purchased a home in quarter t
(i.e. the denominator of the internal mover share) if the following conditions are satisfied:
the mailing address reported to Equifax for quarter t is di↵erent from the one reported in
quarter t

1, a new first mortgage was opened in quarter t, the individual has at most

one first mortgage open in quarters t and t

1.33 Since some individuals temporarily have

two first mortgages open (perhaps because they bought before selling), we also classify an
individually as having purchased a new house if the conditions specified hold for quarters
t

2, t

3, or t

4. Internal movers (i.e. the numerator of the internal mover share) are

the subset of these movers where 1) a first mortgage existed in quarter t

1 that is not

the same as the first mortgage in quarter t and 2) the MSA in quarter t is the same as the
33

In period t

1, we allow the individual to have two first mortgages if the smaller is less than half the

size of the larger mortgage to accommodate junior liens. This restriction is borrowed from Molloy and Shan
[2012].

40

MSA in quarter t

1.34 For studying internal movement, an advantage of Equifax relative

to Dataquick is that we have household identifiers so we do not need to match names. A
disadvantage is that we rely on mortgage information to identify home purchases, so, for
example, purchases where the buyer pays in cash are dropped from our analysis.
Appendix Figure 1 plots the internal mover share by year for MSAs in California, averaged
across MSAs. We smooth through the year 2003 because there is an uptick in internal
movement (not just in California but in all states) due to a change in Equifax’s methodology
of determining someone’s address. The level of the internal mover share is similar to the
level of the internal mover share calculated from the Dataquick data specifically for Los
Angeles. The internal mover share is also pro-cyclical for MSAs in California. Interestingly,
the internal mover share peaks just before the house price index, which we also find to be
the case in Dataquick (see Figure 1). Since the Equifax data is nationally representative,
we can also investigate across MSA di↵erences in the dynamics of the internal mover share.
The states in the left panel of Appendix Figure 1 had large price run-ups in the early 2000’s,
followed by large house price declines starting in the middle of the decade. The states in the
right panel had more subdued house price dynamics according to CoreLogic. The evidence
strongly suggests that the dynamics of internal movement are correlated with the house price
cycle.
We also examine whether our finding in Dataquick that internal movers tend to sell before
buying holds up in the Equifax data. In the Equifax data, we classify an internal mover as
buying-before-selling if the mover temporarily has two first mortgages open. For MSAs in
California, 30 percent of internal movers buy before sell on average, which is identical to the
number we arrive at with Dataquick. For the country as a whole, the share is 25 percent.

A.2

American Housing Survey

We use the American Housing Survey data for Los Angeles to calculate the share of owneroccupied housing units with recent movers where the previous unit of the recent mover was
also owner-occupied (Source: Table 3-10). This should overstate the internal mover share
34

The mailing address in Equifax is a unique identifier, but is scrambled to preserve the anonymity of

individuals. We do observe the unscrambled county and state, which we use to determine the MSA.

41

as we define it because a move between two owner occupied units from one MSA to another
would be included in the numerator. The survey is only conducted every 5 years or so, but
the average share in the six most recent surveys is 40 percent, consistent with our finding
that most housing transactions are external. The share is the highest in 1989 (during a house
price boom) and the lowest in 1995 (during a house price bust).

B

Additional Model Details

B.1

Conditional Expectation of Total Surplus (⇧)

In this subsection, we define ⇧j,k , which denotes the expected value of the total surplus
associated with a transaction between a type j buyer and a type k seller conditional on the
total surplus being greater than zero, multiplied by the probability that the total surplus is
greater than zero. The first step is to define the total surplus from each type of transaction
in the economy in terms of the value functions defined in the main text:
1. b meets with bs
• T S b,bs = U m

V b + ✏˜ + V b

V bs

2. b buys from s
• T S b,s = U m

V b + ✏˜ +

uO
1

Vs

3. b buys from ms
• T S b,ms = U m

V b + ✏˜ + V m

V ms

4. b buys from ss
• T S b,ss = U m

V b + ✏˜ + V s

V ss

5. bs buys from bs
• T S bs,bs = U ms

V bs + ✏˜ + V b

V bs

6. bs buys from s
42

• T S bs,s = U ms

V bs + ✏˜ +

uO
1

Vs

7. bs buys from ms
• T S bs,ms = U ms

V bs + ✏˜ + V m

V ms

8. bs buys from ss
• T S bs,ss = U ms

V bs + ✏˜ + V s

V ss

The only idiosyncratic component to the total surplus is the normally distributed term, ✏˜.
Let T S denote the non-idiosyncratic component of T S; that is, T¯S equals T S less a mean
zero, idiosyncratic term. Then, using properties of the truncated normal distribution, we
can write
j,k

⇧
where

B.2

j,k

and

j,k

= E[T S |T S

j,k

> 0]P r(T S

j,k

j,k

TS
TS
j,k
)T S + (
)˜
> 0) = (
˜
˜

(15)

are the standard normal cdf and pdf, respectively.

Behavior of a buyer-seller when matched with both a buyer
and a seller (dsell )

In this subsection, we define the expected value of proceeding as a buyer and as a seller
conditional on matching with a buyer and a seller for a member of bs. When presenting the
value functions, we used dsell = 1 to denote the case where the expected value of proceeding
as a seller is higher than the expected value of proceeding as a buyer. Since we focus on a
symmetric equilibrium, dsell must be the same for all agents in the economy. Therefore, if
the agent chooses to pursue the match as a seller, in equilibrium the expected payo↵ is

b,bs

TS
b
E(sell) = ( (
B
˜

b,bs

)T S

b,bs

TS
+ (
˜

bs,bs

TS
bs
)˜ ) + ( (
B
˜

bs,bs

)T S

bs,bs

TS
+ (
˜

)˜ )(1

M
)
S
(16)

If the agent chooses to pursue the match as a buyer, in equilibrium the expected payo↵
is
43

bs,ms

bs,ms

s
ms
TS
TS
bs,ms
( (
)(T S
)˜ ) + (
E(buy) =
)+ (
S
˜
˜
S
bs,ss
bs,ss
M
TS
TS
2ss
bs,ss
( (
)(T S
)˜ )(1
)+
)+ (
S
˜
˜
2S

bs,s

bs,s

TS
TS
bs,s
(
)(T S ) + (
)˜ )+
˜
˜
bs,bs
bs,bs
bs
TS
TS
bs,bs
( (
)(T S
)˜ )(1
)+ (
S
˜
˜
(17)

Note that
dsell = I[E(sell) > E(buy)]

(18)

where I is the indicator function. We have suppressed the dependence on the state in the
equations above, but it should be emphasized that dsell does indeed depend on the state ⌦t .

B.3

Equilibrium Transaction Volume

When dsell (⌦t ) = 1, transaction volume in period t is:
✓
M
M
T S bs,bs
T S bs,s
M
bs ⇤ bs(1
) (
) + bs ⇤ s(1
) (
)+
Transaction Volume:
B⇤S
S
˜
S
˜
M
M
M
T S bs,ms
T S bs,ss
bs ⇤ ms(1
) (
) + bs ⇤ 2ss(1
)(1
) (
)+
S
˜
S
2S
˜
◆
M
T S b,bs
T S b,s
T S b,ms
T S b,ss
b ⇤ bs (
)+b⇤s (
) + b ⇤ ms (
) + b ⇤ 2ss(1
) (
)
(19)
˜
˜
˜
2S
˜
When dsell (⌦t ) = 0, transaction volume is:
✓
M
T S bs,bs
T S bs,s
M
bs ⇤ bs(1
) (
) + bs ⇤ s (
)+
Transaction Volume:
B⇤S
B
˜
˜
T S bs,ms
T S bs,ss
M
bs ⇤ ms (
) + bs ⇤ 2ss(1
) (
)+
˜
2S
˜
◆
M
M
T S b,bs
T S b,s
T S b,ms
T S b,ss
b ⇤ bss(1
) (
)+b⇤s (
) + b ⇤ ms (
) + b ⇤ 2ss(1
) (
)
B
˜
˜
˜
2S
˜
(20)

B.4

Laws of Motion

In equilibrium, the state variables transition according to the following equations:

44

M
)
B

• When dsell (⌦t ) = 1:
M
M
T S b,ms
T S b,s
T S b,ss
(ms (
)+s (
) + 2ss(1
) (
))
B⇤S
˜
˜
2S
˜
M
M
T S bs,bs
+ bs ⇤ bs
(1
) (
)
B⇤S
S
˜
M
M
M
T S b,ms
ms0 = ms ms
b (
) + bs
(1
)
B⇤S
˜
B⇤S
S
T S bs,bs
T S bs,s
T S bs,ss
M
⇤ (bs (
)+s (
) + 2ss(1
) (
))
˜
˜
2S
˜
M
M
T S b,s
T S bs,s
s0 = s s
(b (
) + bs(1
) (
))+
B⇤S
˜
S
˜
M
M
M
T S b,ss
T S bs,ss
2ss
(1
)(b (
) + bs(1
) (
))
B⇤S
2S
˜
S
˜
M
M
M
T S b,ss
T S bs,ss
ss0 = ss 2ss
(1
)(b (
) + bs(1
) (
))
B⇤S
2S
˜
S
˜
M
M
T S bs,bs
T S bs,ms
bs0 = bs bs
(1
)(2bs (
) + ms (
)+
B⇤S
S
˜
˜
T S bs,s
T S bs,ss
T S b,bs
M
M
s (
) + 2ss(1
) (
)) bs ⇤ b ⇤
(
)
˜
2S
˜
B⇤S
˜
b0 = b

b

(21)

• When dsell (⌦t ) = 0:
T S b,ms
T S b,s
T S b,ss
M
M
(ms (
)+s (
) + 2ss(1
) (
))
B⇤S
˜
˜
2S
˜
M
M
T S bs,bs
+ bs ⇤ bs
(1
) (
)
B⇤S
B
˜
M
M
T S b,ms
ms0 = ms ms
b (
) + bs
B⇤S
˜
B⇤S
M
M
T S bs,bs
T S bs,s
T S bs,ss
⇤ (bs(1
) (
)+s (
) + 2ss(1
) (
))
B
˜
˜
2S
˜
M
T S b,s
T S bs,s
s0 = s s
(b (
) + bs (
))+
B⇤S
˜
˜
T S b,ss
T S bs,ss
M
M
2ss
(1
)(b (
) + bs (
))
B⇤S
2S
˜
˜
M
M
T S b,ss
T S bs,ss
ss0 = ss 2ss
(1
)(b (
) + bs (
))
B⇤S
2S
˜
˜
M
M
T S bs,bs
T S bs,ms
bs0 = bs bs
(2bs(1
) (
) + ms (
)+
B⇤S
B
˜
˜
M
M
M
T S bs,s
T S bs,ss
T S b,bs
s (
) + 2ss(1
) (
)) bs ⇤ b ⇤
(1
) (
)
˜
2S
˜
B⇤S
B
˜
b0 = b

b

45

(22)

• Exogenous movements due to mismatch shocks
ms0 = ms

ms

ss0 = ss + ms
s0 = s + (1

⇡)(1

bs0 = bs + ⇡(1

bs

bs

2ms

2ms

s

s

2ss)

2ss)

b0 = b +

B.5

(23)

Welfare

Social welfare in our model economy is defined as follows:
✓
✓
1
X
M (Bt , St )
t
W =
E bst umm + (mst + sst )( ud ) + (st + sst )ummo + bt ub +
B t St
t=0
✏˜⇤bs,bs

ũm

M (Bt , St )
)
˜
St
✏˜⇤bs,s ũm
M (Bt , St )
+ bst st (
)(E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤bs,s ] + V O )(1 dsell
)
t
˜
St
✏˜⇤bs,ms ũm
M (Bt , St )
+ bst mst (
)E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤bs,ms ](1 dsell
)
t
˜
St
✏˜⇤b,bs ũm
M (Bt , St )
+ bt bst (
)E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤b,bs ](1 (1 dsell
)
t )
˜
Bt
✏˜⇤b,s ũm
✏˜⇤b,ms ũm
⇤
O
+ bt st (
)(E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜b,s ] + V ) + bt mst (
)E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤b,ms ]
˜
˜
✏˜⇤b,ss ũm
M
(B
,
S
)
t
t
+ 2bt sst (
)E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤b,ss ](1
)
˜
2St
◆◆
✏˜⇤bs,ss ũm
M (Bt , St )
⇤
sell M (Bt , St )
+ 2bst sst (
)E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜bs,ss ](1
)(1 dt
)
˜
2St
St
+ bst bst (

)E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤bs,bs ](1

dsell
t

(24)

✏˜⇤k,j is the match quality threshold for a transaction to occur between a type k buyer and
a type j seller. We suppress the dependence on the state, (⌦t ), but in both the decentralized
and the centralized equilibrium, the threshold will depend on (⌦t ).
and the

is the normal cdf,

terms represent the probability that the match quality exceeds the threshold,

conditional on a match occurring. E[˜✏|˜✏ > ✏˜⇤ ] represents the expected match quality draw
conditional on the match quality exceeding the threshold.
Note that the total discounted present value of the entire steam of ✏ shocks is accounted
for at the time of the transaction. We can express welfare in these terms because the expected
46

duration of a match is constant and exogenous in the model. The outer expectation in (24)
is with respect to realizations of the inflow process. The V O term reflects the fact that when
there is a transaction involving an external seller, a lifetime utility of V O is also generated
for an agent that exits the city. Prices do not enter (24) because they are simply transfers
from one agent to another.

47

Figure 1: Los Angeles Prices, Volume, Time on Market
Real house price and total transaction volume index based on Dataquick data. Median time on market from California
Association of Realtors. The underlying data are presented in Table 1.

1.00
0.80
0.60
Index (Log Scale)

0.40
0.20
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
Real House Price

Volume

48

Time On Market

Figure 2: Los Angeles Transaction Volume by Type
The underlying data (from Dataquick) are presented in Table 1. A transaction is internal if the seller bought a house in the
Los Angeles MSA within twelve months of the selling date. Otherwise, it is external.

1
0.8

Index (Log Scale)

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
External Transactions

49

Internal Transactions

Figure 3: Distribution of Sell Date - Purchase Date for Internal Movers
Histogram of days between sale and purchase for internal movers in Los Angeles for years 1992-2008 calculated using Dataquick.
A mover is internal if he sells one house and buys another within the Los Angeles MSA within twelve months of each other.
Date of buy and sell are defined using closing dates.

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

50

Figure 4: Internal Mover Share by LTV
This graph shows the share of transactions by internal movers when we restrict the sample by the loan-to-value (LTV) ratio of
the seller at the time of the sale (calculated using Dataquick data). LTV is imputed, as described in the main text, using data
on the original loan amount (including all mortgages), refinances, and the original purchase price. A transaction is internal if

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

the seller bought a house in the Los Angeles MSA within twelve months of the selling date.

1990

1995

2000
y
LTV<40
LTV<80

2005

2010

LTV<60
Unrestricted LTV
®

51

Figure 5: Internal Mover Share, Excluding Flippers
This graph reproduces the time-series of the internal mover on a subset of the main sample, which excludes all transactions
purchased by buyers who buy multiple homes within the calendar year. A transaction is internal if the seller bought a house in

.15

.2

Internal Mover Share
.25
.3

.35

.4

the Los Angeles MSA within twelve months of the selling date.

1990

1995

2000
Year

2005

2010

®

52

Figure 6: Flow Chart of Model Economy
This figure shows how agents in the model economy flow through the di↵erent pools. Double arrows reflect endogenous
movements through trade and single arrows reflect exogenous movements. The greek letters in italics to the right of the single
arrows reflect the probability that the exogenous movement occurs. b denotes a buyer; m denotes a matched owner; bs denotes
a buyer-seller; ms denotes a dual position seller; s denotes an external seller; ss denotes a dual position external seller.

Entry ( )

bs

b

m

ms

(1 )

s

Exit

53

ss

Figure 7: Simulated Mismatch over the House Price Cycle
This figure illustrates how the estimated model generates endogenous build-ups and release of mismatched homeowners over
time. Internal mismatch (buyer-sellers (bs) and dual position sellers (ms)) and external mismatch (external sellers (s) and dual
position external sellers (ss)) are plotted for an arbitrary, but representative 20 year simulation on the left y-axis. The average
house price is plotted on the right y-axis, where the house price in period one is indexed to one.

0.02

1.2
0.015

1

0.01
0.8

0.005

0

2

4

6

8

10
12
14
Year
Internal Mismatch (bs+ms)
External Mismatch (s+2ss)
Price

54

16

18

20

Price Index

Mass Relative to Housing Stock

1.4

Figure 8: Simulated Price Index Under Counterfactual Models Relative to Baseline Model
This figure compares the price dynamics for a 20-year period (one in which the inflow realizations are such that there is a large
boom and bust in the baseline model) in the baseline model, the model without internal movement, and the model in which ud
is lowered to

1/2umm . Prices are indexed to one in period one.

1.35
1.3
1.25
1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0.95
0.9
0.85

0

2

4

6

8

10
12
Year
Baseline Model
Lower Cost of 2 Positions
No Internal Movement

55

14

16

18

20

Figure 9: Simulated Mismatch Under Counterfactual Models Relative to Baseline Model
This figure compares the mismatch dynamics in the baseline model relative to the counterfactual model where ud is lowered
to

1/2umm for a 20-year period (one in which the inflow realizations are such that there is a large boom and bust in the

baseline model). Indexes summarizing price dynamics in each of the two models are plotted on the left y-axis. The pool labeled
mismatch consists of buyer-sellers (bs), external sellers (s), and dual position external sellers (ss).

0.04

1.2

0.03

1

0.02

0.01

0.8

0

2

4

6

8

10
12
14
Year
Mismatch (Baseline)
Mismatch (Lower Cost of 2 Positions)
Price (Baseline)
Price (Lower Cost of 2 Positions)

56

16

18

20

Price Index

Mass Relative to Housing Stock

1.4

Figure A1: Internal mover share is the share of moves into owner occupancy where the
previous home for the owner occupant was in the same MSA and also owner occupied. Owner
occupancy is inferred from the mortgage information of the individual. See Appendix for
additional details. The source for internal mover share is Equifax and the source for house
price index is CoreLogic.
Appendix Figure 1: Internal Mover Share from Equifax Data (Top Panel)
and House Prices (Bottom Panel)

.2

.2

Internal Mover Share
.3
.4
.5

Internal Mover Share
.3
.4
.5

.6

MSAs in Flatter House Price States

.6

MSAs in Boom−Bust States

2000

2005
year

2010

2000

2005
year

2010

Texas

Oklahoma

Arizona

Iowa

Arkansas

House Price Index
1.3
1.8
.8

.8

House Price Index
1.3
1.8

2.3

Nevada

Florida

2.3

California

2000

2005
year

2010

2000

2005
year

2010

California

Nevada

Texas

Oklahoma

Florida

Arizona

Iowa

Arkansas

Notes: Internal mover share is the share of moves into owner occupancy where the previous home for the owner occupant was in the same MSA
and also owner occupied. See Appendix for additional details. The source for internal mover share is Equifax and the source for house price index is
CoreLogic.

®

57

Table 1: Summary Of Transactions and Prices, Los Angeles Metropolitan Area 1988-2009
Year 2009 includes sales through June only. A transaction is internal if the seller also bought a house in the Los Angeles MSA
within 12 months of the selling date. A transaction is external if the seller does not buy a house in the Los Angeles MSA within
12 months of the selling date. All data except for Days on Market comes from Dataquick. Days on Market data comes from
California Association of Realtors. We cannot break out total transaction volume into internal and external movement during
the years before 1992 because the buyer and seller names are severely truncated in the Dataquick data for those years.

Year

Real House
Price Index

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

0.00
0.15
0.15
0.08
0.00
-0.13
-0.22
-0.27
-0.31
-0.29
-0.20
-0.13
-0.06
0.02
0.14
0.30
0.53
0.68
0.73
0.63
0.31
0.11

Total
Median Days
Transactions on Market
225,103
214,682
166,434
146,592
140,522
144,618
170,250
157,369
180,183
198,838
231,606
242,962
235,843
238,522
262,751
264,161
238,939
228,850
167,411
109,046
122,698
77,506

50
62
80
86
88
93
80
75
59
48
38
36
29
27
24
24
23
25
44
53
49
37

58

External
Transactions

Internal
Transactions

Internal Mover
Share

----104,553
111,919
133,519
125,508
142,621
155,267
169,703
172,311
162,663
157,964
168,975
165,610
147,967
141,588
111,546
82,211
106,824
--

----35,969
32,699
36,731
31,861
37,562
43,571
61,903
70,651
73,180
80,558
93,776
98,551
90,972
87,262
55,865
26,835
15,874
--

----25.6
22.6
21.6
20.2
20.8
21.9
26.7
29.1
31.0
33.8
35.7
37.3
38.1
38.1
33.4
24.6
12.9
--

Table 2: E↵ect of Internal Mover Type on Sales Prices
These regressions investigate how sales prices of homes bought and sold by internal movers depend on the number of days
between the sale date and the purchase date, and how the sales prices of homes sold by internal movers compare with the sales
prices of homes sold by external movers. The source is the Los Angeles Dataquick data. Log sales price are normalized by a
log predicted market price, which is calculated in a first stage through a repeat sales analysis. Transactions that do not have a
previous price during our sample window are thus excluded from the second stage regression. I[] denotes the indicator function.
In the first two columns, the sample is restricted to internal movers, so that the price comparisons are between internal movers
who buy and sell at various times. A mover is internal if they bought a house in the Los Angeles MSA within 12 months of the
selling date and external otherwise. The first column investigates the price of the home sold by internal movers. The second
column investigates the price of the home purchased by internal movers. The third column investigates the prices of homes sold
by internal movers relative to the prices of homes sold by external movers.

I[60 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 180 ]
I[30 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 60 ]
I[20 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 30 ]
I[10 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 20 ]
I[0 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 10 ]
I[(Sell Date Purchase Date) == 0]
I[0 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 10 ]
I[ 20 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 10 ]
I[ 30 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 20 ]
I[ 30 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 60 ]
I[ 60 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 180 ]
I[ 180 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 365 ]

Log Price
Log Predicted Price
of Sell

Log Price
Log Predicted Price
of Buy

-0.0103***
(0.0017)
-0.0080***
(0.0023)
-0.0129***
(0.0032)
-0.0134***
(0.0031)
-0.0099***
(0.0030)
0.0132***
(0.0020)
0.0137***
(0.0016)
0.0185***
(0.0022)
0.0125***
(0.0023)
0.0133***
(0.0019)
0.0057***
(0.0015)
0.0005
(0.0016)

-0.0035
(0.0025)
-0.0016
(0.0033)
-0.0114**
(0.0045)
-0.0064
(0.0044)
-0.0038
(0.0042)
0.0000
(0.0028)
0.0002
(0.0022)
0.0048
(0.0031)
0.0103***
(0.0033)
0.0035
(0.0027)
-0.0001
(0.0022)
0.0028
(0.0023)

I[Internal Mover]
Month Fixed Effects
Sample Includes:
Internal Movers
External Movers
Observations
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Log Price
Log Predicted Price
of Sell

0.0530***
(0.0006)
x

x

x

x

x

x
x

527454

300597

1426185

59

Table 3: Moments Targeted in Estimation
The means (µ) and standard deviations ( ), as well as the correlation coefficients (Correl), are taken over the time series. All
changes are annual.

Moment
Median Months on market for sellers ( )
Median Months on market for sellers ( / )
Correl(Median Months on market, Real Price)
Sales volume ( / )
Correl(sales volume, Real Price)
Real price ( / )
Within period price dispersion as a share of average price ( )
Share of internal movers who buy first ( )
Correl(Share of internal movers who buy first, Real Price)
Correl(Share of transactions by internal movers, Real Price)
External Sellers Price Discount

Data
2.000
0.436
0.390
0.240
0.850
0.316
0.130
0.292
0.000
0.920
0.050

Simulated Value
4.042
0.273
0.138
0.062
0.748
0.371
0.113
0.308
0.017
0.715
0.071

Table 4: Parameter Estimates

Parameters Calibrated A Priori/Normalizations
Parameter
b
m

infl

A
(1 )

Description
Monthly Flow utility of being a buyer

Value
0.0000

Monthly Flow utility of being mismatched
Monthly Discount factor
Monthly Average inflow into economy
Monthly Probability of transition to mismatch
Exponent of matching function
Scaling of matching function
Bargaining power of seller
Share of Mismatched Starter Owners Get Mismatched with City

1.0000
0.9950
0.0053
0.0083
0.8400
0.5000
0.5000
0.6667

Parameters Estimated by Simulated MOM
Parameter
mm

Description
Monthly Flow utility of being matched

mmo

Monthly Flow utility of being mismatched with metro area

0.5438

0.0331

Monthly Flow utility penalty of having 2 positions
Stdev. Of match quality shocks
Monthly Stdev of inflow into economy

0.6133
0.0787
0.0021

0.0125
0.0115
0.0003

d

infl

60

Estimate
0.9198

Standard Error
0.0496

Table 5: Model Generated Volatility
Volatility is defined as the coefficient of variation over time. The unit of observation is a year. Volume is total annual sales
volume, price is an annual average price (weighted by monthly volume), and TOM is an annual average time on market (weighted
by monthly volume). In the no internal movement model, upon selling, sellers receive a time invariant and market conditions
invariant lifetime utility. ud denotes the penalty to flow utility from owning two homes. umm denotes the flow utility associated
with being mismatched.

Counterfactual Models
ud equals:
Baseline Model No Internal Movement
Prices
Volume
TOM

0.371
0.062
0.273

1/4 of baseline estimate

zero

1/2*umm

0.3281
0.0531
0.2182

0.257
0.052
0.211

0.095
0.051
0.208

0.121
0.056
0.226

Table 6: Policy and Welfare Analysis
The policy consists of subsidises to both the per period utility of holding two homes (ud ) and the per period utility of being
mismatched with the city (ummo ), and a tax on each transaction. The subsidies and taxes are chosen optimally so as to
maximize social welfare subject to revenue neutrality. Volatility is defined as the coefficient of variation over time. The unit of
observation is a year. Volume is total annual sales volume, price is an annual average price (weighted by monthly volume), and
TOM is an annual average time on market (weighted by monthly volume).

Change in Welfare per Transaction
Price Volatility
Volume Volatility
TOM Volatility

61

Policy
$4,204
0.085
0.050
0.207

Baseline
0.371
0.062
0.273

Table A1: E↵ect of Internal Mover Type on Sales Prices, Alternative Definition of Internal
Move
This table reproduces the regressions display in Table 2 but on a sample of internal movers where the definition of an internal
mover is more stringent. For a pair of transactions to be an internal move, here we require an exact match between the seller
and buyer variables in the transaction data. See Table 2 for additional notes.

I[60 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 180 ]
I[30 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 60 ]
I[20 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 30 ]
I[10 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 20 ]
I[0 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 10 ]
I[(Sell Date Purchase Date) == 0]
I[0 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 10 ]
I[ 20 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 10 ]
I[ 30 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 20 ]
I[ 30 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 60 ]
I[ 60 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 180 ]
I[ 180 < (Sell Date Purchase Date) < 365 ]

Log Price
Log Predicted Price
of Sell

Log Price
Log Predicted Price
of Buy

-0.0265***
(0.0032)
-0.0353***
(0.0039)
-0.0396***
(0.0050)
-0.0433***
(0.0050)
-0.0425***
(0.0047)
-0.0204***
(0.0032)
-0.0154***
(0.0027)
0.0053
(0.0037)
0.0047
(0.0040)
0.0080**
(0.0034)
0.0123***
(0.0030)
0.0033
(0.0031)

-0.0056
(0.0046)
-0.0102*
(0.0055)
-0.0178**
(0.0071)
-0.0070
(0.0070)
-0.0032
(0.0067)
-0.0052
(0.0045)
-0.0025
(0.0039)
0.0008
(0.0052)
0.0054
(0.0058)
-0.0033
(0.0049)
-0.0043
(0.0043)
0.0025
(0.0044)

I[Internal Mover]
Month Fixed Effects
Sample Includes:
Internal Movers
External Movers
Observations

Log Price
Log Predicted Price
of Sell

0.0634***
(0.0008)
x

x

x

x

x

x
x

180781

107618

1426192

Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

62

