NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE BUDGET DEFICIT AND THE DOLLAR

Martin

Feldstein

Working Paper No. 1898

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1898
April 1986

The Budget Deficit and the Dollar

ABSTRACT

This study examines the reasons for changes in the real exchange rate
between the dollar and the German mark from the beginning of the floating rate
regime in 1973 through 1984. The econometric analysis focuses on the effects
of anticipated structural budget deficits and monetary policy in the United
States and Germany and the changes in U.S. profitability induced by changes -in
tax rules. The possible impact of a number of other variables is also
examined.
The evidence indicates that the rise in the expected future defic-its in
the budget of the U.S. government has had a powerful effect on the exchange
rate between the dollar and the German mark. Each
one percentage point
increase in the ratio of future budget deficits to GNP increased the exchange
rate by about 30 percentage points. Changes in the growth of the money supply
also affect the exchange rate. Changes in the tax rules and in the inflationtax interaction that altered the corporate demand for funds did not have any
discernible effect on the exchange rate.

A separate analysis confirms that there is an equilibrium structural
relation between the dollar-DM rates in the United States and Germany. An
increase of one percentage point in the real interest rate differential has
been associated with a rise in the OM-dollar ratio of about five percent.

Martin Feldstein
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138

THE BUDGET DEFICIT AND THE DOLLAR
Martin Feldstein*

The dramatic surge in the dollar's value relative to major European
currencies was probably the most important economic event of the period

between 1980 and 1984. The dollar's value rose from 1.8 German marks in
mid-1980 to a peak of more than 3.3 marks in February 1985. More generally,
the multilateral trade-weighted real value of the dollar rose by 70 percent
between 1980 and the first quarter of 1985.

The rise of the dollar produced an unprecedented merchandise trade
deficit that increased to three percent of GNP by 1985, hurting a wide range
of American industries and creating a political receptivity to protectionism
that still threatens to reverse the progress of the past half century -in

liberalizing world trade. The trade deficit and the associated current
account deficit transformed the United States from a net capital exporter in
1980 to a country that by 1984 had a large enough capital inflow to finance

55 percent of the nation's total net fixed investment. In addition, the sharp
rise in the dollar not only increased Americans' real incomes but also
contributed significantly to the decline of inflation.'
In Europe and Japan, exports rose sharply and the current account moved
into substantial surplus; for the European Economic Community as a whole, the
trade balance with the rest of the world improved by more than $50 billion
between 1980 and 1984. But at the same time, the rise -in the dollar induced
foreign central banks to increase their interest rates in order to prevent

their currencies from falling even further.2 On balance, despite the increase

—2-

-in exports, the induced rise in interest rates may have depressed aggregate

demand in Europe by enough to make the dollar's rise a net contributor to the
stubbornly high level of unemployment.

The present study focuses on the real exchange rate between the dollar
and the German mark from the beginning of the floating exchange rate regime in

1973 through 1984. The mark is not only very important in its own right but
is representative of the exchange rate between the dollar and the other
European countries since the mark is the dominant currency in the European
Monetary System.

1.

Alternative Explanations of the Dollar's Rise

The basic cause of the dollar's sharp increase still remains a very
contentious subject.

I have argued since 1982 that the dollar's rise could be

traced primarily to the increase in current and expected structural deficits
in the federal budget and to the shift to an anti-inflationary monetary

policy.3 This view was also elaborated in the Economic Reports of the
President for 1983 and 1984.

Increases in the federal budget deficit raise real long—term interest

rates and these higher rates attract funds to the United States. The dollar's
rise is necessary to create the trade deficit and associated current account

deficit that permits the desired net inflow of foreign capital. Moreover, to
achieve portfolio equilibrium, the dollar must rise by enough so that its
expected future fall just offsets the nominal yield differential between

dollar securities and foreign assets. This is discussed in Branson (1985) and

—3—

Frenkel and Razin (1984). The budget deficit may also raise the dollar more
directly by changing the relative demand for U.S. and foreign goods (Dornbusch,
1983 and Obstfeldt, 1985).

The effect on the dollar of the rising level of structural budget
deficits was reinforced by the change in monetary policy that began in October
1979. The contractionary shift of Federal Reserve policy caused a short—term
spike in real interest rates that temporarily increased the attractiveness of

dollar securities. More fundamentally, the new Federal Reserve policy also
caused a more sustained increase in the confidence of investors world—wide
that the value of the dollar would not soon be eroded by a return to rising

inflation in the United States. This reduction in the risk of dollar
investments reinforced the attractiveness caused by the deficit-induced rise
in the expected real interest rate.

Other economists and policy officials have offered quite different

explanations of the rise in the dollar. The Economic Report of the president
for 1985 concludes that the most important reason for the rise in the dollar
between 1980 and 1982 was the rise in the after-tax return on new business
investment caused by the combination of the Economic Recovery and Tax Act of

1981 and the reduced rate of inflation. The tight money policy is also seen as
a cause of the dollar's rise in this period. But the authors conclude that
although expanding budget deficits in this period "may also have raised the
level of U.S. real interest rates and helped to strengthen the dollar ....
extent of upward pressure on real interest rates and on the dollar through
this channel is uncertain, and numerous studies have failed to uncover
significant effects" (page 105).

the

-4-

The IpQ±s authors also note that after 1982 the differential between
U.S. 3-month real interest rates and a trade-weighted average of 3-month real
interest rates in six other industrial countries (calculated using OECD
inflation forecasts) narrows to zero and is occasionally negative. They
conclude from this that "other factors have continued to push up the demand
for dollar assets" and suggest that the dollar's strength since 1982 has been
due to "the combination of increased after-tax profitability of U.S.
corporations, demonstrated strength of the U.S. recovery, reversal of
international lending outflow from U.S. banks, and generally more favorable
longer run prospects for the U.S. economy... ." (pages 105-06).

Another commonly expressed opinion is that the rise in the dollar since
the summer of 1980 reflected growing confidence in the United States as a
"safe haven" for investments by foreigners who believed that the election of
Ronald Reagan would make their assets safer in the United States than elsewhere

in the world. There is also the view, identified most strongly with Ronald
McKinnon (e.g., 1984), that the strong dollar does not reflect any "real"

(h idrit

F-

S

df - r- 4 tc

. .-—,

-i...,—.n.—.——-——
rpI nrr,f
F-,. 4 +h-i
'-'-"1 4

1 f,—n+ 4ti .-.-,
+y r', ii

but is solely an indication that monetary policy in the United States is too
tight.

At a more fundamental level, any role for the budget deficit in
explaining the rise of the dollar must be rejected by those economists who
believe that deficits do not raise real interest rates because they induce an

equal offsetting rise in private saving (e.g., Barro, 1974). Evans (1985)
extended the procedure of Plosser (1982) to study the relation between
unexpected changes in budget deficits and the dollar and concluded the dollar

—5,-

exchange rate is not affected by changes in the budget deficit.

I return

below to the deficiencies of this type of analysis.
Although there may be some element of truth -in each of the alternative

explanations of the dollar's rise, my own judgment is that they are not as
important as the increase in expected structural

to a less inflationary monetary

budget deficits and the shift

strategy. This is supported by the

econometric evidence presented in sections 4 through 6 below. The estimated
effects of the expected deficits and of the rate of growth of the money supply
are economically important and statistically significant. In contrast, the
increase in profitability induced by the tax changes in the first half of the
1980s did not have a significant effect on the exchange rate in the equations

presented below. The strong statistical evidence of a link between the
expected structural budget deficits and the value of the dollar is direct
evidence against the Barro hypothesis that budget deficits have no real

impact. The implied impact of the expected budget deficits also contradicts
the McKinnon hypothesis that the rise of the dollar was due only to a tight
monetary policy.

Before turning to that econometric evidence, it is useful to consider
some further reasons for rejecting the arguments of those who claim that
neither increased real interest rates nor budget deficits was responsible for
the dollar's rise.

The evidence presented in The 1985 Economic Report of the President (and
elsewhere) that there is no longer a difference between the 3-month real
-interest rate in the United States and in other industrial countries is

essentially irrelevant since the theory implies that the equilibrium relation

-6--

between the exchange rate and the difference in long-term real rates is much
larger than the relation with the difference in short-term real rates.

It is

easy to see why this is true. Consider the situation in which the U.S. 3-month
real rate is four percentage points above the 3-month rate on foreign
securities but there is no interest differential for intervals beginning after
three months. Thus the six-month interest rates differ by only two percentage

points, the one-year rates differ by 1 percentage point, etc. The value of
the dollar can be 1 percentage point above its equilibrium value since the
interest rate differential is enough to compensate for a one percent decline
-in the dollar, regardless of whether this happens in 3 months, 6 months, a

year or longer. But with the differential in real rates concentrated only in
the 3-month maturity, any greater overvaluation of the dollar would imply an
expected future decline not compensated by the difference in interest rates.
In contrast, consider the situation in which the real interest rate on
the U.s. io year bond is 4 percentage points above the real yield on foreign

10 year bonds with no interest differential for intervals after 10 years. Then
the real value of the dollar can fall by 4 percent a year for 10 years and
still leave an investor indifferent between having purchased dollar bonds and
foreign bonds. This implies that a 4 percent real interest differential on 10
year bonds can support a 48 percent initial overvaluation of the dollar.
It is noteworthy therefore that although the 3-month real yield

differential reached zero by the end of 1982 and hovered around that level
thereafter, the long—term real interest differential at the end of 1983 was in
the range of two to four percentage points, depending on the method of

forecasting future inflation.4 The observed real interest differential was

—7—

therefore quite consistent with the observed rise in the dollar's real value.
I will return below to the more formal evidence on the link between the dollar
and the real interest differential.

While the change in U.S. monetary policy after October 1979 may have

reduced the inflation risk in U.S. fixed income securities, the notion that
the dollar rose -in the 1980s because the United States capital market -is a

political safe haven for foreign funds seems doubtful. Although the U.S. does
offer a politically safe environment, it is hard to see a rise in U.S.
political stability vis—a-vis Switzerland or other major countries between the

late 1970s and the early 1980s. Moreover, if there had been a shift in the
worldwide portfolio demand -in favor of U.S. assets, U.S. interest rates would

have declined. The sharp rise in real rates suggests that any "safe haven"
increase -in the demand for dollar assets was overwhelmed by the increased

supply of those assets. It is also doubtful that the declines of 25 percent
or more between February 1985 and February 1986 in the value of the dollar
relative to the German mark, the Swiss franc, and the Japanese yen reflects
any deterioration -in the relative political stability and security of the
United States.

Those who point to the reduced lending of U.S. banks to the Latin
American debtor nations after the fall of 1982 as an example of the safe

haven effect misconstrue the portfolio effect of that lending. That change in
lending did not represent a change in U.S. demand for assets denominated in
foreign currencies since those loans were all denominated in dollars.
Moreover, the loan proceeds were used by the borrowers either to purchase
imports or, through capital flight, to make deposits or purchase assets in the

—8-

United States.

There are two problems with the argument that the dollar rose because
the strength of the recovery attracted investments seeking to share in U.S.

profitability. First, the real value of the dollar rose through the recessions
of 1980 and 1981 and was 36 percent higher at the trough of the second

recession (in the final quarter of 1982) than it had been in 1980. Real
interest rates and projected budget deficits were rising during this period

even though the econmy was sagging. Second, most of the capital inflow to the
United States was in the form of bank deposits or purchases of short-term
fixed income securities and only about one—third was in the form of portfolio

equity purchases or direct investment. In 1982 and 1983 combined, there was a
$192 billion increase in foreign private assets in the United States but
direct investments were only $27 billion and stock purchases were only $33
billion.

In short, there are good reasons to reject the arguments of those who say
that the dollar's rise cannot be due to higher real rates because the interest
differential disappeared long ago and who attribute the dollar's rise to the
attractiveness of U.S. financial markets as a safe haven for foreign investors
and as a place in which equity investments can participate in the profitable

recovery. Although the improved tax climate for investment should in
principle have raised the value of the dollar, the evidence presented below
indicates that this effect is too weak to discern statistically.

The study by Evans (1985) is unpersuasive for a quite different reason.
Evans' basic procedure is to relate quarterly movements -in the exchange rate

to the quarterly "surprises" in the deficit, in government spending, in

—9—

monetary policy, etc. These "surprises" are calculated as the residuals from
vector autoregression predictions of the deficit and other variables. The
fundamental problem with this procedure is that it assumes that the deficit
variable that might influence the exchange rate is the concurrent deficit when
theory implies that it is the sequence of expected future deficits that
influences the long-term real interest rate and the exchange rate.5 There is
no reason for the surprises in actual current quarterly deficits to be related

to the expected future deficits6
Finally, the evidence presented below supports the importance of the
increased budget deficits as the primary cause of the rise in the dollar and
thereby refutes both the Ricardian-equivalence proposition that

budget

deficits have no real effects and the position of McKinnon and others who
attribute all of the dollar's rise to tight monetary policy in the United
States.

2.

Studies of the Dollar and

the

Interest Differential

With the exception of the study by Evans (1985) referred to above, the
empirical research on the determination of exchange rates has focused on the
relation between the exchange rate and the real interest differential.7
Although the equilibrium relation between the exchange rate and the interest
differential is a fundamental characteristic of portfolio balance in foreign
exchange markets (Dornbuscn, 1976; Frankel, 1979), there are four serious
problems in estimating an equation relating the exchange rate to the real
interest differential in order to understand the causes of variations in the

—10-

real exchange rate and, more specifically, to assess the role of the budget
deficit as a cause of changes in the exchange rate.

First, the critical interest rate variable is very difficult to measure

with any accuracy. The difference in real long—term interest rates is equal
to the difference in nominal long-term interest rates minus the difference in

expected long—term inflation rates. It is clearly very difficult to measure
with any accuracy the difference between the long-term expected inflation

rates in the two countries. These expectations depend not only on the history
of inflation in the two countries but also on the credibility of government
and central bank policies. The critical real interest differential is
therefore subject to substantial measurement error that will tend to bias the
coefficient toward zero and to reduce the statistical significance of its

effect.8
Second, changes -in the level of the real interest rate in each country

reflect changes in the risk premium required to get investors to hold the debt

denominated in that currency. These changes reflect variations in the
perceived risk of fluctuations in the interest rate and the exchange rate as
well as variations in the relative quantities of the assets denominated in

that currency. An increase in the level of the real interest rate due to a
change in the risk premium can occur with no change in the exchange rate.
Third, the real interest rates in the two countries are endogenous
variables, responding to changes in the exchange rate in a way that causes the
direct structural effect of the interest rates on the exchange rate to be

underestimated. Thus, a strong dollar implies a reduction in net exports
which depresses aggregate demand in the United States and therefore tends to

—11--

lower the U.S. real interest rate. In addition, the strong dollar reduces U.S.
net exports, thereby increasing the net capital inflow to the United States;
the increase in the current and projected net capital inflow also tends to

lower U.S. real interest rates. The stronger dollar may at times induce a
more lax monetary policy than would otherwise prevail, temporarily reducing

the real interest rate. These inverse effects of the dollar on the level of
interest rates attentuates the measured direct effect of the interest rate on
the level of the dollar.

An increase in the dollar—DM ratio also tends to raise the real interest
rate in Germany through the same three channels that cause it to lower the

U.S. real interest rate. The weaker mark increases economic activity in
Germany and this raises the real interest rate. The current and projected
outflow of capital from Germany that accompanies the trade surplus raises the

equilibrium real interest rate. And recent experience indicates that a fear
of the inflationary consequences of a declining mark caused the Bundesbank to
tighten monetary policy as the mark fell relative to the dollar.9
In the econometric estimates of the relation between the exchange rate
and the interest rate presented in section 6 below, I use an instrumental
variables procedure that treats the interest differential as endogenous. The
instrumental variables are the budget deficits of the two countries, the past

growth of the monetary base and the past rates of inflation. The use of the
instrumental variable procedure may also reduce the bias that results from the

difficulty of measuring expected inflation. However, despite its desirable
large sample properties, the instrumental variable procedure is of only
limited comfort with the small sample available in the present study.

—12--

In addition to the statistical problems of estimating the direct effect
of exogenous shifts in the real interest differential on the exchange rate,
there is the more fundamental issue that evidence on the dollar's response to
changes in the real interest rate does not resolve the issue of the relative
importance of changes in the budget deficit, in tax policy and in monetary

policy. Although that could in principle be obtained by estimating a separate
equation relating the real interest rate to the budget deficit, tax and
monetary variables,10 that two—equation specification implicitly assumes that
these variables affect the exchange rate only through the real interest

differential. At a minimum, changes in monetary, tax and budget policies may
affect the expected rate of inflation and the uncertainty about future real
interest rates in ways that are not captured by the measured values of the

real interest rates. In addition, as Oornbusch (1983) has noted, the budget
deficit can have a direct effect through the relative demand for domestic and
foreign goods.

The present paper therefore focuses on estimating a reduced form
specification that relates the dollar-DM exchange rate to four key variables:
expected future budget deficits; tax-induced changes -in the profitability of

investment in plant and equipment; past inflation; and changes in monetary

policy. The specification is also extended to include other variables such as
the net U.S. stocks of international investment and the rate of growth of real

GNP. A dummy variable is also used to evaluate whether the dollar's exchange
value was higher in the period 1980-84 for some other unmeasured reason like
an increased attractiveness of the United States as a "safe haven" for foreign
funds or international investors' greater faith in the Reagan administration.

—13--

In addition to these reduced form equations, the paper also reports estimates

of equations relating the dollar-DM exchange rate to a measure of the real
interest rate differential, using an instrumental variable procedure to reduce

the statistical bias that might otherwise result from the endogeneity of the
interest rates and the errors of measurement.

The next section describes these key variables and their construction in

more detail. The estimated equations are then discussed and presented in
sections 4 and 5.

3.

The Key Variables of a Reduced Form Specif

ion

The dependent variable of the equations presented below is the real

exchange rate between the dollar and the German mark calculated as the nominal

exchange rate multiplied by the ratio of the GNP deflators. The exchange rate
is stated as the number of German marks per U.S. dollar; a rise of the
dependent variable is thus a rise in the real value of the dollar.

The key variables of the reduced form specification described above

cannot be observed directly but must be constructed. The current section
describes the rationale for these variables and the way that they have been

constructed for the current study. The regression equations reported in the
next sections are estimated with annual observations for the period 1973
through 1984. The analysis uses annual observations because quarterly or
monthly observations on variables like the expected future budget deficits and
the tax—induced changes in profitability would probably contain much more
measurment error with little or no increase -in actual information.

-14--

3.1 Expected U.S. Budget Deficits
It -is the path of expected future budget deficits rather than simply the

current year's deficit that influences the level of real interest rates and

the exchange rate. In 1983 testimony (Feldstein, 1983) I emphasized this link
of the exchange rate to expected future budget deficits as follows:

That is the essential explanation of the strong dollar: the
high real long-term interest rate in the United States, combined
with the sense that dollar investments are relatively safe and that
American inflation will remain low, induces investors world wide to
shift in favor of dollar securities. Moreover, the unusually high
real long-term interest rate here relative to the real rates abroad
is now due primarily to the low projected national savings rate
caused by the large projected budget deficits [emphasis added].

To clarify the importance of the long—term projected deficits rather than
just the current year's deficit, I noted:

Net national saving fell from its customary 7 percent of GNP to only
1.5 percent of GNP -in 1982 and L5 percent of GNP in the first three
quarters of 1983. Moreover, and of particular importance in this
context, the large budget deficits that are projected for the next
five years and beyond -if no legislative action is taken means that
our net national saving rate will continue to remain far below the
previous level.

If government borrowing is high for only a single year, the additional

government debt can be absorbed by temporarily displacing private investment

with little effect on long-term interest rates. In contrast, the expected
persistence of budget deficits in the future implies a larger increase in the
stock of debt that must be sold to the private sector and a persistent
displacement of private investment that must be achieved to accommodate the
government's borrowing. Future budget deficits also mean future increases in

—15--

potential aggregate demand that will lead to higher future short-term

interest rates and therefore to higher current long—term rates. All of these
considerations imply that the dpilar exchange rate should be more sensitive to
expected future deficits rather than to the current year's budget deficit.
Blanchard (1985) emphasized the importance of expected future deficits in
the determination of current long-term interest rates and Frenkel and Razin
(1984, 1986) and Branson (1985) emphasized the importance of expected future
deficits in exchange rate determination.
The expected persistence of structural budget deficits also increases the
risk that political pressures will lead to an inflationary monetary policy.
To this extent, expected high future deficits may raise nominal interest rates
but reduce the exchange value of the dollar by making dollar—denominated fixed
income securities more risky.

Neither of the studies that explicitly look at budget deficits considers
the expected sequence of future budget deficits.

I have already commented on

the fact that Evans' (1985) procedure is based on the difference between the

budget deficit in the current quarter and the deficit predicted by a VAR

equation for the current quarter. There is no attention to expected future
deficits. Hooper's (1985) analysis is also in terms of the current quarter's
budget deficit with no attention to expected future deficits. As a result, I
am not inclined to give any weight to Evan's negative conclusion or to
Hooper's conclusion that budget deficits had only a small effect on the dollar
exchange rate.

The variable used in this study to represent the anticipated future
budget deficit (DEFEX) is an estimate of the average ratio of the budget

-16-

deficit to GNP for five future years. Since the five-year deficit forecast is
used as a proxy for the long—term expected deficit, it is appropriate to
eliminate the cyclical component of the deficit and focus on the structural
component of the deficit relative to an estimate of potential or

full-employment GNP. The structural deficit is calculated from the observed
or projected deficit and an estimate of the difference between the actual GNP

and potential GNP. The details of this calculations and of the derivation of
potential GNP are described in Feldstein (1986b).
Although five year forecasts of the deficit and of GF'IP have been made

in recent years, they are not available for the entire sample period. The
analysis therefore assumes that, for the years for which it is observable, the
actual deficit and the actual GNP are the best estimates of the values that

financial market participants previously anticipated. For the years 1985 and
beyond, the expected deficit and expected GNP is measured by the projections

published in July 1985 by Data Resources, Inc. The Data Resources deficit
projections reflect anticipated policy developments as well as existing tax and
spending rules; they are therefore taken as an indication of the view of

sophisticated financial market participants. The actual and projected
deficits are then adjusted to obtain structural deficits and full-employment

GNP. Mote that this implies that for recent years the expected deficit
variable is a combination of actual deficits and projected deficits; e.g., the
1983 expected future deficit variable includes the observed deficit and GNP
variables for 1983 and 1984 but the ORI projections for 1985 through 1987.
The anticipated deficit variable has been constructed in a way that, as
far as possible, avoids discretionary decisions in order to eliminate any

suspicion that the deficit variable has been modified to obtain a variable
that can explain the variations in the exchange rate. Avoiding discretion can,
however, lead to implausible assumptions and several people commenting on an
earlier draft of this paper indicated that they were concerned about the
implication that the financial markets anticipated the unprecedented growth of
budget deficits in the 1980s even before the 1980 election of Ronald Reagan and
the presentation of his 1981 budget.

I have therefore constructed an alternative expected deficit variable
that differs from the standard expected deficit variable for the years 1977

through 1980. For those years, the alternative expected five-year average
deficit ratio is calculated by assuming that the 1980 ratio of structural

deficit to GNP persists. For example, the five—year average for 1978 consists
an average of the deficit-GNP ratios for 1978, 1979 and 1980 with 1980
getting 60 percent of the weight. This variable will be denoted DEFALT for
"alternativet' deficit variable. The empiricaT analysis shows that
substituting this for my standard expected deficit variable improves the
explanatory power of the equation but does not alter the estimated
coefficient.

3.2 Expected German Budget Deficits
Although the exchange rate between the dollar and the German mark might
at first seem to depend symmetrically on the budget deficits of the United
States and Germany, this is only true if the two countries are symmetric in

all other relevant ways. There are, however, two major differences between
the U.S. and Germany that imply that changes -in German deficits have smaller

-18-

effects on the exchange rate than changes in U.S. deficits.
First, the German economy is less than one-third the size of the U.S.

economy. An increase in the German deficit by one-percent of GNP is therefore
only one-third as large as a one-percent of GNP deficit increase in the United
States.

More important, the close links among the European economies, now
formalized by the European Monetary System, means that European investors will
frequently act as if exchange rates among the major European countries are

fixed. To the extent that this is true, what matters is not the change in the
German budget deficit as a percentage of German GNP but the change in the
combined European (or EMS) budget deficits as a percentage of the combined

GNPs of those countries. Although this idea will be the subject of further
attention in a future study, the current paper uses only the ratio of the
German budget deficit to German GNP.
The German expected deficit-GNP ratio variable (OEFEXG) is constructed to
be as close as possible in concept to the U.S. expected deficit variable

although differences inevitably remain. The basic source of the data is an
OECD study of structural budget deficits (Price and Muller, 1984) that
provides estimates of the ratio of the structural budget deficit to potential

GNP for each year from 1973 through 1984. Forecasts for 1985 and 1986 are
obtained from the OECD Economic Outlook for December 1985. For the years
through 1982, these data can be used to construct a five-year average by
assuming that financial markets expected the deficit-GNP ratios that were
subsequently observed (or, for 1985 and 1986, that were subsequently forecast

by the OECD). For 1983 and 1984, we lack the necessary forecasts of the

—19—

deficit—GNP ratio in the more distant future; we therefore assume that
investors project the deficit-GNP ratio at the 1984 level.
It should be noted that there is a serious problem in defining the
structural deficit f or Germany since the German unemployment rate (defined to

approximate U.S. standards) rose from less than 1 percent in 1973 to nearly 8

percent in 1984. There is substantial controversy about how much of this
increase is cyclical and how much is structural.

Although the present

analysis adopts the deficit implicit in the OECD measure of the structural
deficit, it is clear that there is substantial possible error in this
variable.

3.3 Tax-induced Changes in Profitability
The after-tax profitability of new corporate investments in plant and
equipment determines the corporate demand for funds. If the domestic supply of
funds to the corporate sector is relatively inelastic, an increase in the

corporate demand for funds will put upward pressure on real interest rates and

attract an inflow of capital from abroad. In contrast, if the corporate
sector is a relatively small part of the domestic capital market, an increase

in the corporate demand for funds can probably be satisfied without a
significant rise in the real rate of return and therefore with little effect
on international capital flows and the dollar.
The difference between pretax and after-tax profitability depends on the
corporate tax rate, the depreciation rules, the investment tax credit, and the
rate of inflation. All of this can be summarized by the "maximum potential
real net return" (MPRNR) that the firm can afford to pay to the suppliers of

-20--

capital on a standard project.11 In an economy without taxes, the MPRNR on a
project would be the traditional real internal rate of return. With taxes and
complex tax depreciation rules, the MPRNR is the maximum real return that the
firm can afford to pay on the outstanding "loan" (of debt or equity or a
combination of the two) used to finance the project and have fully repaid the
"loan" when the project is exhausted.

The standard project for which this calculation is done is a "sandwich"
of equipment and structures in a ratio that matches the actual
equipment-structures mix of the non—residential capital stock. Because the tax
law specifies depreciation rules and interest deductibility in nominal terms,
the expected real net return depends on the expected rate of inflation; a
maximum potential nominal return is obtained using an expected inflation
series generated by a "rolling" ARIMA forecast (described below) and then the
real MPRNR is calculated by subtracting the average expected inflation rate

from this maximum potential nominal return. Full details of the calculation
are provided in Feldstein and Jun (1986) in which it is also shown that
variations in the MPRNR have had a substantial effect on corporate investment
in the part quarter century.

The MPRNR represents a potential net return that the firm can provide in
the sense that it takes into account the deductibility of interest payments.
From the portfolio investor's point of view, what matters is not the MPRNR but
the maximum market rate of return that the corporation can provide.

This

differs from the MPRNR essentially in the fact that the portfolio investor
receives gross interest while the MPRNR reflects interest net of the corporate

deduction for that interest cost. The maximum real return depends on the mix

—21—

of debt and equity that the firm uses to raise marginal increments to its

capital stock. If we assume an average ratio of two—thirds equity and
one-third debt and incorporate the average historical standard difference in
the net returns of equity and debt, we can calculate "the maximum potential
real interest return" (MPRIR).12
The MPRNR measure of real net profitability remained at approximately 6.0

percent during the years 1973 through 1984 and then rose to approximately 7.3

percent in the early 1980s. The behavior of the maximum potential real
interest rate was quite different. Since nominal interest rates are deductible
in calculating the taxable profits of the corporation, a one percentage point

decline in expected inflation reduces the maximum potential nominal interest
rate by more than one percentage point and therefore reduces the maximum

potential real interest rate. The MPRIR measure of the maximum real net
interest rate rose significantly between 1973 and 1981 (because of the rising
expected rate of inflation) and then came down significantly in the 1980s.
Both variables are studied in the empirical section.

3.4 Expected Inflation
The expected inflation rate has no direct role in a simple model of
exchange rate determination since the exchange rate depends only on the

difference in real rates. However, as Frankel (1979) has emphasized, a rise
in expected inflation may temporarily depress real interest rates (because
nominal rates do not adjust rapidly enough) and therefore the exchange rate.
In addition, financial investors may regard a higher inflation rate as
inherently more uncertain; a government that has allowed its inflation rate to
get to (say) 10 percent may be less able to control it in the future than a

—22-S

government that has kept its inflation rate under 5 percent.

The uncertainty of

future inflation makes the future value of the currency more uncertain and
therefore depresses the demand for the currency.

The expected rate of inflation is not only unobservable but depends on a
large number of variables: past rates of inflation; past increases in monetary
aggregates; projected structural budget deficits; changes in energy prices;

the current level of capacity utilization; etc. Although it is not possible
to combine all of these factors to obtain a single operational measure of
expected inflation, the exchange rate equations presented below include many

of these variables. The proper interpretation of the projected structural
budget deficit variable, for example, is therefore a combination of the direct
effect of the deficit on real interest rates and any effect that operates

through expected inflation and inflation uncertainty. It is not possible to
identify these separate effects but only to quantify the net impact of
expected deficits on the exchange rate.

Although this approach is satisfactory as a general way of dealing with
the effect of expected inflation on the dollar's value, it cannot be used for
quantifying the effect of the tax-inflation interaction on the maximum

potential real interest rate. For that purpose, we require an explicit
year-by--year forecast of inflation over the future life of the standard

investment project. To do that, we estimate a series of first-order ARIMA
models using quarterly data on the GNP deflator with observations through each
year and use these models to forecast future inflation rates for the 30 year

life of the standard investment project. The algorithm calculates nominal
values of MPNR and MPIR using the entire set of 30 years of inflation rates.

These nominal returns are then converted into real returns by subtracting a
weighted average of the projected future inflation rates.
This "projected inflation variable" (INFEX) is also used as a separate
explanatory variable in the exchange rate regressions to summarize the past
rates of inflation. As an alternative, equations are also presented with a
polynomial distributed lag on past rates of change of the GNP deflator.

3.5 Other Variables
The other variables that are included in some or all of the estimated
exchange rate equations can be easily described.
The basis measure of U.S. monetary policy -in this study is the rate of

change of the monetary base (MBGRO). As an alternative, equations are also
estimated with the rate of change of Ml (M1GRO). Variables like the ratio of
money to GNP or the interest rate would clearly be endogenous in a way that
would be inappropra-ite for the current specification.

For Germany, equations are presented with the rate of change of the

Central Bank money stock (MBGROG). There is however a problem of interpreting
this variable if, as I believe, the Bundesbank altered the growth of its

monetary base in response to variations in the dollar-DM ratio. A strong
dollar and declining mark created potential inflationary pressures that caused
the Bundesbank to reduce the growth of the monetary base, thereby introducing
an offsetting negative correlation between the growth of the German monetary
base and the strength of the dollar.

Much of the financial market discussion of short—term changes in exchange
rates focuses on changes in the pace of economic activity, presumably as an

—24—

indicator of future changes in real interest rates. Dornbusch (1983) and
Obstfeldt (1985) also show how changes in domestic demand can alter the
exchange rate by changing the relative demand for domestic and foreign goods.
The current analysis uses the change in real ONP (GNPGRO) as a measure of
economic activity.

Some of the equations also include a dummy variable for the period
beginning in 1980 (DUM8O+) to see whether the effects attributed to the rising
budget deficit are simply due to some other unidentified or unmeasured
character of the period since 1980 such as the altered nature of monetary
policy or the strengthened political "save haven" quality of the dollar.
Finally, some of the equations include the net international investment
position (NIIP) of the United States, i.e., the excess of U.S. investments

abroad over foreign investments in the United States. If U.S. securities are
not a perfect substitute for foreign securities, an exogenous increase in the
net international investment position of the United States should strengthen
the dollar by reducing the demand for additional foreign securities by U.S.

investors Similarly, an exogenous rise in the foreign holding of U.S.
securities (a decrease in the U.S. net international investment position)
should reduce the value of the dollar by reducing the demand for dollar
securities.

Since the NIIP of the United States reflects past current account
deficits, the level of the NIIP will not be exogenous if the residual in the
current account equation or in the equation for the exchange rate is serially

correlated. For example, an increased taste for investing in dollar securities
will strengthen both the dollar and, after a lag, reduce the U.S. net

—25--

international investment position. Since the taste shift is unobservable, the
coefficient of the NIIP of the U.S. will be biased upwards toward zero.
Although it would be desirable to develop a more complete analysis of this
issue with which to model the process of portfolio satiation, the current
research settles for only a very simple extension of the basic specification to
include the NIIP variable.

4.

A Summary of the Reduced Form Estimates

It is useful to begin with a summary of the estimated reduced form
equations and a commentary on the magnitude of the estimated coefficients.
The individual estimated equations are then presented and discussed in

section 5. The equations relating the exchange rate to the real expected
interest rates in the United States and Germany are discussed in the
section 6.

The dependent variable of all of the estimated equations is the real
dollar-OM exchange rate, defined as the number of German marks per dollar,
adjusted for the level of the GNP deflator of the two countries and normalized

to 1.0 in 1980. This variable declined erratically from 1.21 in 1973 to 0.97
-in

1979 and then climbed to 1.72 in 1984. Individual annual values are shown

in Appendix Table A-i, together with the annual values of all other variables
used in this study.

The basic equation relates the real dollar-DM exchange rate to the
expected structural deficits as a percentage of GNP (DEFEX), the maximum
potential real interest rate that can be supported by a standard investment

—26—

project given the concurrent tax rules and expected inflation (MPRIR), the
rate of growth of the monetary base (MBGRO), and the average future GNP

inflation projected by a rolling ARIMA model (INFEX). To test the sensitivity
of the estimated effect of the expected deficit variable to the specification
of the exchange rate equation, a large number of variants of this basic

specification have been estimated. These variations included omitting some of
the basic variables, replacing the basic variables with other closely related
variables (e.g., replacing INFEX by a polynomial distributed lag on past
changes in the GNP deflator), and adding additional variables.
Several results are very robust with respect to alternative

specifications. The coefficient of the expected future budget deficits is
always positive, substantial and almost always statistically significant. The
point estimate generally varies between 0.25 and 0.40. To appreciate the
magnitude of this coefficient, it is useful to recognize that DEFEX rose from
1.58 (percent of GNP) in 1978 and 1.79 in 1979 to 3.38 in 1983 and 3.33 in

19 4. Comparing the average of the first two years with the average of the
last two years implies an increase of 1.67 percent of GNP. A coefficient of
0.25 implies an increase of the dollar-DM exchange rate index of 0.42 while a

coefficient of 0.40 implies an increase of the dollar-OM index of 0.67. Since
the dollar-DM index rose from 0.99 in 1978-79 to 1.61 in 1983-84, the rise in
the expected budget deficit can account for between two-thirds of the dollar's
rise (0.42/0.62 =

0.677) and slightly more than 100 percent of the dollar's

rise (0.67/0.62 =

1.08).

The coefficient of monetary base growth is always negative and generally

statistically significant. A negative coefficient implies that a faster

—27—

growth of the monetary base depresses the value of the dollar. This may be
because an increase in the monetary base temporarily increases the

liquidity

of the banking system and therefore reduces interest rates or, more generally,
because it causes nominal interest rates to decline.

Alternatively, more rapid

growth of the monetary base may raise expected inflation or inflation
uncertainty, thereby making dollar securities more risky.
The value of the coefficient of the annual growth rate of the monetary

base is approximately -0.06. Although the implied effect of monetary policy
can explain relatively little of the dollar's rise from 1980 to 1984, it does
indicate an important effect during the early part of the period. The annual
rate of growth of the monetary base fell from 8.8 percent in 1978 and 1979 to

a low of 6.4 percent in 1981. The coefficient of 0.06 implies a rise in the
OM-dollar exchange rate index of 0.144 between these years. Since the actual

exchange rate index rose from 0.99 to 1.31, the tighter money can account for
nearly one—half of the observed rise (0.144/0.32 =

0.45)

from 1978-79 to 1981.

However, since the epxected budget deficit increased during these same years

from 1.68 percent of GNP to 2.82 percent of GNP, the implied rise in the
DM—dollar index was about twice as large as the rise implied by the change in
monetary policy and the two together account for more than the entire rise,
implying that other factors depressed the dollar's value during this period.

By 1984, the annual rate of increase of the monetary base was back up to
8.1 percent, implying that the change from 1978—79 could only explain about
0.05 points of the 0.73 point rise -in the real dollar—OM ratio.

The coefficient of the MPRIR tax variable was frequently insignificant
and generally had the wrong sign (implying that increases in the maximum

-28—

potential real interest rate that resulted from changes in ex ante effective
tax rates depressed the value of the dollar).

The coefficient of the MPRNR

variable also generally had the wrong sign but was almost always

insignificant. While a negative coefficient cannot be reconciled with the
theoretical expectations, the insignificant
an earlier finding (Feldsteifl and Summers,

coefficients are consistent with
1978) that shifts in the MPIR had

only a small effect on market interest rates, a result that was obtained more
recently (Feldstein, 1986b) in an even stronger form. The small and
insignificant effect of the MPRIR and MPRNR on the financial variables stands
in sharp contrast to their powerful effects on real investment reported -in
Feldstein (1982) and Feldstein and Jun (1986).
The insensitivity of the real interest rate and the real exchange rate to
the rate that corporate borrowers can afford to pay on a standard investment
project may simply reflect the fact that corporate borrowers represent only a
small part of the funds raised in credit markets.

Between 1980 and 1984,

corporate borrowing was only 20.5 percent of the total funds raised -in the
credit markets by all of the public and private nonfinancial borrowers

combined. Even a substantial shift in the demand curve represented by this 20
percent need not cause an appreciable rise in the interest rate if the
additional funds are easily attracted from the other borrowers, from potential
savers, or from the rest of the world.
Negative coefficients of the MPRIR and MPRNR variables cannot be given a

structural interpretation. They may represent the

correlation of this

variable with other omitted variables that depress the value of the dollar.

While this leaves some residual doubt about the actual impact of the tax

changes, it

is

important to note that including, excluding or changing the

specification of the tax variable does not alter the conclusions about the
expected budget deficit variable.

The inflation variables had a negative coefficient, implying that a
higher rate of predicted inflation (or past inflation) depressed the relative

value of the dollar. This may reflect a failure of the nominal interest rate
to adjust quickly enough to changes in the expected rate of inflation.

Alternatively, if there is a positive correlation between the inflation level
and inflation uncertainty, the higher level of predicted inflation may make
the dollar a riskier asset for investors and therefore an asset of lower
va 1 ue.

Although the inflation coefficient was always negative, the magnitude of
the coefficient varied substantially from specification to specification and
was not always statistically significant. In interpreting the coefficient, it
should be borne in mind that INFEX rose from 6.7 percent in 1978-79 to 8.1

percent in 1981 and fell to 5.5 percent in 1984. A coefficient of -0.04 on
this variable would imply a decline of 0.06 points on the doiiar-0M index
between 1978—79 and 1981 followed by a rise of 0.10 points between 1981 and

1984. This increase represents about one-fourth of the rise in the dollar-DM
index during those years.

The estimated coefficients of the expected German budget deficits are

always insignificant. This may reflect the difficulty in measuring the German
structural deficit accurately or it may reflect the fact that the close links
among the European economies mean that the dollar-DM ratio is not sensitive to

German deficits p se. Only future work will clarify this. It is important

—30-

to note however that the inclusion or exclusion of this variable has
essentially no effect on the coefficient of the U.S. budget deficit variable.

5.

The Estimated Reduced Form Equations

Table 1 presents the basic reduced form equation and a number of

variations on this specification. In equation 1.1 the coefficient of the
expected deficit variable (tJEFEX) is 0.375 with a standard error of 0.071,

implying that each percentage point increase in the ratio of expected

structural deficit to GNP raises the real dollar-OM index by 0.375 points. As
noted above, the real dollar-UM index rose from 0.99 in 1978-79 to 1.72 in
1984 while the expected deficit rose from 1.68 percent of GNP to 3.35 percent
of GNP. The coefficient of 0.375 implies that the rise in DEFEX accounts for
63 points of the 73 point rise in the index.

The coefficient of the tax variable, the maximum potential real interest
rate (MPRIR) supportable by a standard project, has the wrong sign.

I return

to this and to its sensitivity to specification in the equations that follow.
The coefficient of the ARIMA inflation projection (INFEX) is negative but

is only -0.010 and much smaller than its standard error of 0.029. It is
useful to reiterate a point made earlier that this ARIMA variable should not
be regarded as equivalent to inflation expectations since inflation
expectations at any time will also reflect the growth of the monetary base,
the size of projected budget deficits and many other political and economic
factors.

Finally, the rate of growth of the monetary base has a coefficient of
—0.06 (with a standard error of 0.042), implying that a faster rate of

monetary growth depresses the value of the dollar.

The adjusted R2 of 0.78 implies that the equation explains the variations
in the dollar-OM ratio quite well and the Ourbin-Watson statistic of 1.68
indicates that there is little serial correlation of the residuals.

Equation (1.2) replaces the basic DEFEX variable with the alternative
DEFALT variable (described in 3.1) that was constructed to avoid the
assumption that financial market participants anticipated the large budget

deficits before 1981. The coefficient of DEFALT is 0.385 and therefore almost
identical to the 0.375 coefficient of 0EFEX reported in equation (1.1). The
standard error of DEFALT is however only 0.031 or less than half of the
standard error of the coefficient of DEFEX, reflecting the fact that the

alternative variable has far less "noise in it. This is also seen in the
sharp rise of the corrected 2 from 0.78 in equation (1.1). to 0.95
in equation (1.2). The other coefficients are not changed in any substantial

way. Although the DEFALT seems clearly to be a better variable than the DEFEX
variable, the latter does have the virtue that its construction involved less
discretion and I will continue to present results for that variable.
Because the coefficient of the inflation variable is much smaller than
its standard error, it is desirable to conserve the very scarce degrees of

freedom by reestimating the equation with the INFEX variable omitted. This is
done in equation (1.3). None of the remaining coefficients or standard errors
changes appreciably.

Instead of omitting the rolling ARIMA forecast variable, equation (1.4)
replaces it with a polynomial distributed lag on the annual changes of the GNP

deflator. The distributed lag coefficients are constrained to satisfy a

third—order polynomial on six lagged values of the annual rate of change of

the GNP deflator with no restriction on the final weight. The sum of the
implied coefficients is —0.098 with a standard error of 0.082. The monetary
base variable remains essentially unchanged with this respecification. The
coefficient of MPRIR drops to -0.016 and is completely insignificant (standard

error 0.077); this is reassuring since an insignificant coefficient is quite
plausible while a significantly negative one cannot be justified. Finally, the
coefficient of DEFEX drops to 0.254 but remains both statistically significant

and economically very powerful. The corrected 2 statistic of 0.84 shows that
the polynomial distributed lag specification has slightly greater explanatory
power than the more constrained INFEX specification.

Since the MPRIR variable is either insignificant or significant with the
wrong sign, it is useful to see the implications of omitting it from the

specification. This is done in equation (1.5). The coefficient of the DEFEX
variable is 0.234, indicating that the decline in the coefficient value
observed in 1.4 was due to the small size of the MPRIR coefficient rather than

to the change in the inflation variable p se. This specification is clearly
inferior to the previous ones, with a much lower corrected

and a very much

lower Ourbin—Watson statistic.

To deal with the low Durbin-Watson statistic, equation (1.5) was reestimated

with a first-order transformation. Since this still had a low Durbin—Watson
statistic, a second-order autocorrelation correction was used. This is shown

in equation (1.6). The DEFEX coefficient has remained essentially unchanged at

0.236 and the M8GRO coefficient has returned to —0.060. The inflation
coefficient is now the same size as its standard error. This variable is

—33--

dropped in equation (1.7) where the other coefficients remain essentially
unchanged.

The specification of the MPRJR variable requires assuming a particular
marginal debt-equity ratio and a particular yield difference between equity

and debt. An alternative measure of the effect of changes in tax rules and in
the tax-inflation interaction is to use the less restricted variable MPRNR,

the maximum potential real net return. This alternative is used in equations
(1.8) through (1.10).

Equation (1.8) parallels (1.1) except for the substitution of MPRNR for
MPRIR. The OEFEX variable is essentially unchanged (0.343 with a standard
error of 0.123) while the MPRNR is statistically insignificant, MBGRO is
similar to its earlier value (-0.054 ) and the INFEX variable is now nearly

twice its standard error (—0.070 with a standard error of 0.,039). A first—
order autocorrelation correction actually lowers the Durbin—Watson statistic.
A far better specification is obtained by substituting the polynomial

distributed lag for the INFEX variable (equation 1.10). This combination of
variables has the highest corrected 2 statistic (0.86) and a Durbin—Watson
statistic of 2.48. The coefficient of the DEFEX variable is 0.283 with a

standard error of only 0.075. MBGRO and PDLINF are both negative and nearly
twice their standard errors while the coefficient of MPRNR is satisfactorily
less than its standard error.

Equation (1.11) is similar to (1.1) but constrains the monetary
base growth not to appear- in the equation. Although the resulting
specification is not very satisfactory, the coefficient of DEFEX remains
almost unchanged from equation (1.1).

—34-

Finally, equation (1.12) substitutes the rate of growth of Ml for the rate

of growth of the monetary base. The coefficients are generally similar to
those of equation 1.1 but the overall goodness of fit is slightly worse.

A variety of additional sensitivity tests are presented in Table 2.
These tests involve adding several new variables as well as considering some

of the variations discussed in Table 1. All of the results again support the
conclusion that the coefficient of the expected deficit is statistically
significant and economically powerful.

Equation (2.1) starts with the basic specification of equation (1.1) and
adds a dummy variable equal to one for the years 1980 through 1984 and zero

for the previous years. The purpose of the dummy variable is to test whether
the dollar was strong in the 1980s for any of a variety of otherwise
unspecified reasons (the new monetary policy regime that began in October
1979; the Reagan presidency; the increased importance of the United States as

a political safe haven for foreign capital; etc.). If some combination of
omitted variables did indeed raise the dollar in the 1980s above what it would

1-hrwi hi hn fh riiitirn
rf Th1c 1 iririht
-.. ——,.l——-..—--..-.—

large

hi'

..

imnttcr1 th-ic 1-n th

expected deficits or to some other variable that distinguished the 1980s

from previous years. Including a specific dummy variable should eliminate
this source of bias.

Rather surprisingly, the coefficient of the dummy variable for the 1980s
(OUM8O+) is negative, about twice its standard error and quite large in
absolute size (about -0.25 ).

This

implies that the unspecified factors at

work in the 1980s had the effect of lowering the dollar relative to the German

mark in comparison to the earlier years. Faced with the negative coefficient,

-35--

it is of course possible to identify possible explanations. For example, the
decline -in OPEC financial assets during most of the 1980s reduced the demand

for dollar securities relative to DM securities. The conservative political
victories in Germany and Britain, and the switch in French economic policy,
may have revived the demand for portfolio investment in Europe.

The important point to note about these arguments is that they imply that
the actual rise of the dollar in the 1980s is even more surprising and that
the combined role of those factors that systematically raised the dollar was

even stronger. The other coefficients of equation (2.1) show that the primary
effect of including DUM8O+ is to raise the coefficient of DEFEX from 0.375 to
0.525.

The DUM8O+ variable appears in most of the specifications of Table 2. Its
coefficient is almost always about twice its standard error and it has the

effect of raising the coefficient of DEFEX to 0.5 or above. Although it is of
course possible that the DUM8O÷ variable is spurious, it is not necessary to
decide this question in order to say whether the rise in the expected budget

deficit was an important cause of the increase in the dollar. That is clearly
an implication of the specifications of Table 1 without the OUM8O+ variable as
well as of the equations in Table 2 with the OUM8O+ variable.
Equation (2.2) drops the INFEX variable and equation (2.3) replaces it

with the polynomial distributed lag. Equation (2.4) omits the tax variable
while equation (2.5) switches to the relatively unconstrained MPRNR

specification. Equation (2.6), with no tax variable and with the distributed
lag specification of the inflation variable is one of the -few specfications
in which the coefficient of the DUM8O+ variable is only slightly greater than

—36—

its standard error. In this specification, the coefficient of the DEFEX
variable is reduced to the level of 0.343, approximately its value in the
equations without the DUM8O+ variable.
Equations (2.7) through (2.11) include the annual growth of real GNP

(GNPGRO) as an additional explanatory variable. When the OUM8O+ variable is
not present (equations 2.7 and 2.8), the GNPGRO variable is only slightly

greater than its standard error. The OEFEX coefficients are raised by a small
amount and the inflation variables are insignificant. When the DUM8O+ variable
is present, the GNPGRO coefficients are quite significant and the DEFEX
coefficients are increased to more than 0.5.
Finally, equation (2.11) adds the net international investment position of

the United States as a percent of GNP (NIIP). Its coefficient is very much
less than its standard error and the remaining coefficients are very similar
to the coefficients of equation (1.7) (which has the same specification except

for the NIIP variable). The statistical insignificance of this coefficient
should not be overinterpreted. As I noted above, the net stock of accumulated
assets may not be truly exogenous since the decline in NIIP in the 1980s has
been the cumulative result of the high value of the dollar and the resulting
current account deficits.13
Table 3 extends the analysis of tables 1 and 2 to include the German

deficit and monetary base variables. For reference, the basic specification of
equation (1.1) is repeated in equation (3.1). Adding the variable that measures
the ratio of expected German deficits to GNP (OEFEXG) and the growth of the
German monetary base (MBGROG) does not alter the other coefficients
substantially but does cause the standard errors to become quite large

—37--

(equation (3.2)). The additional variables also leave the corrected
unchanged.

The increased standard errors is perhaps not surprising since equation
(3.2) has six coefficients and a constant term to estimate with only twelve
observations. Dropping the German monetary base variable (equation (3.3)) leaves
the coefficients of the four U.S. variables very similar to the basic

specification of equation (3.1) but with very large standard errors. The
coefficient of the German deficit variable is small and only about one-tenth
of its standard error.

In an attempt to reduce the problem of the large standard errors, these
equations are repeated with the standard U.S. DEFEX variable replaced by the
alternative DEFALT variable in which the observations for 1977 through 1980
are modified to assume that the 1980 deficit-GNP ratio was projected forward

until after the 1980 election. Equation (1.2) indicated that this substitution
leaves the coefficient of the deficit and other variables essentially
unchanged while reducing their standard errors. The effect is similar -in

equation (3.4). The coefficient of DEFALT is 0.414 with a standard error of
0.103. The coefficients of MPRIR and MBGRO are very similar to their values
in equation (3.1) but with smaller standard errors. The coefficient of INFEX
remains very much smaller than its standard error. The coefficients of the two
German variables are again much smaller than their standard errors.
Dropping the insignificant MBGROG and INFEX variables and the MPRIR
variable which has an inadmissible sign leads to equation (3.5) in which the
three remaining variables are statistically significant and have the correct

sign. In this equation, which is estimated after a second—order

autocorrelation transformation, the coefficient of DEFALT is 0.202 (with a
standard error of 0.058) and in which the coefficient of the German deficit
variable is —0.173 w-ith a standard error of 0.087.

This coefficient structure is however quite fragile. Adding the INFEX
variable produces a coefficient of -0.016 with a standard error of 0.013 while
the coefficient of the German deficit variable drops to -0.067 and less than
half of its standard error.
In short, -it seems from table 3 that the German deficit variable does not

have a significant or stable relation to the dollar-GM ratio and that the
decision of whether or not to include it does not alter the point estimate of

the U.S. deficit variable. Future work will be needed to assess whether some
combination of German and other European deficits is significant and whether
its presence alters the coefficient of the U.S. budget deficit variable.

It is, of course, unfortunate that the history of the floating rate

period gives us only 12 years of experience to analyze. Although more data
points could be created by using quarterly observations, I believe very little

(f

. i ... ii,,. j I
, dfr1
/

Instead,

. ..

I

t1IZV
L..I%f'I4uI%a MDOTD
IIIIsI

r,'.F .aII4

L4¼_ I

I_A I

Iy

.,,,,14A I_I I I.
I

there would be more measurement error in the "expectations" variables

(DEFEX, INFEX, MPRIR) relative to the actual variation. Looking back before
1973 is inappropriate because the quasi-fixed rate system that existed then
would imply very different exchange rate dynamics and might be expected to
have very different monetary policy responses as countries tried to maintain

their currencies at the fixed parities. Expectations would also be formed
differently in a regime -in which governments were committed to maintaining

fixed exchange rates and in which the United States appeared willing to

-39-

accumulate overseas investments or run down its assets in order to maintain
that fixed rate system.

6.

Effects of the Interest Differential

I have already commented in section 2 on the difficulty of assessing the
structural relation between the exchange rate and the difference in expected

real interest rates. The expected inflation, which is a very critical
component of the calculation, is difficult to measure and the real interest
rates themselves are endogenous variables.

Despite these difficulties, it is worth devoting some attention to the
estimation of a structural equation linking the exchange rate to the real
interest differential because it is the operational link between budget

deficits and the exchange rate in several analytic models. The problems of
measurement and of endogeneity can be mitigated by using an instrumental
variable procedure with the DEFEX, MBGRO and INFEX variables as the

instruments. The results indicate that the use of an instrumental variable
procedure is important and that, when it is used, the evidence shows a
substantial effect of the real interest differential on the exchange rate.
Equation (4.1) of Table 4 presents an ordinary least squares regression
of the the exchange rate index on the difference between the real long-term
interest rate in the United States and a corresponding real long-term interest

rate for Germany. The nominal U.S. rate is the yield on Treasury bonds with
five years to maturity. The real rate is calculated by subtracting the ARIMA
projection (INFEX) from this nominal rate. The nominal German rate in a rate

—40-

on long-term German government bonds.14 The real rate -is

calculated by

subtracting an ARIMA estimate of future German inflation calculated by the

same process used for the U.S. ARIMA forecast of inflation. Annual values of
these variables are shown in Appendix Table A-2.

The coefficient of the real interest rate differential is 0.042 with a
standard error of 0.025. The Durbin-Watson statistic is very low arid the

equation is therefore reestimated with an autocorrelation transformation. A
first-order transformation (equation (4.2)) is inadequate so the final result

(presented in equation (4.3)) has a second-order autocorrelaton correction. In
this form, the coefficient of the interest differential is 0.034 with a
standard error of 0.022.

When the equation is estimated by an instrumental variable procedure
(equation (4.4)), the coefficient of the interest rate differential becomes much

larger (0.082) and more than twice its standard error. The Durbin-Watson
statistic is however very small (0.56). When Fair's method is used to obtain
an instrumental variable estimate with a first order autocorrelation

correction, the coefficient falls to 0.054 with a standard error of 0.023. In
short, the instrumental variable procedure results in a slightly larger

coefficient that the OLS procedure. It might also be noted that these coefficient estimates are similar to the estimates of approximately 0.06 obtained by
Sachs (1985) and Hooper (1985).

Before looking at any further equation estimates, it is helpful to
consider the implications of a coefficient of approximately 0.04 to 0.06 on

the interest rate differential. In 1978-79, the estimated real long—term U.S.
rate exceeded the corresponding German rate by 0.7 percent; by 1983 the

—41--

differential was 1.4 percent and by 1984 it was 2.8 percent. Even a
coefficient of 0.06 implies a rise in the dollar-DM real exchange rate of

0.042 between 1980 and 1983 and of 0.126 between 1980 and 1984. Since the
actual exchange rate rose by 0.72 points over this period, the equation can
account for at most one-fifth of the actual rise.

The estimated coefficient is far less than theory suggests. As I noted
above, an increase of one percentage point in the difference between U.S. and
German 10—year real interest rates should increase the dollar-OM exchange rate
by about 12 percentage points, not the 4 to 6 percentage points estimated here

and in previous studies. This implies that the coefficient may be grossly
underestimated because of the measurement and simultaneity problems referred
to above.

When the interest differential is split into two separate interest rates
and the equation estimated by ordinary least squares, only the coefficient of

the U.S. rate is statistically significant. This remains true when the
equation is reestimated with a second order autocorrelation correction
(equation (4.7)) and by an instrumental variable procedure (equation (4.8)).

However, the combination of instrumental variable estimation and a firstorder autocorrelation correction (Fair's method) does result (equation (4.9)) in
coefficients for the U.S. and German interest variables that are both

absolutely about 0.04 but with the appropriate opposite signs. More
specifically, the coefficient of the real U.S. rate is 0.046 (with a standard
error of 0.024) while the coefficient of real German rate is -0.037 (with a
standard error of 0.024).

As an alternative to the rolling ARIMA procedure, I have also used a

-42--

simpler method that may correspond more closely to the way that market
participants used past inflation experience to form judgments about the
future. In place of the ARIMA estimate of inflation, I use a weighted average
of inflation, giving a weight of 0.5 to the most recent year's inflation, of
0.33 to the inflation of the previous year's inflation and of 0.17 to the
inflation of the year before that. On that basis, the expected inflation came
down gradually in Germany from 4.5 percent in 1980 to 4.3 percent in 1981 and
1982 ,

3.8

percent in 1983 and 2.8 percent in 1984 and real German long—term

rates in the 1980-84 period stayed between 4.0 and 5.0 percent except for a
6.1 percent rate in 1981.

Table 5 presents the results based on this simpler specification of

inflation. The OLS estimates (equations (5.1) and (5.2)) are similar to the
estimates with the ARIMA inflation forecast: a coefficient of 0.055 with a
standard error of 0.035. The instrumental variable estimates (equations (5.3)
and (5.4)) show a more substantial coefficient and smaller standard error of

regression measures than the ARIMA forecast. With the ARI correction (i.e.,

using Fair's method), the coefficient of the interest differential is OO81
with a standard error of 0.031. This is approximately twice the typical
estimate based on the ARIMA inflation forecast. Dividing the interest
differential into a real U.S. rate and a real German rate (equation (5.5))
results in a coefficient of 0.072 (with a standard error of 0.025) for the
U.S. real rate but a very small and statistically insignificant coefficient of
0.003 (with a standard error of 0.032) for the German real rate, possibly
because there was very little variation in the measured real rate for Germany.
In short, the different specifications of the real interest differentials

—43-

and the different estimation methods indicate that each percentage point
difference in real interest rates raises the real exchange rate by between
0.04 and 0.08 points, an impact that accounts for only a small part of the
rise in the exchange rate that actually occurred in the 1980s and also only a
small part of the rise in the exchange rate that is predicted by the changes
in the expected budget deficits and -in monetary policy. It is difficult to
tell whether this is because the real interest differential is measured very
badly (causing a substantial underestimate of the true coefficient) or because
the budget deficit and monetary policy have direct effects on the exchange
rate that are not chanelled through the real interest differential.

7.

Concluding Comments

The findings of the current research can be summarized briefly. The
estimated reduced form equations for the dollar-OM real exchange rate imply
that the rise in the expected future deficits in the budget of the U.S.
government had a powerful effect on the exchange rate between the dollar and

the German mark. Each one percentage point increase in the ratio of future
budget deficits to GNP increases the exchange rate by about 30 percentage
points.
Changes -in the growth of the monetary base also affect the exchange rate,

but the estimated effect of the deficit does not depend on whether this is
taken into account in the estimation procedure.
The analysis also indicates that the changes in tax rules and in the
inflation—tax interaction that altered the corporate demand for funds did not

have any discernible effect on the exchange rate. The presence or absence of

alternative tax variables did not alter the estimated effect of the budget
deficit.

The estimated effect of the budget deficit is also relatively insensitive
to the other variables that were included in the regression equation.
As I have emphasized elsewhere in a different context (Feldstein, 1982),
all models are "false" in the sense that they involve substantial

simplifications that can lead to incorrect inferences. It is impossible to
relax all of the specification constraints or include all of the plausible

variables in any single model. We learn about reality only by examining a
variety of alternative false models to see which implications of these models

are robust. In the present study, I was eager to focus on the question of
whether changes in the expected budget deficit could account for shifts in the
real exchange rate and, if so, whether this was a spurious relation that was
really reflecting a more fundamental relationship between the exchange rate
and tax rules, monetary policy, inflation, German budget deficits or
unobservable characteristics of the 1980s that strengthened the dollar.
Although any econometric study leaves room for doubt and uncertainty, I
believe that the current evidence shifts the burden of proof to those who
would claim that deficits do not matter or that tax, monetary or "confidence"
variables were the real reasons for the dollar's strength since 1980.
There are of course a number of things that have been omitted from the

analysis that deserve attention in future studies. It would be good to model
the changing behavior of expected European budget deficits or, even
more generally, of the changing balance between the supply and demand for

funds in Europe. There are a number of difficulties in doing so, including

—45-

the problem of establishing the "full employment" level at which to estimate
structural deficits in the face of Europe's rapidly rising unemployment and
the much larger and more ambiguous role of public investment in Europe.
U.S. budget deficits have been defined without correct-ion for the

inflation erosion of the public debt on the implicit assumption that, at the
observed rates of inflation, individuals did not adjust their saving but
treated the inflation component of the interest on the public debt as income.
Shifts in the price of oil were ignored in the present study although
they presumably affected the equilibrium exchange rate between the OM and the

dollar. It should be possible to extend the analysis to include the price of
oil and other raw materials.

Finally, in future work I plan to extend the analysis to include 1985 and

the decline of the dollar. The sharp rise in the dollar—DM ratio that
climaxed in the early spring of 1985 may have had some unsustainable
speculative element (as Krugman's 1985 analysis implies) but the decline of
more than 20 percent in the dollar-DM ratio between mid-1984 and the present
time is, I believe, quite in line with what would have been expected on the
basis of the fall in expected future budget deficits.
As participants in financial markets studied the action of Congress in
the spring and early summer of 1985, there was growing confidence that some

significant action would be taken to reduce future budget deficits. The
Congressional Budget Office summarized this in August when it contrasted the
current services deficits of 5.1 percent of GNP each year from 1986 to 1990
with the results of the Congressional Budget Resolution that brought the
projected deficits onto a path that declined to 3.0 percent of GNP in 1988 and

—46—

2.1. percent in 1990. The Gramm—Rudman amendment gave the markets even greater
confidence that budget deficits would continue to decline in the future.
The estimated ratio of the expected 5-year structural deficit to

potential GNP has declined from 3.3 percent in 1984 (the last observation in

the sample) to about 2.6 percent at the present time. An estimated
coefficient of 0.25 to 0.40 would imply a decline -in the dollar from this

source alone of between 18 points and 28 points. In fact, as of the middle of
February 1986, the dollar-DM ratio was down 23 points in comparison to its
1984 average value and 32 points from its high in early 1985.

There is substantial room for additional research on the determinants of

the exchange rate. But the massive fiscal experiment of the past six years
should have convinced us that sustained shifts in the Federal government's
deficit have powerful effects on the value of the dollar.

Cambridge, Mass.
February 1986

—47—

Footnotes

*Professor of Economics at Harvard University and President of the National

Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for the NBER
Conference on Macroeconomics, March 7 and 8, 1986, and will appear in NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1986.

I am grateful to Andrew Berg for help with this

work and to Rudiger Dornbusch, Jeffrey Frankel, Stanley Fischer, Paul Krugman
and Jeffrey Sachs for discussions about this subject.
1.

On the impact of the dollar's rise on U.S. inflation, see Sachs (1985)

and Sinai (1985).
2.

This idea of an induced monetary policy response is discussed -in

Feldstejn (1985, 1986a). This provides an alternative to the Blanchard and
Summers (1985) explanation of the high level of world interest rates.
3.

See, e.g., Feldsteir, (1983).

4.

This is shown on page 52 of The Economic Report of the Pres-ident for 1984.

5.

The importance of expected future deficits was emphasized in Feldstein

(1983) and analyzed more formally in Frenkel and Razin (1984), Blanchard
(1985), and Branson (1985).
6.

The same criticism also applies to Plosser's (1982) claims that budget

deficit's do not influence the level of interest rates.
7.

Although measures of the money stock, inflation and real activity have

sometimes been included among the regressors, neither the budget deficit nor

the effect of changes -in tax rules has been included. See Frankel (1979) for
a relatively early study of this form and Hooper (1985), Meese and Rogoff
(1985) and Sachs (1985) for more recent examples; Obstfeldt (1985) provides a

—48-

very useful survey of recent research on this subject. Hooper allows budget
deficits and tax rules to affect the exchange rate as part of a large

econometric model but the estimated effect is only through their impact on the

real interest differential. Moreover, since Hooper uses only the current
budget deficit (rather than expected future deficits) it is not surprising
that he estimates only a relatively small effect of the deficit on the
exchange rate.

After this paper was written, I received a copy of Hutchison and Throop
(1985); the authors provide a very careful analysis that shows the
trade-weighted real value of the dollar can be explained by a an equation that

combines the real interest differential between the U.S. and the major seven
industrial countries and a corresponding one-year expected structural budget

deficit differential. Both the interest rate and the deficit differential are
significant in this formulation. No evidence about monetary policy or tax
policy is presented.
8.

A review of the papers that use a "real interest differential" to explain

exchange rate variations shows the potential seriousness of this problem. For
example, Frankel's seminal 1979 paper used the short-term German-U.S. interest

differential instead of the long-term differential and measured the difference
in expected long—term inflation rates (a separate variable in his formulation)

by the difference in long-term bond rates. Meese and Rogoff (1985), in an
otherwise very sophisticated paper, also generally use the 3-month interest
rates and when they do use long-term bonds they take the inflation during the
most recent twelve months as a proxy for long-term expected inflation.
Hooper's analysis is perhaps most satisfactory but uses only a three-year

-49-

moving average of inflation rates.
9.

On the induced change in Bundesbank policy, see Feldstein (1986a) and

Feldstein and Bacchette (1986).

10. This is done in Feldstein (1986b).
11. This MPRNR measure is very closely related to the MPNR and MPIR values

calculated in Feldstein and Summers (1978) and updated with some improvements in
Feldstein and Jun (1986).

12. See Feldstein (1986b) for an explanation of how the related nominal MPIR is
calculated. The MPRIR is obtained from the MPIR by subtracting the same average
projected inflation rate used to generate the MPNR and MPIR values.
13.

When equation 2.12 was estimated with the stock of foreign private assets

in the United States as a percentage of GNP instead of NIIP, its coefficient

had the wrong sign (positive) and was statistically significant. This again
no doubt reflects the fact that foreign private investment in the United States
grew in the 1980s because of the high dollar.

14. The German interest rate was provided by Data Resources, Inc. and is
identified by Data Resources as RMGBL@GY.

-50-

References

Barro, R. (1974), "Are Government

Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of PolJtIi

November.

Blanchard, 0. (1985), "DebtS, Deficits and Finite Horizons,1' Journal of

?iticl29)?9' April.
Blanchard, 0. and L. Summers (1985), "PerspectiVes on High World Real

Interest Rates," Brookings jD

cskptqAJY'

Bransofl, W. (1985), "Causes of Appreciation

pp. 273-324.

and Volatility of the Dollar,"

NBER Working Paper No. 1777.

DornbusCh, R. (1976), "Expectations and Exchange

Rate Dynamics," Journal of

flcalEc9.t!9fl December.
DornbusCh, R. (1983), "Comment on Floating Exchange Rates After Ten Years,"

8rookingSPaps, on Economic Activity.
Evans, P. (1985a), "Do Large Deficits

Produce High Interest Rates?" American

Economic Review, March.

Evans, P. (1985b), "Is the Dollar High Because of Large Budget Deficits?"
mimeo; September.

Feldstein, M. (1982), "Inflation, Tax Rules and Investment: Some Econometric
Evidence," The 1980 Fisher-Schultz Lecture of the Econometric Society,
Econometrica 50(4), July.
Feldstein, M. (1983), "Why the Dollar is Strong," in

of the Dollar, Hearings Before the Committee on

Banking, Finance and

Monetary Policy, House of RepresentatiVes, October 1985 (reprinted in

Chai1eng1!' 1984>.

-51-

Feldstein, M. (1985), "American Economic Policy and the World Economy,"
Foreign Affairs, Summer, pp. 995—1008.

Feldstein, M. (1986a), "U.S. Budget Deficits and the European Economies:
Resolving the Political Economic Puzzle," American Economic Review, May.
Feldstein, M. (1986b), "Budget Deficits, Tax Rules and Real Interest Rates,"
forthcoming.

Feldstein, M. and P. Bacchetta (1986), "U.S. Budget Deficits and European

Unemployment: The German Experience," forthcoming.
Feldstein, M. and L. Summers (1978), "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Long-Term
Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, January.

Feldstein, M. and J. Jun (1986), "The Effects of Tax Rules on Nonresidential

Fixed Investment: Some Preliminary Evidence from the 1980's," forthcoming
in M. Feldstein (ed.), Taxation and Capital Formation.

Frankel, J. (1979), "On the Mark: A Theory of Floating Exchange Rates Based
on Real Interest Differentials," American Economic Review, September.
Frankel, J. (1982), "A Test of Perfect Substitutability in the Foreign
Exchange Market," Southern Economic Journal, October.
Frenkel, J. (1985), "Causes of Appreciation and Volatility of the Dollar,"
NBER Working Paper No. 1377.
Frenkel, J. and A. Razin (1984), "The International Transmission of Fiscal
Error and Budget Deficits in the World Economy," NBER Working Paper
No. 1527.

Frenkel, 3. and A. Razin (1985), "The International Transmission and Effects
of Fiscal Policies," NBER Working Paper No. 1799.
Hooper, P. (1985), "International Repercussions of the U.S. Budget Deficit,"

—52—

Brookings Discussion Paper No. 27, February.

Hutchinson, M. and A. Throop, "U.S. Budget Deficits and the Real Value of the
Dollar," Economic Review of Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Fall
1985.

Krugman, P. (1985), "Is the Strong Dollar Sustainable?" NBER Working Paper
No. 1644.

McKinnon, R. (1984), An International Standard for Monetary St bilization,
Policy Analyses in International Economics No. 8, Institute for
International Economics.

Meese, R. and K. Rogoff (1983), "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the

Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of International
Economics.

Meese, R. and K. Rogoff (1985), "Was it Real? The Exchange Rate-Interest
Differential Relation, 1973-1984," NBER Working Paper No. 1732.

Obstfeldt, M. (1985), "Floating Exchange Rates: Experience and Prospects,"
Brookings Papers on Ecoknomic Activity 1985:2.
Plosser, C.

(1982), "Government Financing Decisions and Asset Returns,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, May.

Price, R.W.R. and P. Muller (1984), "Structural Budget Indicators and the
Interpretation of Fiscal Policy Stance in OECD Economies," in OECD
Economic Studies, No. 3, Autumn.

Sachs, J. (1985), "The Dollar and the Policy Mix: 1985," NBER Working
Paper No. 1636, forthcoming in the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Sinai, A (1985), "The Dollar and Inflation," Economic Studies Series,

Shearson Lehman Brothers, Inc., November. (Reprinted from the Eastern

—53—

Economic Journal, Proceedings: Eleventh Annual Conference, July/August
1985.)

—0.057
(0.024)
-0.054
(0.055)

0.223
(0.161)

0.343

(0.052)

—0.106
(0.108)
-0.081
(0.040)
-0.053
(0.046)

0.283
(0.075)

0.367
(0.076)

0.339

1.10

1.11

1.12

—0.027
(0.023)

(0.036)

—0.023

(0.030)

-0.000

(0.033)

-0.027

—0.070
(0.039)

(0.017)

-0.020

(0.032)

—0.048

0.005
(0.014)

-0.010
(0.029)

(6)

INFEX

-0.084
(0.046)

-0.098
(0.082)

(7)

PDLINF

1.10

0.86

2.63

1.09

2.07

1.21

1.34

1.32

1.99

1.39

1.21

1.47

(8)

CONST.

(0.53)

0.72

1.21
(0.29)

1.23
(0.33)

(9)

u1

—0.69
(0.38)

-0.68
(0.45)

(10)

u...2

0.76

0.75

0.86

0.73

0,64

0.83

0.84

0.64

0.84

0.81

0.95

0.78

(11)

R2

at

1.16

1.59

2.48

0.87

1.11

2.13

2.22

0,76

1.78

1.72

1.76

1.68

(12)

ows

Basic Specifications

The dependent variable is the real OM-dollar exchange rate (DMs per dollar, adjusted for GNP deflators) normalized
1.0 = 1980.
Equations estimated for 1973 to 1984. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
See text for
In equation 1.12, the growth of the monetary base is replaced by the growth of Ml.
explanations of variables.

(0.079)

—0.097

0.023
(0.108)

0.246
(0.201)

1.9

—0.043
(0.041)

—0.110
(0.111)

1.8

(0.123)

1.7

-0.060
(0.023)

0.236
(0.193)

1.6

-0.068
(0.050)

—0.058
(0.038)

—0.044
(0.019)

—0.061
(0.042)

(5)

MBGRO

-0.036
(0.052)

(4)

MPRNR

0.234
(0.056)

-0.016
(0.077)

—0.102
(0.031)

—0.093
(0.017)

—0.095
(0.038)

(3)

MPRIR

1.5

0.385
(0.031)

(2)

DEFALT

0.254
(0.118)

(0.059)

0.387

0.375
(0.071)

(1)

DEFEX

Effects of Expected Budget Deficits and Other Variables on the DM-Dollar Exchange Rate:

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.1

Equation

Table 1:

3.2

0.212
(0.070)

3.6
(0.013)

-0.016

-0.067
(0.154)

—0.173
(0.087)

0.009
(0.509)

(0.030)

0.040

(7)

MBGROG
(9)

(8)

1.73
(0.11)

1.60
(0.37)

1.15

1.21

1.06

1.58

1.22

1.47

u

CONST.

-0.91
(0.15)

-0.94
(0.09)

(10)

u_2

R2

0.96

0.95

0.94

0.75

0.78

0.78

(11)

1.84

2.11

1.76

1.64

1.85

1.68

(12)

ows

for GNP deflators) normalized at
rate (OMs per dollar, adjusted
real
OM—dollar
exchange
is
the
variable
See text for
The dependent
are shown in parentheses.
for
1973 to 1984. Standard errors
=
estimated
1980.
1.0
Equations
explanations of variables.

—0.034
(0.016)

—0.029

0.007
(0.055)

0.010
(0.023)

-0.045
(0.025)

-0.092
(0.018)

(0.012)

0.414
(0.103)

3.5

0.323
(0.521)

0.022
(0.218)

—0.007
(0.047)

-0.062
(0.047)

-0.093
(0.047)

(0.217)

0.028
(0.051)

-0.081
(0.046)

-0.100
(0.044)

-0.055

-0.010
(0.029)

-0.061
(0.042)

-0.095
(0.038)

0.202
(0.058)

3.4

3.3

0.344

(0.491)

0.375
(0.071)

(6)

(5)

(4)

(3)

(2)

(1)

3.1

Equation

DEFEXG

INFEX

MBGRO

MPRIR

DEFALT

Deficits and Other Variables
Effects of U.S. and German Expected Budget
Rate
on the DM-Dollar Exchange

DEFEX

Table 3:

OLS
AR1

OLS
AR2

IV

IV

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

OLS
AR2

IV

IV

4.7

4.8

4.9

Real
Real

1973-84

1973-84

1973-84

1973-84

1973—84

1973-84

1973—84

1973-84

1973-84

Interval

4:

(0.023)

0.054

(0.035)

0.082

(0.022)

0.034

(0.023)

0.032

(0.025)

0.042

(1)

(0.024)

(0.024)

—0.037

(0.061)

(0.034)
0.046

-0.055

(0.034)

0.011

(0.037)

0.003

(3)

RO

Predicted

0.080

0.038
(0.019)

0.051
(0.024)

(2)

Interest Rates minus
RUS-RG
RUS

1.23

1.17

1.10

1.08

1.26

1.25

1.26

1.32

1.24

(4)

Inflation
Constant

(0.18)

0.74

(0.28)

1.38

(0.18)

0.75

1.27
(0.29)

(0.19)

0.81

(5)

u1

(.028)

—0.75

(0.31)

-0.59

(6)

u_2

Interest Differentials and the DM—Dollar Exchange Rate
Interest is Interest Minus ARIMA Predictions

0.53

2.13

0.90

0.41

(8)

OWS

(0.16)

NA

(0,16)

NA

(0.10)

0.80

(0.19)

0.23

1.05

1.05

2.08

0.48

NA
1.18
(0.15)

(0.23)

NA

(0.11)

0.74

(0.13)

0.63

(021)

0.14

(7)

(SER)

R2

The dependent variable is the real DM-dollar exchange rate (DMs per dollar, adjusted for GNP deflators)
normalized at 1.0 = 1980. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. See text for explanations of variables.

APi

OLS

4.6

APi

OLS

4.1

Equation

Estimation
Method

Table

IV

IV

5,3

5.4

0.072
(0.026)

AR1

(2)

IV

0.081
(0.031)

(0.029)

0.097

(0.035)

0.055

(0.035)

0.055

(1)

(0.033)

0.003

(3)

1.04

1.33

1.32

1.32

1.31

(4)

(0.17)

0.75

(0.24)

0.58

(0.14)

(0.78)

(0.12)

NA

(0.15)

NA

(0.17)

NA

0.62

(0.16)

0.45

0.69

u_1

(SER)

2

Real Interest Differentials and the DM-Dollar Exchange Rate:
Real Interest is Interest Minus Distributed Lag Inflation

Interest Rate minus Past Inflation
RUS
RG
Constant
RUS-RG

5:

0.83

1.50

0.91

1.36

0.84

DWS

The dependent variable is the real DM-dollar exchange rate (DMs per dollar, adjusted for GNP deflators)
normalized at 1.0 = 1980. Equations estimated for 1973 to 1984. Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
See text for explanations of variables.

5.5

OLS
AR1

5.2

AR1

0LS

5.1

Equation

Estimation
Method

Table

6.405

7.037
8.535

5.494

7.500

4.053
4.462

4.320
3.802

7.770
8.725
9.324
7.751
5.520
4.159

5.284
4.902
4.812
4.495
4.050
4.048
3.874

6.400
7.000
7.600
8.000
7.000
5.600
5.500

6.158
5.733

7.425
8.500
10.383
8.950
7.892
7.775

6.990
8.318
9.518
11.478
14.236
13.006
10.796
12.241

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

bonds;
INFPUS (ARIMA) = U.S. inflation predicted by Arima method;
INFPG (ARIMA) = German inflation
predicted
by Arima method;
INFPUS (PAST) = U.S. inflation predicted by average of past values;
INFPG = German inflation
predicted
by average of past values.

10 =

yield on 5-year government bonds;
yield on long-term German government

3.990
6.500

5,603

6.000

7.800

7.179

1976

IUS

4.062

6.193

6.125

5.800

8.483

7.766

1975

2.771

4.288

4.982

7.173

6.101

9.700

10.383

7.802

1974

=

6.555

5.093

4.869

4.500

6.313

(6)

(5)

(4)

(3)

9.:323

(2)

(1)

INFPG
PAST

ARIMA

INFPUS
ARIMA

INFPG

INFPUS
PAST

Table A—2
Inflation Time Series Observations

6.868

10

IUS

arid

1973

Year

Interest

