                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FIRMS’ OPTIMISM AND PESSIMISM

                                          Rüdiger Bachmann
                                           Steffen Elstner

                                         Working Paper 18989
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w18989


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We are grateful to Wolfgang Ruppert and Christian Seiler from the IFO Institute for helping us with
the data and introducing us to the institutional backgrounds. We appreciate the comments from our
discussant Charles Manski. We would like to thank Kai Carstensen, Matthias Doepke, Gebhard Flaig,
Monika Piazzesi, Martin Schneider as well as seminar participants at the Royal Economic Society
Meeting 2013 and the University of Munich for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Rüdiger Bachmann and Steffen Elstner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Firms’ Optimism and Pessimism
Rüdiger Bachmann and Steffen Elstner
NBER Working Paper No. 18989
April 2013
JEL No. D22,D84,E20,E22

                                           ABSTRACT

Are firms’ expectations systematically too optimistic or too pessimistic? Does it matter? We use micro
data from the West German manufacturing subset of the IFO Business Climate Survey to infer quarterly
production changes at the firm level and combine them with production expectations over a quarterly
horizon in the same survey to construct series of quantitative firm-specific expectation errors. We
find that depending on the details of the empirical strategy at least 6 percent and at most 34 percent
of firms systematically over- or underpredict their one-quarter-ahead upcoming production. In a simple
neoclassical heterogeneous-firm model these expectational biases lead to factor misallocations that
cause welfare losses which in the worst case are comparable to conventional estimates of the welfare
costs of business cycles fluctuations. In more conservative calibrations the welfare losses are even
smaller.


Rüdiger Bachmann
Department of Economics
RWTH Aachen University
Templergraben 64
Aachen
Germany
and NBER
ruediger-bachmann@gmx.de

Steffen Elstner
Ifo Institute for Economic Research e.V.
at the University of Munich
Poschingerstr. 5
81679 München
elstner@ifo.de
1      Introduction
Are firms’ expectations systematically too optimistic or too pessimistic? Firms, based on
expectations about their future business situation, decide about the allocation of an econ-
omy’s capital stock and labor supply. If firms’ expectations are biased, an economy’s factor
allocation is likely to be suboptimal compared to an economy populated by firms with unbi-
ased expectations. How large are the welfare losses from the resulting factor misallocations?
This paper, using business survey data from Germany, provides quantitative answers to these
questions. We find that at most a third of firms in the sample systematically over- or un-
derpredict their one-quarter-ahead upcoming production; these expectational biases lead to
welfare losses that are typically not larger than conventional estimates of the welfare costs
of business cycles fluctuations.
    Little is known empirically about firms’ expectation formation.1 There is an accounting
literature (e.g. McDonald, 1973, Firth and Smith, 1992, Brown et al., 2000), which finds
that managers tend to bias their public earnings and dividend forecasts upward, presumably
for strategic reasons to attract investors. Malmedier and Tate (2005, 2008) using data on
risk exposure in firms’ investment strategies to measure CEO overconfidence, investigate the
relationship between CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. These literatures rely
on either publicly announced expectations or ex-post behavior to measure firms’ expecta-
tions. Business survey data on expectations and realizations are less likely to suffer from
strategic forecasting behavior, as they are highly confidential micro data and can only be
accessed under strict non-disclosure agreements, if at all. These survey data have been used
in the literature to study rationality and unbiasedness of firms’ expectations: Anderson et
al. (1954) conduct a very early study on qualitative expectation errors using the first few
installments of the IFO Business Climate Survey. Nerlove (1983) uses German (from IFO)
and French data on firms’ expectations about idiosyncratic firm variables (such as prices, de-
mand, etc.). Tompkinson and Common (1983) study expectations about idiosyncratic firm
variables in the U.K. manufacturing sector and Zimmermann and Kawasaki (1986), using
IFO price expectation and realization data, test whether firms are rational about the devel-
opment of the market prices of their own commodities. All these studies have in common
    1 Expectation formation of households is somewhat better understood: for instance, Souleles (2004),
using data from the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and Bovi (2009), using the harmonized European
consumer surveys, present evidence that household expectations are not rational. Agents systematically
assess their current situation overcritically and form their expectations overoptimistically. On the theory
side, Brunnermeier and Parker (2005) present a model where agents optimally bias their expectations about
the future upwards to increase their expected life time utility. Jaimovich and Rebelo (2007) study a business
cycle model with overoptimism with respect to the realization of investment-specific shocks, without, however,
using micro data for calibration. Hassan and Mertens (2011) argue that small expectation errors of stock
market investors can have first order effects on welfare.


                                                      2
that they usually find some degree of deviation from rationality. Nonetheless as e.g. Pesaran
and Wheale (2006) state the analysis of individual response data of business survey data is
underdeveloped.
     Progress in the empirical literature on firms’ expectation formation has been slow be-
cause of formidable data requirements. Ideally, researchers need high-frequency quantitative
expectation and realization data on firm-specific variables for a large (and representative)
cross-sections of firms, such as: “By how much do you expect your production to grow over
the next quarter? By how much did your production grow during the preceding quarter?”
These data need to be available over long time horizons to construct firm histories of ex-
pectation errors and to ensure that specific cyclical episodes do not bias results; after all, in
booms we should expect to see upward expectation errors, and vice versa in recessions.
     However, high frequency business survey data about idiosyncratic expectations and real-
izations are usually qualitative,2 indeed trichotomous, in nature: “We expect our production
to increase, decrease, stay the same over the next three months”. While useful, qualitative
information has its limits, in particular when forecasting errors need to be aggregated over
time in order to measure the long-run average forecasting errors of firms and possible biases
therein. How does one aggregate a qualitative forecasting error of +1 (up) today and −1
(down) tomorrow?3 Therefore, Müller (2011) uses quantitative expectations about plants’
sales and employment development over a year from the annual IAB Establishment Panel
in Germany to measure whether firms are overoptimistic or overpessimistic. He finds strong
evidence for the existence of both types of firms. However, the IAB Establishment Panel is
still rather short (starting in 1993) and of low frequency.
     In our analysis we use firm-level micro data from the IFO Business Climate Survey
(IFO-BCS) that allow us to construct quantitative expectation errors for firms’ production.
We note that we do not observe directly in the IFO-BCS the aforementioned quantitative
questions “By how much do you expect your production to grow over the next quarter? By
how much did your production grow during the preceding quarter?”. But we can combine
answers to other qualitative and quantitative questions that under certain assumptions allow
us the construction of quantitative expectation errors for firms’ production. While not ideal,
we view this as an attempt to use the best available data and inform quantitative assessments
of the welfare impact of expectational biases.
   2  De Leuuw and McKelvey (1981) study quantitative annual expectation data about aggregate prices
from a BEA survey of business expenditures on plant and equipment in the U.S. and find that firms do not
have rational expectations.
   3 This is a problem, even when qualitative expectation data predict quantitative ex-post data rather well,

which is what Lui et al. (2008) find, using survey data from the ’Confederacy of British Industry’ business
survey and ex-post administrative data.



                                                     3
    We also note that we cannot measure surprises with respect to truly exogenous driving
forces, such as technology or demand shocks. However, to the best of our knowledge there
is no business survey in the world which does or even would ask these questions directly.
Nevertheless, surprises with respect to endogenous variables, such as production, can be
informative about truly exogenous surprises when viewed through the lens of a structural
model of the firm. We will make use of this insight in the second half of the paper.
    The IFO-BCS is a monthly qualitative business survey that is supplemented on a quar-
terly basis with quantitative questions. Given appropriate assumptions, we can combine the
qualitative three-month ahead production outlook from the monthly survey with the quan-
titative change in percentage capacity utilization from the quarterly supplement to compute
idiosyncratic quarterly, one-quarter-ahead production expectation errors. We do this for the
manufacturing part of the IFO-BCS from 1980 on and thus construct a panel of quarterly
firm-level production expectation errors over thirty years.
    Limiting our analysis to firms with at least eight years of observations we compute long-
run averages of firms’ expectation errors and analyze their distributions. To classify firms
as optimists or pessimists, we test for each firm whether its average expectation error is
significantly different from zero in statistical sense, at the 5 percent level. At least 6 percent
and at most 34 percent of firms consistently over- or underpredict their one-quarter-ahead
upcoming production. The optimist firms, for example, overpredict their production in the
baseline specification by 3.5 percent on average.
    To gauge the implications of these expectational biases we perform a simple welfare
calculation, using a neoclassical heterogeneous-firm model where firms decide about their
factor demands before they know their idiosyncratic productivity levels. We calibrate the
fractions of optimistic and pessimistic firms and the extent of their expectational biases to the
distributional properties of production expectation errors in the IFO-BCS. Overoptimistic
firms hire too many workers and build up capital stocks that are too high. Overpessimistic
firms do not demand enough inputs. We then compare the welfare in an economy which is
populated by firms with a distribution of production expectation errors that approximates
the one in the data to a world that is only populated by firms with zero long-run expectation
errors. We robustly find that the welfare losses from expectational errors are small, at worst
around 0.1 per cent in terms of consumption equivalents, more likely smaller than these
conventional estimates of the welfare costs of business cycles.
    The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The next section describes the
IFO-BCS and the construction of the idiosyncratic production expectation errors from it.
Section 3 introduces the heterogeneous-firm model, our measurement device. Section 4
presents and discusses the welfare results. Section 5 provides a series of robustness checks.


                                                4
Section 6 concludes. Details on the empirics and the computations are relegated to various
appendices.


2      Evidence from the IFO Business Climate Survey
2.1         The IFO Business Climate Survey
The IFO Business Climate index is a much-followed leading indicator for economic activity in
Germany. It is based on a firm survey, the IFO Business Climate Survey (IFO-BCS), which
has been conducted since 1949. To the best of our knowledge it is the first business survey
that started to ask manufacturing firms about their own output and price expectations (see
Becker and Wohlrabe, 2008, for details).4 Since then the survey design of the IFO Business
Climate index was adopted by other surveys such as the Confederation of British Industry for
the UK manufacturing sector or the Tankan survey for Japanese firms. Due to longitudinal
consistency problems in other sectors and the availability of micro data in a processable form
we limit our analysis to the manufacturing sector from 1980 until 2010. Again for reasons of
longitudinal consistency, our analysis excludes East German firms.
    One of the IFO-BCS’s main advantages is the high number of survey participants. The
average number of respondents at the beginning of our sample is approximately 5,000; to-
wards the end it is about 2,000.5 Participation in the survey is voluntary and confidential.
Thus, there is little incentive for firms to provide overoptimistic forecasts as a signal to
investors. There is some fraction of firms that are only one time participants. However,
conditional on staying two months in the survey, most firms continue on and this allows
us to construct an (unbalanced) panel data set of production expectation errors. For our
narrow, very conservative definition of expectation errors the final baseline panel consists
of 696 firms for which we have at least 32 quarterly observations each; for a broader defi-
nition of expectation errors the panel contains 3,679 firms, again with at least 32 quarterly
observations.


2.2         Construction of Quantitative Production Expectation Errors
To construct firms’ quantitative production expectation errors we would ideally need the
following quantitative information about production expectations and realizations: “By how
    4 The first consumer survey asking for information on expectations was conducted by the United States’
Department of Agriculture in 1944. The Livingston survey, the oldest survey of economists’ expectations
concerning macroeconomic variables, started in 1946.
   5 Strictly speaking, the IFO-BCS is a survey at the product level, so that these numbers do not exactly

correspond to firms.


                                                    5
much do you expect your production to grow over the next quarter? By how much did
your production grow in the preceding quarter?” To the best of our knowledge there is no
firm survey that asks these questions for a long time horizon and repeatedly at underyearly
frequencies. However, the quantitative quarterly supplement of the IFO survey allows us to
construct - under certain assumptions - quantitative production expectations and quantita-
tive production realizations. We are thus able to construct a panel of quantitative quarterly
production expectation errors for the last thirty years. While not ideal, we view this paper
as an attempt to use the best available data to address the question of how expectational
biases impact welfare.
    Specifically, we use the following supplementary question about capacity utilization to
compute production changes:6

Q 1 “Supplementary Question: The utilisation of our production equipment for producing
XY (customary full utilization = 100) currently amounts to..%.”


                                                                        more than 100 %
            30 40 50 60           70 75 80 85           90 95 100           namely




    We start from the following production relationship of an individual firm i:

                                             act         pot
                                            yi,t = ui,t yi,t ,                                       (1)

        act denotes the firm’s actual output, y pot its potential output level and u the level
where yi,t                                       i,t                                i,t
of capacity utilization. Only ui,t is directly observable in the IFO-BCS. Taking the natural
logarithm and the three-month difference, we get:7

                                                             pot
                                  ∆logyi,t
                                       act
                                           = ∆logui,t + ∆logyi,t .                                   (2)

                                                                       pot
Under the assumption that potential output remains constant, ∆ log yi,t    = 0, percentage
changes in actual output can be recovered from percentage changes in capacity utilization.
To implement this idea we restrict the analysis to firms of which we can reasonably expect
that they did not change their production capacity in the preceding quarter, making use of
the following two questions in the IFO-BCS:
   6 Herewe provide a translation, for the German original see Appendix A.
   7 Time intervals are months. For us to construct an expectation error in t, we need an observation for
capacity utilization in t and t − 3.


                                                    6
Q 2 “Expectations for the next three months: Employment related to the production of XY
in domestic production unit(s) will probably increase, roughly stay the same, decrease.”


Q 3 “Supplementary Question: We evaluate our technical production capacity with reference
to the backlog of orders on books and to orders expected in the next twelve months as more
than sufficient, sufficient, insufficient.”


    Given hiring frictions in the labor market, we view a firm’s expectation, stated in t − 3,
that its employment level will remain the same in the next three months as highly indicative
that its productive capacity did not change between t − 3 and t. Similarly, given capital
adjustment frictions, we view a firm’s statement, again in t − 3, that its technical production
capacity is sufficient for the future incoming orders as suggestive that this firm has no
reason to change its production capacity in the near future. To be conservative we require
a firm to satisfy both criteria in t − 3 for us to assume that its production capacity has
not changed between t − 3 and t. In this case, we use the quarterly percentage change in
capacity utilization in t as a proxy for the quarterly percentage change in production in t.
The existence of non-convex or kinked adjustment costs for capital and labor adjustment as
well as time to build (see Davis and Haltiwanger, 1992, as well as Doms and Dunne, 1998)
make this a reasonable assumption.
    To derive production expectation errors we also need information on firms’ production ex-
pectations. This allows us to compute production surprises out of mere production changes.
In the IFO-BCS firms report only qualitative production expectations:

Q 4 “Expectations for the next three months: Our domestic production activities with respect
to product XY will (without taking into account differences in the length of months or seasonal
fluctuations) increase, roughly stay the same, decrease.”


Qualitative expectations have a built-in asymmetry in the sense that the middle category also
constitutes a quantitative expectation, zero or close-to-zero change, whereas the increase and
decrease categories convey no quantitative information. We therefore proceed in two steps.
                                                                                   act , will not
First, we consider only firms whose answer to Q4 is that their production level, yi,t
                                                                 pot
change in the next three months. Under the assumption that yi,t      remains constant over this
time period, all ∆ log ui,t are automatically expectation errors. In a second step we extend
our analysis to arbitrary qualitative production expectations. This will give us a broader
picture of expectation errors, albeit with the added cost of more necessary assumptions.


                                               7
    We also clean our sample from firm-quarter observations with extreme capacity utilization
outliers, i.e. those that exceed 150%, and from firm-quarter observations with inconsistent
statements. To determine the latter we consider the following monthly qualitative IFO-BCS
question concerning actual production changes in the months t, t − 1, t − 2:

Q 5 “Trends in the last month: Our domestic production activities with respect to prod-
uct XY have (without taking into account differences in the length of months or seasonal
fluctuations) increased, roughly stayed the same, decreased.”


    We drop all observations as inconsistent in which firms report a strictly positive (negative)
change in ∆ log ui,t and no positive (negative) change in Q5 in the last 3 months. For firms
that report ∆ log ui,t = 0, we proceed as follows: Unless firms in Q5 either answer three times
in a row that production did not change, or unless they have at least one “Increase” and one
“Decrease” in their three answers, we drop them as inconsistent.
    In our starting sample we have 381,854 firm-level observations for ui,t , i.e. 381,854
firm-quarter observations. The number of outliers is quite small and corresponds to 238
firm-quarter observations. We are able to compute 343,023 changes in capacity utilization,
                                                                    pot
∆ log ui,t . For 177,432 observations we can assume that their yi,t     has not changed during
the last three months, due to Q2 and Q3. We classify 69,669 observations as inconsistent
and drop them for the baseline. Our final baseline sample consists of 107,763 observations
     act .
for yi,t

2.2.1   Quantitative Expectation Errors under Constant Qualitative Production
        Expectations

If the production capacity can be assumed not to have changed in the preceding quarter, and
if no change in production was expected three months prior, a change in capacity utilization,
∆ log ui,t , is also a production expectation error of firm i in month t. Notice that the signing
convention for a production expectation error is such that we subtract the expectation from
the actual change. We first restrict our analysis to the subset of firm-quarter observations
that satisfy these assumptions. For this case, Figure 1 illustrates the move from capacity
utilization changes to production expectation errors.




                                               8
      Figure 1: Link between Capacity Utilization and Production Expectation Errors

 Prerequisite: Firm i passes the outlier and inconsistency test (Q1 and Q5)

 Firm i has an observation for a change in capacity utilization ∆ log ui,t (Q1)
                                               pot
          No change in potential output ∆ log yi,t

             Firm i answers “Constant employment expectations” (Q2)

             and “Technical production capacity is sufficient” (Q3) in t − 3
      ?
 ∆ log ui,t is a production change ∆ log yi,t
                                          act


          No expected production change

             Qualitative production expectations in t − 3 are constant (Q4)
      ?
 ∆ log ui,t is a quantitative production expectation error

Notes: The time dimension t is measured in months.


    Figure 2 illustrates the exact timing of the questions in the IFO-BCS that we use to
compute production expectation errors. As a first pass we consider only firms which state in
period t − 3 that their production level, employment level and technical production capacity
will remain the same in the next three months. Then we compute ∆ log ui,t three months
later in t. These ∆ log ui,t constitute our narrow definition of production expectation errors.
We denote them by F E_BCSi,t      narrow .



Figure 2: Derivation of Production Expectation Errors under Constant Production Expec-
tations - Timing

            Prerequisite: Firm i passes the outlier and inconsistency test (Q1 and Q5)

            Firm i states in period t − 3:
            Constant employment expectations (Q2)
            Sufficient technical capacity (Q3)
            Constant production expectations (Q4)

                                ∆ log ui,t =F E_BCSi,t
                                                   narrow
                  ui,t−3                                      - ui,t
                                                                                    -

                   t−3                                             t           Time (in months)




                                                     9
2.2.2       Quantitative Expectation Errors under General Production Expectations

The derivation of quantitative production expectation errors for firms with increasing or
decreasing qualitative production expectations in Q4 requires additional assumptions. We
admit at the outset that these assumptions may not be too palatable. However, we view
this as an attempt to measure firms’ quantitative production expectation errors as best
as we can, given the limited data available. We take the following four steps. First, we
define a qualitative index of production changes. Specifically, we compute a firm-specific
activity variable, REALIZi,t , as the sum of the increase-instances minus the sum of the
decrease-instances in question Q5 over the last three months going backward from t. In a
second step, we use these qualitative production changes to determine qualitative expectation
errors with question Q4.8 Then, using the conditions about employment expectations and
adequacy of technical capacity, we map qualitative production changes into quantitative
production changes. In a final step, we convert these quantitative production changes into
quantitative production expectation errors for all firms that pass the aformentioned outlier
and inconsistency tests.
    The basic idea is to assign firms with large qualitative production expectation errors –
for example a firm expecting its production to go up over the next three months, but then
reporting only production declines – large quantitative production expectation errors, derived
from a mapping between qualitative and quantitative production changes. The expectation
errors for firms with constant production expectations remain the same as in the previous
section. We denote this measure of quantitative production expectation errors under general
production expectations by F E_BCSi,t    broad . Details of the construction can be found in

Appendix B.


2.3       Results
We next compute the average firm-specific production expectation error over all time periods
for which we have data. We restrict our sample to firms that have at least 32 observations or
eight years of expectation errors, for both F E_BCSi,tnarrow and F E_BCS broad . The average
                                                                           i,t
firm-specific expectation errors are denoted by AF E_BCSi     narrow and AF E_BCSibroad .
    Table 1 displays the distributions of firms’ average expectation errors.9 Note that posi-
   8 This procedure follows Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013).
   9 We show in Figure 6 of Appendix C the corresponding histograms of these distributions. Tables 11 and
12 in Appendix D show the analogue of Table 1, when we, respectively, include firm-quarter observations
for firms that have an “inconsistent” production change statement for that quarter, and when we use 16
quarterly expectation error observations (or four years) instead of 32 as the cut-off criterion to compute the
AF E_BCSinarrow or AF E_BCSibroad .



                                                     10
 Table 1: Firm-Specific Average Production Expectation Errors (IFO-BCS)

                           Statistics       AF E_BCSinarrow         AF E_BCSibroad
                           Obs                    696                    3,679
                           Mean                 -0.0064                 -0.0255
                           Std.Dev.              0.0162                  0.0302
                           Percentiles
                           5th                    -0.0339               -0.0822
                           10th                   -0.0240               -0.0645
                           25th                   -0.0118               -0.0401
                           50th                   -0.0030               -0.0205
                           75th                    0.0014               -0.0059
                           90th                    0.0068                0.0058
                           95th                    0.0120                0.0134
                           # Optimists           38 (5.5%)           1,213 (33.0%)
                           # Pessimists           6 (0.9%)              48 (1.3%)
                           # Realists           652 (93.7%)          2,418 (65.7%)

Notes: This table provides a summary of the distributions of AF E_BCSinarrow and AF E_BCSibroad . In
the last three rows we report the number of firms which are classified as optimists, pessimists and realists,
respectively. We define optimistic firms as those firms which feature a negative average expectation error
that is significantly different from zero, at the five percent level. Pessimistic firms are defined as those firms
with a positive average expectation error that is significantly different from zero, at the five percent level.


tive values of AF E_BCSinarrow or AF E_BCSibroad indicate that a firm was on average too
pessimistic in the sense that its predicted production changes were on average lower than
its actual production changes. Especially for AF E_BCSibroad the distribution is skewed
towards negative values and at least 25 percent of all firms have long run averages of ex-
pectation errors which are too optimistic by 4 percent or more.10 These numbers alone,
however, are not sufficient to assess whether a firm has biased expectations. To provide
evidence for expectational biases we need to consider the second moment of firm-specific
shocks as well. Firms operate in different economic environments and face different sizes of
shocks. Therefore, analyzing only average expectation errors can be misleading.
    The panel structure of the IFO-BCS allows us to address this issue. We test for each
firm whether its average expectation error is statistically significantly different from zero.
Adapting the procedure in Souleles (2004), we regress for each firm all its observations of
F E_BCSi,t narrow and F E_BCS broad on a constant. Then we use two-sided t-tests with a
                                  i,t
5 percent significance level in order to assess whether the individual firm-specific average
expectation error is significantly different from zero. We define optimistic firms as those
  10 Excluding the periods 1990 to 1992 (German reunification) and 2008 to 2009 (recession after the collapse

of Lehman) does not change noticeably our results shown in Table 1.



                                                       11
firms which feature a negative average expectation error that is significantly different from
zero. Pessimistic firms are defined as those firms with a positive average expectation error
that is significantly different from zero.
    We find for AF E_BCSinarrow and AF E_BCSibroad that at least 20 percent of firms
have average expectation errors that deviate one standard deviation of the corresponding
distribution or more from zero. However, in the case of AF E_BCSinarrow this difference
from zero is only significant for 6 percent of all considered firms. For AF E_BCSibroad we
end up classifying more than 30 percent of firms as optimists. For both definitions of forecast
errors we see that the distribution of average forecast errors is skewed towards overoptimism.
The optimist firms overpredict their production by 3.5 percent (5.6 percent for the broad
definition) on average, which corresponds to 2.2 times (1.8 times) the standard deviation of
the distribution of firms’ production expectation errors. The pessismist firms underpredict
their production by 2.4 percent (3.3 percent for the broad definition) on average, which
corresponds to 1.5 times (1.1 times) the standard deviation of the distribution of firms’
production expectation errors.
    It is instructive to analyze whether the existence of expectational biases covaries with ob-
servable firm-specific characteristics. To do so, we compute contingency tables. Specifically,
we check whether firm-specific characteristics like exporter status or firm size, determined
by the average number of employees over the sample, induce a higher probability to ob-
serve a “realist” or a “nonrealist” firm. A summary of the results is shown in Table 2. To
test whether statistical relationships are significant we use Pearson’s χ2 -test. The null hy-
pothesis of this test states that both firm-specific characteristics are independent of each
other, i.e. under the null hypothesis the distribution of expectational biases is independent
of firm size or exporter status. Our results show, however, that, in particular in the case of
AF E_BCSibroad , systematic relationships between firm size and expectational biases exist.
While smaller firms are more likely to be too optimistic in their expectations, larger firms
seem to be more “realistic”. For AF E_BCSibroad , we observe that 38.9 percent of all firms
with less than 50 employees are overoptimistic firms, whereas only 24.6 percent of firms with
more than 1000 employees are optimists. This result reflects the idea that larger firms are
likely to put more resources into analyzing their current and upcoming business environment
than smaller firms. Regarding the exporter status we find that exporting firms tend to be
more “realistic” firms.11




   11 To determine exporter status we use the monthly IFO-BCS question concerning expected export trade.

If a firm stated in more than half its answers that it does not export, that firm is classified as non-exporter.


                                                      12
Table 2: Relationship of Firms’ Expectational Biases with Firms’ Character-
istics

    Characteristics                  # Observations       # Realists     # Optimists      # Pessimists

    Quantitative Expectation Errors under
    Constant Production Expectations: AF E_BCSinarrow

    All Firms                               696               652               38               6
                                         (100.0%)          (93.7%)          (5.5%)           (0.9%)
    Exporter                                593               558               30               5
                                         (100.0%)          (94.1%)          (5.1%)           (0.8%)
    Firm Size
      less than 50 employees                103                 92              11               0
                                         (100.0%)          (89.3%)**       (10.7%)**         (0.0%)
      50 − 199 employees                    267                251              12               4
                                         (100.0%)          (94.0%)          (4.5%)           (1.5%)
      200 − 499 employees                   166                156               9               1
                                         (100.0%)          (94.0%)          (5.4%)           (0.6%)
      500 − 999 employees                    91                 87               3               1
                                         (100.0%)            (95.6%)         (3.3%)          (1.1%)
      more than 1, 000 employees             69                 66               3               0
                                         (100.0%)          (95.7%)          (4.4%)           (0.0%)

    Quantitative Expectation Errors
    under General Production Expectations: AF E_BCSibroad

    All Firms                              3,679             2,418            1,213              48
                                         (100.0%)          (65.7%)          (33.0%)          (1.3%)
    Exporter                               2,890             1,926             930               34
                                         (100.0%)          (66.6%)**        (32.2%)*         (1.2%)
    Firm Size
      less than 50 employees                803                482             311               10
                                         (100.0%)          (59.9%)***      (38.9%)***        (1.3%)
      50 − 199 employees                   1,399               903             480               16
                                         (100.0%)           (64.6%)         (34.4%)          (1.1%)
      200 − 499 employees                   803                547             248                8
                                         (100.0%)           (68.1%)         (30.9%)          (1.0%)
      500 − 999 employees                   345                249              93                3
                                         (100.0%)          (72.2%)***      (27.0%)**         (0.9%)
      more than 1, 000 employees            329                237              81               11
                                         (100.0%)           (72.0%)**      (24.6%)***       (3.3%)***

Notes: This table provides the numbers of firms that feature specific observable firm-level characteristics
and expectational biases. The numbers in parentheses are proportions. To check for independence between
those firm level characteristics we use Pearson’s χ2 -test . ***: p<0.01; **: p<0.05; *: p<0.1.



                                                    13
3     A Model
3.1    Firms
The model economy is populated by a unit mass continuum of ex ante identical, but ex post
potentially heterogeneous firms. They produce a final generic good using a diminishing re-
turns to scale production function with capital and labor as inputs. In addition, production
is affected by idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Specifically, an individual firm i’s produc-
tion function is given by:

                                                          θ ν
                                             yi,t = zi,t ki,t ni,t ,                           (3)

where zi,t denotes the idiosyncratic productivity level, and ki,t and ni,t denote the firm-
specific capital stock and employment level, respectively. We assume competitive factor
markets. Firms pay a real wage wt for one unit of labor input and a rental rate rt for one
unit of capital input.
    To incorporate expectational biases, we assume that firms decide about their factor de-
mands in period t before knowing their productivity levels zi,t . Instead, firms form expecta-
tions about zi,t on the basis of zi,t−1 . We further assume that the natural logarithm of zi,t
follows a three-state Markov chain on the states [, 0, −] with the following symmetric tran-
sition matrix P obj (in a robustness check we will consider also an asymmetric specification):
                                                                      
                                    
                                            ρ1        ρ2    1 − ρ1 − ρ2 
                             obj
                         P         =
                                           ρ3      1 − 2ρ3     ρ3      ,
                                                                        
                                                                                               (4)
                                                                       
                                        1 − ρ1 − ρ2   ρ2        ρ1

where ρ1 + ρ2 <1 and ρ3 <0.5. P obj is the actual transition matrix of the idiosyncratic
productivity process. Rational firms would use this transition matrix to compute expec-
tations about their idiosyncratic productivity levels. Some firms, however, which we call
optimists and pessimists form their expectations with different transition matrices, P subj,opt
and P subj,pess . Relative to P obj , P subj,opt and P subj,pess feature expectational biases which
we model parsimoniously with a parameter φ. This parameter is introduced additively into
the true transition matrix P obj . Specifically, the subjective transition matrix of an optimist
looks as follows:
                                                                            
                                
                                        ρ1         ρ2    1 − ρ1 − ρ2 
                      subj,opt
                    P          =
                                
                                     ρ3 + φ      1 − 2ρ3   ρ3 − φ 
                                                                     
                                                                       .                       (5)
                                                                    
                                 1 − ρ1 − ρ2 + φ ρ2 + φ    ρ1 − 2φ


                                                      14
The subjective transition matrix for a pessimist is just analogous:
                                                                                     
                                  
                                      ρ1 − 2φ   ρ2 + φ 1 − ρ1 − ρ2 + φ
                      subj,pess
                    P           =  ρ3 − φ
                                  
                                                1 − 2ρ3    ρ3 + φ     .
                                                                      
                                                                                               (6)
                                                                     
                                    1 − ρ1 − ρ2   ρ2          ρ1
With this expectation formation process the optimal factor demands are given by:
                                                                               1
                                     "                        !         θ # 1−θ−ν
                                         νE [zi,t |zi,t−1 ]        θwt
                            ni,t =                                                             (7)
                                               wt                  νrt

                                                      θwt
                                             ki,t =       ni,t .                               (8)
                                                      νrt
Note that if a firm expects a higher expected value of its productivity level E [zi,t |zi,t−1 ], it
will demand more capital and labor. This implies that overoptimistic firms hire too many
workers and build up capital stocks that are too high. In the other direction overpessimistic
firms do not demand enough inputs. This leads to factor misallocation and, potentially, to
welfare losses.


3.2    Households
We assume a representative household with time separable preferences who maximizes the
following instantaneous utility function:

                                                         A
                                     Ut = log Ct −          Nt 1+η ,                           (9)
                                                        1+η

where Ct is aggregate consumption and Nt denotes aggregate employment. η is the inverse
of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. The budget constraint of the household is given by:

                           wt Nt + (1 − δ + rt )Kt + Πt = Kt+1 + Ct ,                         (10)

where δ is the depreciation rate, Kt the aggregate capital stock and Πt denotes aggregate
profits. We assume that all firms are owned by the representative household who does not
know the types of the firms, for instance whether they are realists, optimists or pessimists.
After solving the intertemporal optimization problem of the household we get the usual first-
order conditions:

                                              wt = ACt Ntη ,                                  (11)


                                                      15
                                         1        1 + rt + 1 − δ
                                                                            
                                            = βEt                .                                     (12)
                                         Ct          Ct + 1

3.3     Equilibrium
                                                                                              ∞
Given an initial capital stock, K0 , and a sequence of shocks {{zi,t }∞    i=0 }t=0 an equilibrium of
                                                                                                           ∞
this economy is defined as a time path of quantities {{yi,t }i=0 , {ki,t }i=0 , {ni,t }∞
                                                             ∞            ∞
                                                                                       i=0 , Ct , Kt , Nt }t=0
and a time path of prices {wt , rt }∞
                                    t=0 that satisfy:

   1. Firm optimality: Taking {wt , rt }∞
                                        t=0 as given, the optimal factor demands for ni,t and
      ki,t are determined according to equations (7) and (8).

   2. Household optimality: Taking {wt , rt }∞
                                             t=0 and K0 as given, the household’s consump-
      tion and labor supply satisfy (10), (11) and (12).

   3. Commodity market clearing:
                                    Z                                              Z             
                                              θ ν
                             Ct =       zi,t ki,t ni,t di −    Kt + 1 − ( 1 − δ )       ki,t di


   4. Labor market clearing:                                   Z
                                                     Nt =          ni,t di


3.4     Calibration
The model period is a quarter. Table 3 gives an overview of the standard parameter choices
for calibration: Bachmann and Bayer (2011) compute from national accounting data an
average annual depreciation rate of 0.094 for Germany. They also estimate the median
factor shares of labor and capital in the German manufacturing sector from firm-level micro
data: θ = 0.2075 and ν = 0.5565. The discount factor generates an annual real interest rate
of 2 percent. We fix the Frisch elasticity of labor supply at unity. The disutility parameter
of labor, A, is chosen to ensure that the average time spent at work by the representative
household is 0.33.




                                                          16
                            Table 3: Standard Parameter Values

                                       Baseline Calibration
                      Parameter      Description                        Value
                      δ              Depreciation rate                  0.0235
                      θ              Decreasing returns to capital      0.2075
                      ν              Decreasing returns to labor        0.5565
                      β              Discount factor                    0.9950
                      η              Inverse elasticity of labor supply 1.0000
                      A              Disutility of labor                6.0000



    The remaining parameters ρ1 , ρ2 , ρ3 , φ and  are calibrated using the IFO-BCS. As a
reminder, P obj , the true transition matrix for the idiosyncratic productivity shock process,
is given by:
                                                                            
                                
                                     ρ1        ρ2    1 − ρ1 − ρ2 
                            obj
                           P = 
                                     ρ3      1 − 2ρ3     ρ3      .
                                                                 
                                                                
                                 1 − ρ1 − ρ2   ρ2        ρ1
Note that ρ1 , ρ2 and ρ3 define transition probabilities conditional on a certain economic
state. The IFO-BCS provides such information in a qualitative way with the following
question concerning the current business situation:

Q 6 “Current Situation: We evaluate our business situation with respect to product XY as
good, satisfactory, unsatisfactory.”


     We start with the calibration of ρ3 . These entries define situations in which the economic
states of the firms do not change. Suppose that a firm is in the intermediate economic state.
This state will not change with probability (1 − 2ρ3 ). Therefore, we compute for each
quarter the fraction of firms with no upcoming production change, i.e. REALIZi,t+3 is
equal to zero, conditional on a normal current business situation.12 The time series average
of these fractions provides an estimate of (1 − 2ρ3 ).13
     The probability for firms to remain in either the good or bad economic state is given by
ρ1 . We compute the fractions of firms that have no decrease in their production level over
the next three months, i.e. REALIZi,t+3 is greater or equal to zero, conditional on a good
  12 REALIZ
               i,t is defined as the sum of the Increase-instances minus the sum of the Decrease-instances in
question Q5 over the last three months going backward from t. REALIZi,t can have seven possible values
that live in the interval [-3,3].
  13 As before we use only those firms that pass the outlier and consistency test (Q1 and Q5).



                                                     17
current business situation. Similarly, we compute the fraction of firms that have no increase
in their production level over the next three months, i.e. REALIZi,t+3 is less or equal to
zero, conditional on a bad current business situation. Finally, we take the average of the two
time-series averages to get ρ1 .
    To calibrate ρ2 we compute the unconditional quarterly fractions of firms which change
their production level over the upcoming quarter, i.e. REALIZi,t+3 is unequal to zero. The
time-series average of these fractions provides an empirical moment that has to be matched
by the model. Given ρ1 and ρ3 we find a value for ρ2 that yields the same fraction of firms
changing their economic state in the model. The first three rows of Table 4 summarize the
calibration results so far.

                         Table 4: Parameter Values of P obj , φ, 

                                    Baseline Calibration
             Parameter     Description                             narrow
                                                               F Ei,t           broad
                                                                            F Ei,t
             ρ1            Parameter Transition Matrix         0.8622       0.8488
             ρ2            Parameter Transition Matrix         0.1378       0.1512
             ρ3            Parameter Transition Matrix         0.2073       0.2660
                          Parameter of Technology State       0.0959       0.1914
             φ             Expectational Bias Parameter        0.1486       0.1068



    The calibration of  and φ requires the simulation of the entire model and has to be done
jointly. In a first step we compute separately for the “realist” and “nonrealist” firms the
individual averages of the absolute value of their expectation errors. The average absolute
expectation error for “realist” firms identifies , the same statistic for “nonrealists” identifies
φ. For a given choice of the forecast error type in the data, each guess for  and φ allows us
to compute the model average absolute forecast errors for “realist” and “nonrealist” firms.
We pick  and φ such that the model numbers correspond to their data counterparts. The
calibrated values of φ and  are shown in the last two rows of Table 4.
    To gauge how these Markov chains behave in terms of standard AR(1) modelling we sim-
ulate 100 times the Markov chain defined by P obj and  with 20,000 time series observations
each. Then we estimate AR(1)-regressions on each of these time series. Table 5 displays the
average of the 100 AR(1)-coefficients and standard errors of the regressions.




                                                18
Table 5: AR(1)-Properties of the Calibrated Idiosyncratic Shock Processes

                                                     AR(1)-     Standard Error
                                                    coefficient of Regression
                                         narrow
                                      F Ei,t          0.8619        0.0421
                                         broad
                                      F Ei,t          0.8485        0.0893

Notes: This table shows in the first column the average of the estimated 100 AR(1)-coefficients for the
simulated Markov chains explained in the text for F Ei,t narrow and F E broad . The second column displays
                                                                       i,t
the average of the standard errors of these regressions. Each Markov chain has been simulated over 20,000
observations.


4     Welfare Calculations
To gauge the economic significance of the observed expectational biases in the IFO-BCS,
we compare the lifetime utility of the representative agent in the steady state of the actual
economy with biased expectations, denoted by W elf areact , with her lifetime utility in the
following hypothetical scenario: suppose at some point in time t0 all optimist and pessimist
firms become “realists” and use P obj to form their expectations. Welfare is determined by
the discounted utility function of the representative household:
                                                    ∞
                                                                            A
                                                                                  
                                                              t
                                                                               Nt1+η .
                                                    X
                                      W elf are =         β       log Ct −                           (13)
                                                    t=0                    1+η

   At t0 this economy starts out at the steady state capital stock of the economy with
expectational biases and then transitions towards a new steady state. We can compute the
welfare of the representative household along this transition path, denoted by W elf arehypo ,
according to equation (13). Then we determine the welfare loss as the percent difference of
W elf areact and W elf arehypo . We also compute the consumption equivalent (in percent of
the steady state consumption of the actual economy with expectational biases). Formally,
we find a C, such that:
                    ∞
                                                      A  act 1+η
                                                                            
                              t
                                  log(Ctact                        = W elf arehypo
                    X
                          β                   + C) −     Nt                                          (14)
                    t=0                              1+η
    The results are presented in Table 6. The welfare losses from expectational biases of firms
in this simple model economy are small. The welfare losses range from 0.01 percent to 0.11
percent. The welfare costs under the broad definition of the production expectation error
are higher than those under the narrow definition. The main reason for this is that there
are more optimist and pessimist firms under the broad definition. But even then the welfare


                                                                      19
          Table 6: Welfare Losses Associated with Biased Expectations

                    Type of                     Welfare Loss        Consumption
                    Expectation Error                                Equivalent
                                                     in %              in %
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t                           0.0154            0.0118
                       broad
                    F Ei,t                           0.1481            0.1103

Notes: The welfare loss is computed as the percent difference of W elf areact and W elf arehypo . The third
column shows the welfare loss expressed in terms of consumption equivalents, according to equation (14).
To compute this number we divide C by the steady state consumption level of the actual economy with
expectational biases.


loss in terms of consumption amounts to only roughly 0.1 percent, a number comparable to
conventional estimates of the costs of business cycle fluctuations (see Lucas, 1987, 2003).
    Figure 3 presents the transition paths of major macroeconomic aggregates between the
steady state with expectational biases and the hypothetical steady state with only realist
firms for the broad definition of the production expectation errors, F Ei,t broad .14 Notice first

that the hypothetical steady state with only realist firms features lower output, consumption,
investment, employment and real wages, albeit higher average capital productivity and labor
productivity. Resources, in particular capital, are more efficiently allocated in the hypothet-
ical steady state. In contrast, in the steady state with expectational biases optimist firms
dominate and the economy has too much capital accumulated and works too much. This
is where the transition analysis as opposed to a mere steady state comparison is important.
After the elimination of all expectational biases the economy enjoys a boom in consumption
and leisure on impact which ultimately leads to the welfare improvements documented in
Table 6.




  14 In Appendix E we also show the transition paths for the narrow definition of quantitative expectation
           narrow .
errors, F Ei,t


                                                    20
                                                                                              broad
                                                Figure 3: Transition Paths for the Case of F Ei,t
                                                        Output                                             Consumption
                                1                                                            1
Percent Deviation




                                                                 Actual
                            0.5                                                            0.5
                                                                 Steady State


                                0                                                            0
                                     Hypothetical
                                     Steady State
                       -0.5                                                                -0.5
                                      0       20        40         60     80    100               0   20      40        60   80   100



                                                      Investment                                              Capital
                                3                                                            3

                                2                                                            2
            Percent Deviation




                                1                                                            1

                                0                                                            0

                                -1                                                          -1

                                -2                                                          -2

                                -3                                                          -3
                                      0       20        40         60     80    100               0   20      40        60   80   100



                                                      Real Wage                                            Employment
                            1.5                                                            1.5


                                1                                                            1
Percent Deviation




                            0.5                                                            0.5


                                0                                                            0


                       -0.5                                                                -0.5
                                      0       20        40         60     80    100               0   20      40        60   80   100


                                                    Average Capital                                        Average Labor
                                                      Productivity                                          Productivity
                                1                                                            1

                            0.5                                                            0.5
Percent Deviation




                                0                                                            0

                       -0.5                                                                -0.5

                                -1                                                          -1

                       -1.5                                                                -1.5

                                -2                                                          -2
                                      0       20       40          60     80    100               0   20      40        60   80   100
                                                       Quarter                                                Quarter

                                                                                                     broad .
Notes: This figure shows the transition paths of several macroeconomics variables for the case of F Ei,t
These dynamic responses are expressed as percentage deviations from the steady state of the hypothetical
economy without expectational biases.




                                                                                      21
5     Robustness Checks
This section provides a series of robustness checks to our baseline welfare calculations. All
robustness checks change one feature of the calibration at a time, relative to the baseline sce-
nario. First, we reconsider the definition of optimistic and pessimistic firms. In the baseline
case we defined expectational biases by exploiting firm histories of expectation errors, i.e. we
defined expectationally biased firms statistically as firms whose average production expecta-
tion error was significantly different from zero, given their history of production expectation
errors. An alternative is to define optimists as having an average expectation error below
the 10th percentile of the average production error distribution and a pessimist as having
an average expectation error above the 90th percentile. We also consider 25/75th percentile
thresholds.15 The second and third panel in Table 7 show that in this case welfare losses are
somewhat higher, but their overall magnitude is comparable to our baseline estimates.
    The next robustness check concerns the calibration of ρ1 , ρ2 and ρ3 . In the baseline sce-
nario we calibrated these transition probabilities by using the qualitative production index
REALIZi,t . In particular, we used the signs of this index for calibration. Now we replace
it by sign(∆ log ui,t ), which is derived from the quantitative production changes. This mod-
ification in the calibration strategy yields somewhat higher welfare costs for both types of
expectation errors. In particular, under the broad definition the welfare loss in consump-
tion increases to almost 0.18 percent. Nonetheless, these numbers are of the same order of
magnitude as our baseline results.
    We also check robustness with respect to the number of observations that we require
a firm to have in order to compute an average production forecast error. Instead of 32
observations we use a threshold of 16 observations or four years of quarterly quantitative
production errors. This gives us a larger cross section of firms at the cost of having more
firms with shorter histories in our sample. In the case of F Ei,t  narrow the welfare losses get

somewhat higher, but they are still in line with our baseline estimates.
    In the next robustness check we do not clean our sample from “inconsistent” statements
regarding quantitative and qualitative production changes. After all, these inconsistent
statements might indicate some form of irrationality. Thus, the removal of these observations
could bias the welfare cost estimates downward. If we repeat our analysis without eliminating
these observations, we, unsurprisingly, observe slight increases in all welfare losses. But their
order of magnitude remains unchanged.
    In our final robustness check we relax the symmetry assumption built into the transition
  15 Weprovide the values of ρ1 , ρ2 , ρ3 ,  and φ for these and other robustness checks in Appendix F. For
some cases φ takes on corner solutions that cannot match the data moments perfectly.



                                                    22
                        Table 7: Robustness Checks - Welfare Losses

                    Type of       Welfare Loss          Consumption
                    Expectation                          Equivalent
                    Error             in %                 in %
                    Baseline Results
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0154                0.0118
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.1481                0.1103
                    10% and 90% Percentile
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0566                0.0434
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.1703                0.1264
                    25% and 75% Percentile
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0912                0.0701
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.1553                0.1157
                    Quantitative Production Changes
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0187                0.0143
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.2352                0.1786
                    16 Observations of Production Expectation Errors
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0383                0.0291
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.1335                0.0992
                    Including “Inconsistent” Production Change Statements
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0234                0.0173
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.1524                0.1119
                    Asymmetric Transition Matrix P  obj
                       narrow
                    F Ei,t           0.0131                0.0096
                       broad
                    F Ei,t           0.1607                0.1101

Notes: See notes to Table 6. This table shows the welfare cost estimates of expectational biases for the
baseline case and robustness checks.


matrix Popt . This modification allows for different transitions probabilities. Popt is therefore
defined as follows:
                                                                                    
                            
                                   ρ1,u            ρ2,u       1 − ρ1,u − ρ2,u 
                        obj
                       P = 
                                   ρ3,u       1 − ρ3,u − ρ3,l      ρ3,l       .
                                                                              
                                                                             
                              1 − ρ1,l − ρ2,l      ρ2,l            ρ1,l
    To calibrate ρ3,u (ρ3,l ) we compute for each quarter the fraction of firms with an increase
(decrease) in upcoming production , i.e. REALIZi,t+3 is greater (smaller) than zero, con-
ditional on a normal current business situation. The time series average of these fractions
provides an estimate of ρ3,u (ρ3,l ).16 We determine ρ1,u (ρ1,l ) by computing the fractions
  16 As   before we use only those firms that pass the outlier and consistency test (Q1 and Q5).



                                                      23
of firms that have no decrease (no increase) in their production level over the next three
months, i.e. REALIZi,t+3 is greater or equal (smaller or equal) to zero, conditional on a
good (bad) current business situation. Finally, we take the average of the time-series and get
ρ1,u (ρ1,l ). To calibrate ρ2,u and ρ2,l we compute the two unconditional quarterly fractions of
firms which either increase or decrease their production level over the upcoming quarter, i.e.
REALIZi,t+3 is either greater or smaller than zero, but not equal to zero. The time-series
averages of these two time series provide empirical moments that have to be matched by
the model. Given ρ1,u , ρ1,l , ρ3,u and ρ3,l we find values for ρ2,u and ρ2,l that yield the same
fractions of firms which either increase or decrease their economic state in the model. Table
8 summarizes the calibration results.

            Table 8: Calibration: Asymmetric Transition Matrix P obj

                                         Calibration
             Parameter    Description                       narrow
                                                        F Ei,t                broad
                                                                          F Ei,t
             ρ1,u         Parameter Transition Matrix   0.8744            0.8463
             ρ1,l         Parameter Transition Matrix   0.8500            0.8513
             ρ2,u         Parameter Transition Matrix   0.1256            0.1537
             ρ2,l         Parameter Transition Matrix   0.0750            0.0743
             ρ3,u         Parameter Transition Matrix   0.2312            0.3005
             ρ3,l         Parameter Transition Matrix   0.1834            0.2316
                         Parameter of Technology State 0.0881            0.1727
             φ            Expectational Bias Parameter 0.1834             0.1580



   With these parameter values we obtain the welfare losses summarized in the last panel of
Table 7. It turns out that these results do not differ substantially from the baseline scenario.
The economy experiences at most a welfare loss in consumption equivalents of about 0.1
percent.


6     Conclusion
This paper, using the micro data from the German IFO Business Climate Survey, constructs
a panel data set of firms’ quantitative one-quarter-ahead expectation errors with respect to
their production. With this data set, we can gauge whether firms errors are systematic and
thus biased towards optimism or pessimism. We find some degree of biased expectations, but
for the large majority of firms we find realistic expectations in the sense that zero average
expectation errors cannot be rejected.


                                               24
    We note that obviously our survey data have limitations and the derivation of production
expectation errors is conditional on many assumptions. This calls for better survey data that
ask for production changes and production change expectations directly, quantitatively, and
consistently over many time periods. We still deem the question of the economic importance
of expectation formation as important enough so as to make use of the best available, if less
than perfect data to get a first answer to this question.
    To do so we make use of the simplest possible neoclassical heterogeneous-firm model,
where expectation errors play a role. Expectational biases lead to factor misallocations in
the economy, and a welfare analysis will allow us to gauge the economic significance of
such misallocations. We find that even when expectational errors are very broadly defined,
the welfare costs of these misallocations are generally small, at the order of magnitude of
conventional estimates for the welfare costs of business cycles.
    We do, however, note that our model is somewhat simplistic and expect future research to
compute welfare losses in more realistic environments. In this sense, we view the second half
of the paper only as a first-pass, back-of-the-envelope-type calculation. We speculate that
in economies with physical adjustment frictions to capital, financial frictions or endogenous
growth elements larger welfare losses from expectational biases can be found. Future research
can then make use of our empirical results for firms’ average production errors to calibrate
such models.




                                             25
References
Anderson, O., R. K. Bauer, and E. Fels (1954): “On the accuracy of short-term en-
 trepreneurial expectations,” in Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Sec-
 tion, pp. 124–147. American Statistical Association.

Bachmann, R., and C. Bayer (2011): “Uncertainty Business Cycles - Really?,” Working
 Paper 16862, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. R. Sims (2013): “Uncertainty and Economic Activ-
 ity: Evidence from Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,
 forthcoming.

Becker, S., and K. Wohlrabe (2008): “Micro Data at the Ifo Institute for Economic
 Research - The ‘Ifo Business Survey’ Usage and Access,” Schmollers Jahrbuch, 128, 307–
 319.

Bovi, M. (2009): “Economic versus Psychological Forecasting. Evidence from Consumer
 Confidence Survey,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 30(4), 563–574.

Brown, P., A. Clarke, J. C. Y. How, and K. Lim (2000): “The Accuracy of Manage-
 ment Dividend Forecasts in Australia,” Pacific-Basin Finance Journal, 8, 309–331.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and J. Parker (2005): “Optimal Expectations,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, 95(4), 1092–1118.

Davis, S. J., and J. C. Haltiwanger (1992): “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruc-
 tion, and Employment Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(3), 819–863.

de Leeuw, F., and M. J. McKelvey (1981): “Price expectations of business firms,”
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1981(1), 299–314.

Doms, M., and T. Dunne (1998): “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing
 Plants,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1(2), 409–429.

Firth, M., and A. Smith (1992): “The Accuracy of Profits Forecasts in Initial Public
  Offering Prospectuses,” Accounting and Business Research, 22(87), 239–247.

Hassan, T. A., and T. M. Mertens (2011): “The Social Cost of Near-Rational Invest-
 ment,” Working Paper 17027, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                           26
Jaimovich, N., and S. Rebelo (2007): “Behavioral Theories of the Business Cycle,”
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(2–3), 361–368.

Lucas, R. E. (1987): Models of Business Cycle. Oxford University Press.

        (2003): “Macroeconomic Priorities,” American Economic Review, 93(1), 1–14.

Lui, S., J. Mitchell, and M. Weale (2008): “Qualitative Business Surveys: Signal or
 Noise?,” Discussion Paper 323, NIESR.

Malmedier, U., and G. Tate (2005): “CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment,”
 Journal of Finance, 60(6), 2661–2700.

          (2008): “Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconfidence and the Market’s Reac-
  tion,” Journal of Financial Economics, 89(1), 20–43.

McDonald, C. (1973): “An Empirical Examination of the Reliability of Published Predic-
 tions of Future Earnings,” The Accounting Review, 48(3), 502–510.

Müller, C., and E. Köberl (2007): “The Speed of Adjustment to Demand Shocks: A
 Markov-Chain Measurement Using Micro Panel Data,” Konjunkturforschungsstelle (KOF)
 Working Paper.

Müller, H. C. (2011): “Forecast Errors in Undisclosed Management Sales Forecasts: The
 Disappearance of the Overoptimism Bias,” Discussion Paper 40, DICE.

Nerlove, M. (1983): “Expectations, Plans, and Realizations in Theory and Practice,”
 Econometrica, 51(5), 1251–1279.

Pesaran, M. H., and M. Wheale (2006): “Survey Expectations,” in Handbook of Eco-
 nomic Forecasting, ed. by C. Granger, and A. Timmermann, pp. 715–776, Amsterdam:
 North–Holland.

Souleles, N. S. (2004): “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption:
  Micro Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 28(3), 39–72.

Tompkinson, P., and M. S. Common (1983): “Evidence on the rationality of expectations
 in the British manufacturing sector,” Applied Economics, 15, 425–436.

Zimmermann, K. F., and S. Kawasaki (1986): “Testing the rationality of price expec-
  tations for manufacturing firms,” Applied Economics, 18, 1335–1347.

                                          27
Appendix

A     Original German IFO-BCS Questions
Q 1 “Sonderfragen: Die Ausnutzung unserer Anlagen zur Herstellung von XY (betrieb-
sübliche Vollauslastung=100%) beträgt gegenwärtig bis zu ...%. ”


                                                            mehr als 100 %
           30   40 50 60 70      75 80 85 90       95 100     und zwar




Q 2 “Erwartungen für die nächsten 3 Monate: Beschäftigte (nur inländische Betriebe) -
Die Zahl der mit der Herstellung von XY beschäftigten Arbeitnehmer wird: zunehmen, etwa
gleichbleiben, abnehmen.”


Q 3 “Sonderfragen: Unter Berücksichtigung unseres gegenwärtigen Auftragsbestandes und
des von uns in den nächsten 12 Monaten erwarteten Auftragseingangs halten wir unsere
derzeitige technische Kapazität für XY für: mehr als ausreichend, ausreichend, nicht
ausreichend. ”


Q 4 “Erwartungen für die nächsten 3 Monate: Unsere inländische Produktionstätigkeit
– ohne Berücksichtigung unterschiedlicher Monatslängen und saisonaler Schwankungen –
bezüglich XY wird voraussichtlich: steigen, etwa gleich bleiben, abnehmen.”


Q 5 “Tendenzen im vorangegangenen Monat: Unsere inländische Produktionstätigkeit
– ohne Berücksichtigung unterschiedlicher Monatslängen und saisonaler Schwankungen –
bezüglich XY ist: gestiegen, etwa gleich geblieben, gesunken.”


Q 6 “Aktuelle Situation: Wir beurteilen unsere Geschäftslage für XY als: gut, befriedi-
gend, schlecht.”




                                          28
B      Derivation of Quantitative Expectation Errors un-
       der General Production Expectations
We begin by defining the firm-specific activity variable REALIZi,t as the sum of the Increase-
instances minus the sum of the Decrease-instances in question Q5 over the three months going
backward from t. REALIZi,t can have seven possible values that live in the interval [-3,3].
The qualitative production expectation errors are then computed as follows:

                   Table 9: Possible Qualitative Expectation Errors

                                                                       EXP ERRORi,t
                 Expected    Increaset−3         REALIZi,t >0               0
                 Expected    Increaset−3         REALIZi,t ≤ 0         (REALIZi,t − 1)
                 Expected    U nchangedt−3       REALIZi,t >0            REALIZi,t
                 Expected    U nchangedt−3       REALIZi,t = 0              0
                 Expected    U nchangedt−3       REALIZi,t <0            REALIZi,t
                 Expected    Decreaset−3         REALIZi,t <0               0
                 Expected    Decreaset−3         REALIZi,t ≥ 0         (REALIZi,t + 1)

Notes: Rows refer to the qualitative expectations in month t − 3 (Q4).


    EXP ERRORi,t ranges from [−4, 4], where, for instance, −4 indicates a really negative
forecast error: the company expected production to increase over the next three months, yet
every single subsequent month production actually declined.17
    Next we compute for all firms with a given value of REALIZi,t in time t the average
∆ log ui,t , i.e. the cross-sectional average change in capacity utilization. Again, to ensure
that we can treat utilization changes as production changes only those firms are considered
that state three months before that their future employment levels will remain the same and
that their technical production capacities are sufficient. We compute this mapping between
REALIZi,t and average production changes for each point in time.18 Figure 4 illustrates the
timing of survey questions that are used to compute this mapping. In Table 10 we provide
summary statistics of the quantitative production changes over the entire pooled cross-
section, separately for the seven values REALIZi,t can adopt. Finally, Figure 5 depicts the
time series of the average ∆ log yi,t
                                    act for each value of REALIZ . It shows, for example, that
                                                                i,t
firms with REALIZi,t = 1 in the first quarter of 1980 have an average increase in production
of approximately 5 percent.
  17 See Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013), where this procedure for defining qualitative expectation errors

has been introduced for the IFO-BCS. For similar ideas see Nerlove (1983) and Müller and Köberl (2007).
  18 We also considered a firm-size-specific and an industry-specific mapping, without much change to results.



                                                     29
       Figure 4: Mapping between Qualitative and Quantitative Production Changes

          Prerequisite: Firm i passes the outlier and inconsistency test (Q1 and Q5)

          Firm i states in period t − 3:                   Firm i states in the periods t − 2,
          Constant employment                              t − 1 and t its production change (Q5),
          expectations (Q2) and sufficient                 i.e. REALIZi,t
          technical production capacity (Q3)

                                       N
               REALIZi,t = j −→ N1          (∆ log ui,t |REALIZi,t = j ), where j = −3, ..., 3
                                       P
                                      i=1
             ui,t−3                                                - ui,t
                                                                                      -

              t−3                                                       t       Time (in Months)




Table 10: Qualitative and Quantitative Production Changes – Summary
Statistics for the Pooled Cross-Section

                                       Number                                 Standard
                                          of                    Mean          Deviation
                      REALIZi,t      Observations            of ∆ log yi,t
                                                                       act   of ∆ log yi,t
                                                                                       act

                       3             1,786 (1.7%)               0.1426          0.1378
                       2             3,950 (3.7%)               0.1356          0.1288
                       1            19,285 (17.9%)              0.0510          0.1165
                       0            55,711 (51.7%)             -0.0006          0.0618
                      -1            19,147 (17.8%)             -0.0800          0.1532
                      -2             5,461 (5.1%)              -0.1950          0.1824
                      -3             2,423 (2.2%)              -0.2158          0.1995
                      All          107,763 (100.0%)            -0.0128          0.1323

Notes: This table provides summary statistics of the quantitative production changes over the entire pooled
cross-section for the values REALIZi,t can adopt.




                                                      30
                   Figure 5: Mapping of REALIZi,t into Quantitative Production Changes

                                  For Positive Outcomes of REALIZi,t and REALIZi,t equal to 0
                   30
                            REALIZi,t = 3       REALIZi,t = 2         REALIZi,t = 1       REALIZi,t = 0
                   25

                   20
             act
        ∆logyi,t




                   15

                   10

                    5

                    0

                   −5
                   1980        1985           1990           1995           2000           2005             2010
                                                             Years


                                  For Negative Outcomes of REALIZi,t and REALIZi,t equal to 0

                    0


                −10
          act
     ∆logyi,t




                −20


                −30
                          REALIZi,t = 0       REALIZi,t = −1         REALIZi,t = −2        REALIZi,t = −3
                −40
                 1980          1985           1990           1995           2000           2005             2010
                                                             Years


Notes: This figure shows for each possible value of REALIZi,t the average ∆ log yi,t
                                                                                   act of all firms with a given

value for REALIZi,t . For better readability, the quarterly values of ∆ log yi,t have been averaged to annual
                                                                             act

numbers. The upper panel shows the results for positive outcomes of REALIZi,t and REALIZi,t equal to
zero. The lower panel does the results for negative outcomes of REALIZi,t and REALIZi,t equal to zero.
The cross-sectional average ∆ log yi,t
                                   act of REALIZ = 0 has been subtracted from all time series shown in
                                                    i,t
the figure.




                                                            31
    We subject this mapping to a couple of plausibility tests. The first plausibility test can
be gathered from Figure 5, which shows that the average ∆ log yi,t   act for REALIZ = 1 is
                                                                                        i,t
positive and lies strictly below the average ∆ log yi,t for REALIZi,t = 2, analogously for
                                                      act

REALIZi,t = −1 and REALIZi,t = −2. As regards the relative position of the assigned
values for REALIZi,t = 3 (and REALIZi,t = −3) vis-a-vis REALIZi,t = 2 (REALIZi,t =
−2) we note that only very few observations fall into the REALIZi,t = 3 (REALIZi,t = −3)
category (see Table 10), so that we will invariably measure the average ∆ log yi,tact for the two

extreme categories with noise only, even though for most time periods the assigned value for
REALIZi,t = 3 lies above the one for REALIZi,t = 2, and analogously for REALIZi,t = −3
and REALIZi,t = −2.
    Next, the pooled Spearman correlation coefficient between REALIZi,t and ∆ log ui,t for
firms with constant employment and technical capacity expectations is 0.72. The pooled
Kendall’s tau between sign(REALIZi,t ) and sign(∆ log ui,t ) for the same sample is 0.66.
This means that on average the qualitative production change index based on REALIZi,t
is a good proxy for the quantitative production change based on ∆ log ui,t .
    So far, all we have constructed is a mapping between qualitative production changes and
the average quantitative production changes associated with them. We have also established
that this mapping gives prima facie plausible results. Our ultimate goal, however, is to
construct quantitative production expectation errors for firms where we only have qualitative
production expectations, i.e. those firms that answer either ‘Increase’ or ‘Decrease’ to Q4.
The basic idea is to use the mapping established for production changes also for production
expectation errors.
    For firms with constant production expectations we have a simple plausibility test for
this procedure. Suppose we know with F E_BCSi,t        narrow the “true” quantitative produc-

tion expectation error for the firms with constant production expectations. Of course, we
can also use the outlined mapping strategy for these firms, in which case the average per-
centage change in capacity utilization for a given REALIZi,t would be an alternative (to
F E_BCSi,t  narrow ) estimate for their production expectation error. We can then compare

both estimates.
    Indeed, the time series correlation coefficients between the cross-sectional averages and,
respectively, the cross-sectional standard deviations for these two estimates of expectation
errors are high: 0.97 for the average expectation error and 0.83 for the standard deviation.
This means that over time the mapping strategy captures the first and second moment of
the quantitative production expectation error distribution rather well. However, on average
the “true” production expectation errors, based on F E_BCSi,t    narrow for the firms with con-

stant production expectations, are more disperse than those based on the mapping strategy.


                                               32
Since the time series behavior of the cross-sectional standard deviation is very similar, we
view this essentially as a scaling problem, resulting from the discretization of expectation
errors in the mapping strategy. As a consequence, we will scale the quantitative production
expectation error values that the qualitative expectation errors EXP ERRORi,t are mapped
into by a constant to recover the average dispersion of production expectation errors based
on F E_BCSi,t  narrow .19

    The last step of the procedure is then the mapping of qualitative production expectation
errors into quantitative production expectation errors. This is simply done by assigning
to each value of EXP ERRORi,t the normalized and scaled quantitative counterpart of
REALIZi,t . In other words: if firm i in I/1980 answered ‘Increase’ or ‘Decrease’ to Q420
and had EXP ERRORi,II/1980 = 1, then we would assign this firm the following quantitative
production expectation error, F E_BCSi,t  broad :


       N
    1 X
          (∆ log ui,II/1980 |REALIZi,II/1980 = 1)−
    N i=1
                                                 N
                                                                                                    !
                                              1 X
                                                    (∆ log ui,II/1980 |REALIZi,II/1980 = 0) × 1.7.
                                              N i=1

The extreme cases of EXP ERRORi,t = 4 and EXP ERRORi,t = −4 , are added through
extrapolation.21




  19 This  scaling constant 1.7 and is calculated by dividing the time average of the cross-sectional standard
deviations of F E_BCSi,t  narrow by the corresponding value derived from the mapping procedure on the same

subset of observations.
  20 For firms with constant production expectations we continue to use F E_BCS narrow .
                                                                                       i,t
  21 The extrapolation procedure tries to capture the change in the differences of the quantitative counterparts

of REALIZi,t , as displayed in Table 10. It concerns only 0.25 percent of all observations. Neglecting these
extreme values in the welfare analysis would not alter the results.


                                                      33
C      Firm-Specific Average Production Expectation Er-
       rors - Histograms

Figure 6: Histograms of the Firm-Specific Average Production Expectation
Errors - Baseline Cases
                 50


                 40


                 30                                                Obs.      = 696
       Density




                                                                   Mean      = -0.0064
                 20                                                Std. Dev. = 0.0162


                 10


                  0
                 −0.2   −0.15   −0.1    −0.05         0           0.05      0.1          0.15   0.2
                                                AF E BCSinarrow




                 50


                 40


                 30                                                Obs.      = 3,679
       Density




                                                                   Mean      = -0.0255
                 20                                                Std. Dev. = 0.0302


                 10


                  0
                 −0.2   −0.15   −0.1    −0.05         0           0.05      0.1          0.15   0.2
                                                AF E BCSibroad


                                                                                                   narrow
Notes: This figure shows the histograms of the distributions of the firm-specific means of F E_BCSi,t
and F E_BCSi,t broad together with the normal distribution (green line) with the same means and standard

deviations as the expectation error distributions.




                                                    34
D       Firm-Specific Average Production Expectation Er-
        rors - Robustness

Table 11: Firm-Specific Average Production Expectation Errors - Including
“Inconsistent” Production Change Statements

                           Statistics       AF E_BCSinarrow        AF E_BCSibroad
                           Obs                   1,677                  4,244
                           Mean                 -0.0070                -0.0304
                           Std.Dev.              0.0172                 0.0312
                           Percentiles
                           5th                    -0.0350               -0.0876
                           10th                   -0.0245               -0.0698
                           25th                   -0.0125               -0.0448
                           50th                   -0.0045               -0.0251
                           75th                    0.0012               -0.0100
                           90th                    0.0074                0.0012
                           95th                    0.0122                0.0086
                           # Optimists            45 (2.7%)          1,547 (36.5%)
                           # Pessimists            2 (0.1%)             23 (0.5%)
                           # Realists          1,630 (97.2%)         2,674 (63.0%)

Notes: This table provides a summary of the distributions of AF E_BCSinarrow and AF E_BCSibroad . In
contrast to the baseline scenario we also include firm-quarter observations where firms have “inconsistent”
production change statements. In the last three rows we report the number of firms which are classified as
optimists, pessimists and realists, respectively. We define optimistic firms as those firms which feature a neg-
ative average expectation error that is significantly different from zero, at the five percent level. Pessimistic
firms are defined as those firms with a positive average expectation error that is significantly different from
zero, at the five percent level.




                                                       35
Table 12: Firm-Specific Average Production Expectation Errors - 16 Obser-
vation Threshold

                           Statistics       AF E_BCSinarrow        AF E_BCSibroad
                           Obs                   2,140                  5,438
                           Mean                 -0.0112                -0.0278
                           Std.Dev.              0.0265                 0.0363
                           Percentiles
                           5th                    -0.0574               -0.0945
                           10th                   -0.0383               -0.0732
                           25th                   -0.0182               -0.0443
                           50th                   -0.0049               -0.0215
                           75th                    0.0020               -0.0048
                           90th                    0.0101                0.0091
                           95th                    0.0171                0.0190
                           # Optimists           118 (5.5%)          1,528 (28.1%)
                           # Pessimists           13 (0.6%)             77 (1.4%)
                           # Realists          2,009 (93.9%)         3,833 (70.5%)

Notes: This table provides a summary of the distributions of AF E_BCSinarrow and AF E_BCSibroad . In
contrast to the baseline scenario we restrict our sample to firms that have at least 16 quarterly observations
of expectation errors. In the last three rows we report the number of firms which are classified as optimists,
pessimists and realists, respectively. We define optimistic firms as those firms which feature a negative
average expectation error that is significantly different from zero, at the five percent level. Pessimistic firms
are defined as those firms with a positive average expectation error that is significantly different from zero,
at the five percent level.




                                                       36
                                                                       narrow
  E                                Transition Paths for the Case of F Ei,t

                                                                                           narrow
                                             Figure 7: Transition Paths for the Case of F Ei,t
                                                      Output                                              Consumption
                             0.1                                                          0.1

                                                               Actual
                            0.05                                                         0.05
Percent Deviation




                                                               Steady State

                              0                                                             0
                                   Hypothetical
                       -0.05       Steady State                                          -0.05


                            -0.1                                                          -0.1
                                    0       20        40         60     80    100                0   20      40        60   80   100



                                                    Investment                                               Capital
                             0.3                                                          0.3

                             0.2                                                          0.2
        Percent Deviation




                             0.1                                                          0.1

                              0                                                             0

                            -0.1                                                          -0.1

                            -0.2                                                          -0.2


                                    0       20        40         60     80    100                0   20      40        60   80   100



                                                    Real Wage                                             Employment
                            0.15                                                         0.15


                             0.1                                                          0.1
Percent Deviation




                            0.05                                                         0.05


                              0                                                             0


                       -0.05                                                             -0.05
                                    0       20        40         60     80    100                0   20      40        60   80   100


                                                  Average Capital                                         Average Labor
                                                    Productivity                                           Productivity
                             0.1                                                          0.1
        Percent Deviation




                              0                                                             0



                            -0.1                                                          -0.1



                            -0.2                                                          -0.2
                                    0       20       40          60     80    100                0   20      40        60   80   100
                                                     Quarter                                                 Quarter

                                                                                                       narrow .
  Notes: This figure shows the transition paths of several macroeconomics variables for the case of F Ei,t
  These dynamic responses are expressed as percentage deviations from the steady state of the hypothetical
  economy without expectational biases.




                                                                                    37
F      Robustness Checks - Calibration

                           Table 13: Calibration Robustness Checks


            Parameter        Parameter      Parameter       Parameter Expectational                       S.E.
            Transition       Transition     Transition      Technology    Bias       AR(1)-                of
             Matrix           Matrix         Matrix            State   Parameter    coefficient          Regress.
                ρ1               ρ2             ρ3                        φ
  Baseline Results
     narrow
  F Ei,t      0.8622           0.1378     0.2073     0.0959      0.1486     0.8619                        0.0421
     broad
  F Ei,t      0.8488           0.1512     0.2661     0.1914      0.1068     0.8485                        0.0893
  Robustness Check -        10th and 90th Percentile
     narrow
  F Ei,t      0.8622           0.1378     0.2073     0.0764      0.2073     0.8622                        0.0335
     broad
  F Ei,t      0.8488           0.1512     0.2661     0.2011      0.1348     0.8489                        0.0937
  Robustness Check -        25th and 75th Percentile
     narrow
  F Ei,t      0.8622           0.1378     0.2073     0.0616      0.2073     0.8618                        0.0270
     broad
  F Ei,t      0.8488           0.1512     0.2661     0.1921      0.0875     0.8490                        0.0895
  Robustness Check -        Quantitative Production Changes
     narrow
  F Ei,t      0.8487           0.1381     0.2990     0.0802      0.1974     0.8354                        0.0397
     broad
  F Ei,t      0.8050           0.1950     0.3981     0.1504      0.1746     0.8050                        0.0800
  Robustness Check -        At Least 16 Observations of Production Expectation Errors
     narrow
  F Ei,t      0.8537           0.1462     0.2436     0.1195      0.1889     0.8537                        0.0546
     broad
  F Ei,t      0.8488           0.1511     0.2727     0.1980      0.1039     0.8498                        0.0926
  Robustness Check -        Including “Inconsistent” Production Change Statements
     narrow
  F Ei,t      0.8610           0.1389     0.2299     0.1888      0.1340     0.8611                        0.0841
     broad
  F Ei,t      0.8509           0.1490     0.2625     0.2214      0.0915     0.8509                        0.1026

Notes: This table provides the values of ρ1 , ρ2 , ρ3 ,  and φ for the robustness checks. The next to last column
displays the average of the estimated 100 AR(1)-coefficients for the simulated Markov chains resulting from
these parameter choices (see notes to Table 5). The last column shows the average of the standard errors of
these regressions. Each Markov chain has been simulated over 20,000 observations.




                                                       38
