NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VIX, THE VARIANCE PREMIUM AND STOCK MARKET VOLATILITY
Geert Bekaert
Marie Hoerova
Working Paper 18995
http://www.nber.org/papers/w18995

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Geert Bekaert acknowledges financial support from the NetSpar
foundation.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Geert Bekaert and Marie Hoerova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The VIX, the Variance Premium and Stock Market Volatility
Geert Bekaert and Marie Hoerova
NBER Working Paper No. 18995
April 2013
JEL No. C22,C52,E32,G12
ABSTRACT
We decompose the squared VIX index, derived from US S&P500 options prices, into the conditional
variance of stock returns and the equity variance premium. The latter is increasing in risk aversion
in a wide variety of economic settings. We tackle several measurement issues assessing a plethora
of state-of-the-art volatility forecasting models. We then examine the predictive power of the VIX
and its two components for stock market returns and economic activity. The variance premium predicts
stock returns but the conditional stock market variance predicts economic activity, and is more contemporaneously
correlated with financial instability than is the variance premium.

Geert Bekaert
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
gb241@columbia.edu
Marie Hoerova
European Central Bank
Kaiserstrasse 29 D-60311
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
marie.hoerova@ecb.int

1. Introduction
The 2007-2009 crisis has intensified the need for indicators of the risk aversion of
market participants. It has also become increasingly commonplace to assume that
changes in risk appetites are an important determinant of asset prices. Not surprisingly,
the behavioral finance literature (see e.g. Baker and Wurgler, 2007) has developed
“sentiment indices,” and financial institutions have created a wide variety of “risk
aversion indicators” (see Coudert and Gex (2008) for a survey).
One simple candidate indicator is the equity variance premium, the difference
between the squared VIX index and an estimate of the conditional variance of the stock
market. The VIX index is the “risk-neutral” expected stock market variance for the US
S&P500 contract and is computed from a panel of options prices. Well-known as a “fear
index” (Whaley, 2000) for asset markets, it reflects both stock market uncertainty (the
“physical” expected volatility), and a variance risk premium, which is also the expected
premium from selling stock market variance in a swap contract. Bollerslev, Tauchen and
Zhou (2009) show that an estimate of this variance premium predicts stock returns;
Bekaert, Hoerova, Lo Duca (2012) show that there are strong interactions between
monetary policy and the variance premium, suggesting that monetary policy may actually
affect risk aversion in the market place. The variance premium uses objective financial
market information and naturally “cleanses” option-implied volatility from the effect of
physical volatility dynamics and uncertainty. We show that in a variety of economic
settings, the variance premium is increasing in risk aversion and can therefore serve as an
easy-to-compute risk aversion measure.

1

How to measure the variance premium is not without controversy however, because it
relies on an estimate of the conditional variance of stock returns. For example, the
measure proposed in Bollerslev, Tauchen and Zhou (2009), BTZ, henceforth, assumes
that the conditional variance of stock market returns is a martingale, which is strongly at
odds with the data, leading to biased variance premiums.
In this paper, we tackle several measurement issues for the variance premium,
assessing a plethora of state-of-the art volatility models and making full use of
overlapping daily data, rather than sparse end-of-month data, which is standard.
The conditional variance measure is of interest in its own right. First, there is a long
literature on the trade-off between risk, as measured by the conditional variance of stock
market returns, and the aggregate risk premium on the market (see e.g. French, Schwert
and Stambaugh (1987) for a seminal contribution). This long line of research has mostly
failed to uncover a strong positive relationship between risk and return (see Bali, 2008,
for a summary). Second, stock market volatility can also be viewed as a market-based
measure of economic uncertainty. For example, Bloom (2009) shows that heightened
“economic uncertainty” decreases employment and output. Interestingly, he uses the VIX
index to measure uncertainty, so that his results may actually be driven by the variance
premium rather than uncertainty per se.
Using more plausible estimates of the variance premium and stock market volatility,
we then assess whether they predict stock returns and economic activity. We find that the
well-known results in BTZ exaggerate the predictive power of the variance premium for
stock returns. However, the equity variance risk premium remains a reliable predictor of
stock returns, with its predictive power even stronger when the recent crisis period is

2

added to the sample. Stock market volatility does not predict the stock market, but it is a
much better predictor of economic activity than is the equity variance premium.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides some
theoretical background regarding the interpretation of the variance premium as an
indicator of risk aversion. Section 3 discusses the econometric framework that we use to
forecast volatility and compare different estimates of the conditional variance of stock
returns. Section 4 reports the results of our specification analysis and forecasting horse
race. Section 5 uses the preferred estimates of the variance premium and stock market
volatility to predict stock returns and economic activity. Section 6 concludes.

2. The VIX, Uncertainty and Risk Aversion
To obtain intuition on how the VIX is related to the actual (“physical”) expected
variance of stock returns and to risk preferences, we analyze a one-period discrete state
economy. Imagine a stock return distribution with three different states xi , as follows:
Good state: x g    a with probability (1  p ) / 2 ,
Bad state : xb    a with probability (1  p ) / 2 ,

Crash state: xc  c  0 with probability p ,
where   0 , a  0 and p  0 are parameters to be determined. We set them to match
moments of US stock returns - the mean ( X ), the variance (V) and the skewness ( Sk ) while fixing the crash return at an empirically plausible number. These moments are
readily computed from the state values and probabilities.
Consider an investor with power utility over wealth in a one-period world, so that in
equilibrium she invests her entire wealth in the stock market:

3





~ 1 
 W0 R
~
U W  E
,
1





 

(1)

~
where R is the gross return on the stock market, W0 is initial wealth and  is the
coefficient of relative risk aversion. The “pricing kernel” in this economy is given by

~
marginal utility, denoted by m , and is proportional to R . Hence, the stochastic part of
the pricing kernel moves inversely with the return on the stock market.
The physical variance of the stock market is exogenous in this economy, and is
simply given by V. This variance is computed using the actual probabilities. The
(squared) VIX represents the “risk-neutral” conditional variance. It is computed using the
so-called “risk-neutral probabilities,” which are simply probabilities adjusted for risk. In
particular, for a general state probability  i for state i , the risk-neutral probability is:

i

RN

mi
Ri  .
 i
 i
E m
E m 

(2)

So, for a given  , we can easily compute the risk-neutral probabilities since Ri  xi  1 .
For an economy with K states, the risk-neutral variance is then given by:

VIX 2    iRN xi  X RN 
K

2

(3)

i 1

K

where X RN    iRN xi is the risk-neutral mean. The variance premium is:
i 1

VP  VIX 2  V    iRN xi  X RN     i xi  X 
K

i 1

where  gRN 

2

K

2

(4)

i 1

1  p (   a  1) 
1  p (   a  1) 
(c  1) 
,  bRN 
and  cRN  p
.
E m
E m
E m
2
2

In our economy, the risk-neutral probability puts more weight on the crash state.
The higher is risk aversion, the more weight the crash state gets. As the crash state
induces plenty of additional variance, the variance premium is positive.

4

Numerical Examples
Suppose the statistics to match are as follows: X  10 % ,   15% , both on an
annualized basis; and Sk  1 on a monthly basis. These numbers roughly match
statistics for the aggregate U.S. stock market. We set c  25% (a monthly number).
This crash return is in line with the stock market collapses in October 1987 and October
2008. The implied crash probability to match the skewness coefficient of -1 is given
by p  0.5 % . With a monthly investment horizon, the crash probability implies a crash
every 200 months, or roughly once every 15 years. Panel A of Table 1 provides, for
different values of the coefficient of relative risk aversion  , the values for the VIX on an
annualized basis in percent (VIX) and the annualized variance premium (VP). Note that
the variance premium is increasing in the coefficient of relative risk aversion  .
In structural models,  is typically assumed to be time-invariant, and the time
variation in the variance premium is generated through different mechanisms. For
example, in Drechsler and Yaron (2011), who formulate a consumption-based asset
pricing model with recursive preferences, the variance premium is directly linked to the
probability of a “negative jump” to expected consumption growth. The analogous
mechanism in our simple economy would be to decrease the skewness of the return
distribution by increasing the crash probability p . This obviously represents “risk”
instead of “risk aversion”. Yet, it is the interaction of risk aversion and skewness that
gives rise to large readings in our risk aversion proxy. To illustrate, let us consider an
example with lower skewness. Setting skewness equal to -2 requires a higher crash
probability of p  1 % . Panel B of Table 1 shows that the VIX increases, and increases

5

more the higher the coefficient of relative risk aversion, both in absolute and in relative
terms. The variance premium roughly doubles for all  levels.
In Bekaert and Engstrom (2010), when a recession becomes more likely, the
representative agent also becomes more risk averse through a Campbell-Cochrane
(1999)-like external habit formulation. The recession fear then induces high levels of the

VIX. We can informally illustrate such a mechanism in our one-period model. Imagine
that the utility function is over wealth relative to an exogenous benchmark wealth level

Wbm . Normalizing the initial wealth W0 to 1, the pricing kernel is now given by

R~  W 



bm





~ ~
, and the coefficient of relative risk aversion is  R / R  Wbm . Consequently,

~
risk aversion is state dependent and increases as R decreases towards the benchmark
level. It is easy to see how a dynamic version of this economy, for instance with a slowmoving Wbm , could generate risk aversion that is changing over time as return realizations
change the distance between actual wealth and the benchmark wealth level.
To illustrate this mechanism, Panel C considers three different benchmark levels for
Wbm (0.05, 0.25 and 0.5) with  fixed at 4 and Sk  1 , implying p  0.5 % . The
second column shows expected relative risk aversion in the economy (RRA), weighting
the three possible realizations for risk aversion with the actual state probabilities. The
other columns are as in the panels above. Clearly, for Wbm  0 , RRA = 4 and we replicate
the values in Panel A for   4 . Keeping  fixed and increasing Wbm , effective risk
aversion increases. For example, RRA increases from 5.323 to 7.968 as Wbm increases
from 0.25 to 0.5. The VIX increases from 19.059 to 26.010 and the variance premium
more than triples from 0.014 to 0.045.

6

3. Econometric Framework

Introduction
We define the variance risk premium as:

VPt  VIX t2  Et RVt ( 221 ) 

(5)

Here the VIX is the implied option volatility for contracts with a maturity of one month,
and RVt ( 221 ) is the realized variance measured over the next month (22 trading days) using
5 minute returns. Note that RVt ( 221 )  VIX t2 is the return to buying variance in a variance
swap contract. Therefore, technically speaking, the variance risk premium refers to the
negative of VP. Since that number is always negative, we prefer to define it as we did in
Equation (5). The unconditional mean of the variance premium is easy to compute by
simply computing the average of VIX t2  RVt ( 221 ) . However, we are interested in the
conditional variance premium as described in Equation (5), which relies on the physical
conditional expected value of the future realized variance. The common approach to
estimate this uses empirical projections of the realized variance on variables in the
information set, and subtracts this estimated expected variance from the VIX 2 to arrive at
VP. Hence, the problem is reduced to one of variance forecasting.
Variance forecasting
There is an extensive econometric literature on volatility forecasting. 1 It is now
generally accepted that models based on high frequency realized variances dominate
standard models in the GARCH class (see e.g. Chen and Ghysels, 2012) and we therefore
examine the state-of-the-art models in that class. These models stress the importance of

1

Fernandes, Medeiros and Scharth (2009) forecast the VIX index instead.

7

persistence (using lagged realized variances as predictors), additional information content
in the most recent return variances (Corsi, 2009), asymmetry between positive and
negative return shocks (the classic volatility asymmetry, see e.g. Engle and Ng, 1993) and
potentially differing predictive information present in jump versus continuous volatility
components (Andersen, Bollerslev, and Diebold, 2007). We accommodate all of these
elements in our model.
In the finance literature, it has been pointed out as early as in Christensen and
Prabhala (1998) that option prices as reflected in implied volatility should have
information about future stock market volatility. This motivates using the VIX as a
predictive variable, a variable curiously absent in the econometrics literature. 2 Of course,
because the VIX also embeds a risk premium, it will not be an unbiased predictor of
future realized volatility. Chernov (2007) argues that spot volatility is likely to have
additional information about future volatility. Finally, it is well-known that estimation
noise hurts out-of-sample forecasting performance. Simple models such as the martingale
model may therefore outperform more complex models. We therefore also consider a
number of non-estimated models that are special cases of our general framework.
Our most general forecasting model can be represented as follows:

RVt ( 22 )  c   VIX t222   m RVt ( 2222)   w RVt ( 522)   d RVt (122)
  m J t(2222)   w J t(522)   d J t(122)   m rt ( 2222)   w rt ( 522)   d rt (122)   t

(6)

As explained below, we want to forecast the monthly (22 trading days) realized variance,
denoted by RVt ( 22 ) . Our first independent variable is the VIX 2 , and we expect  to be
positive. The next three variables (realized variances at the monthly, weekly and daily
2

Exceptions are Busch, Christensen and Nielsen (2011) who examine a number of variance forecasting
models embedding option-implied volatility for bond, currency and stock markets and Andersen and
Bondarenko (2007), who mostly focus on measurement issues with the officially published VIX index.

8

frequencies) reflect the HAR (Heterogeneous Autoregressive) specification of Corsi
(2009), incorporating volatility persistence and the idea that more recent variances may
be especially informative.
The third set of variables comprises jumps, denoted as

J t , at the monthly, weekly

and daily frequencies. To isolate the jumps contribution to daily quadratic variation, we
use bipower variation (Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard, 2004). Weekly (h=5) and
h

monthly (h=22) jumps are defined as follows: J t( h )   J t  j 1 . The separation of the
j 1

quadratic variation in a continuous (captured by the RV-variables) and a discontinuous
(“jump”) component follows Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2007).
Finally, following Corsi and Renò (2012), we add negative returns over the past day,
week and month, to incorporate a potential leverage effect (see Campbell and Hentschel,
1991; Bekaert and Wu, 2000). To model the leverage effect at different frequencies, they
define rt ( h )   min  rt ( h ) , 0  where rt ( h ) 

1 h
 rt  j 1 .
h j 1

Initial specification analysis and models
Our data start on January 02, 1990 (the start of the model-free VIX series) 3 and covers
the period until October 01, 2010. The recent crisis period presents special challenges as
stock market volatilities peaked at unprecedented levels, but at the same time the crisis
represents an informative period during which risk aversion may have been particularly
pronounced. For that reason, our main analysis retains the crisis period but also considers
a winsorized sample. In addition, we consider models that predict the logarithm of
3

The CBOE changed the methodology for calculating the VIX, initially measuring implied volatility for the
S&P100 index, to be measured in a model–free manner from a panel of option prices (see Bakshi, Madan
and Kapadia, 2003, for details) only in September 2003. It then backdated the new model–free index to
1990 using historical option prices.

9

realized variances, and we put much emphasis on parameter stability in our model
selection procedure.
Our S&P500 realized variance measurements are computed using five-minute
intraday returns plus the close-to-open return. As is standard in the literature (see, e.g.,
Andersen et al., 2007 or Corsi and Renò, 2012), we exclude holidays and other inactive
trading days in our regressions (specifically, we exclude days with less than 64 returnobservations per day). We are left with a total of 5177 daily, overlapping observations.
As a first step in our model selection, we use the full sample and estimate the model
in Equation (6). To avoid poorly estimated coefficients, we “pare down” the regression
using a model selection procedure akin to the one proposed by Campos, Hendry, and
Krolzig (2003), among many others. Step 1 conducts a joint estimation using all
(remaining) independent variables. Step 2 collects all variables that have coefficients
insignificantly different from zero at the 10% level (using a two-sided test). If this set is
empty, the final specification is reached. Step 3 performs an F-test in that specification on
the non-significant variables. If the test does not reject at the 10% level, all these
variables are dropped from the specification and we go back to step 1. If the test rejects,
we only drop the variable with the lowest t-statistic (in absolute value) and go to step 1.
We conduct this model selection procedure, which we refer to as the “Hendryapproach,” on the original data and three alternative, modified data sets. The first
alternative data set uses winsorized data to mitigate the impact of the extreme
observations encountered during the crisis. 4 While the crisis observations constitute less
than 4% of the sample, their relative contribution to the variance of RV(22) is 81%! We

4

We define the crisis as the period from September 14, 2008 (collapse of Lehman Brothers) to June 2009
(end of the NBER recession).

10

select the level of winsorization to bring this relative contribution to below 50%. This
leads us to winsorizing the top 1.5% of the RV(22) data. We apply the same winsorization
cutoff to all of our variables (winsorizing the bottom 1.5% in case of the negative return
variable). The third and fourth data sets use logarithms of all variables in the winsorized
and non-winsorized samples except negative returns (for the jump variables, we take the
(h)
logarithm of 1  J t ). Because variances have right-skewed distributions, but logarithmic

variances tend to have near Gaussian distributions, it may be easier to predict logarithmic
variances with linear models. However, ultimately, we still need to identify the model
that best forecasts the level of the realized variance. To this end, when we consider a
logarithmic model, we assume log-normality to predict levels of monthly realized
variances:

1


Et RVt ( 221 )   exp Et rvt(221 )   varrvt(221 ) 
2



(7)

where rvt(221 )  ln RVt ( 221 )  . We use the logarithmic model to compute the conditional
expectation of rvt(221 ) and the sample variance of rvt(221 ) to compute the variance term.
The model specification analysis delivers the model with the best in sample fit over
the full sample. This may not be the best model as simpler models may give more robust,
stable and precise forecasts going forward. Therefore our second step in model selection
consists of an out-of-sample forecasting horse race between various special cases of the
encompassing model in Equation (6), including some non-estimated models.
Table 2 summarizes the models we consider. We estimate the models by projecting
the current realized variance onto the past values of the explanatory variables using OLS.
The first model is to simply use the VIX 2 as a predictor. The other benchmark models

11

are the purely econometric models, either using the realized monthly variance only
(model 2) or the realized variance at three frequencies (monthly, weekly and daily) in
model 9. We can then add jumps (models 5 and 11), or jumps and negative returns
(models 7 and 13). Then we also consider all these models with the VIX 2 as an
additional predictor, yielding a total of 13 models (models 3, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12). Model
14 is the model selected by the Hendry analysis, which we discuss below. The three nonestimated models are: the lagged squared VIX; the lagged realized variance (this is the
model used in BTZ); and 0.5 times the lagged squared VIX plus 0.5 times the lagged
realized variance. Finally, we follow the exact same procedure for the logarithmic model,
yielding another 14 models. Thus, we consider 31 models in total.
Forecast accuracy and stability analysis
To select among the various models, we verify their out-of-sample forecasting
performance and examine their stability. We estimate the models using data between
January 1, 1990 and July 15, 2005 (representing 75% of the full sample) and use the rest
of the sample (till October 01, 2010) to measure forecasting performance. The parameters
are not updated. We examine five different criteria.
We compute the mean-squared error (MSE), mean absolute error (MAE), and mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE; the absolute error in percent of the actual realized
variance). We evaluate whether the forecast error measures are significantly different
among competing forecasting models through the Diebold and Mariano (1995) test (with
standard errors computed using 44 Newey-West lags), using a 10% significance level.
We also compute the R2 of Mincer–Zarnowitz (1969) forecasting regressions, that is, we

12

compute the R2 in a regression of actual data on their forecasted values. 5 The final
criterion we examine is a simple joint Chow test for parameter stability over the last part
of the sample versus the estimation part of the sample. We also produce the average
correlation of the forecasts produced by a particular model with the forecasts produced by
the winning model on each of the first 4 criteria. This gives a sense of how close different
forecast models are economically.

4. Model Selection Results

Full sample model selection
In Table 3, we discuss the models chosen by the Hendry analysis over the four
different data sets. The standard errors below the parameters are computed using 44
Newey-West (1987) lags. The model selection always yields models with weekly and
daily realized variances. The monthly realized variance is highly significant in three out
of four cases, but it would be dropped in the case of the level regression using the original
data. We nevertheless still keep the monthly variance as part of the winning model since
the monthly jumps and negative returns, meant to complement its forecast, are significant
at the 5% level, and the three variables are jointly significant at the 1% level.
The VIX is chosen whenever the monthly realized variance would be, i.e., in all cases
except for the non-winsorized levels data, where the Hendry analysis, apart from the VIX,
also eliminates the weekly jumps and negative returns. In the non-winsorized data with
the log regression, the VIX enters, but jumps at all frequencies and monthly negative
returns are eliminated. With winsorized data, both level and log regressions select the
5

We also computed two other statistics; the heteroskedasticity adjusted root mean square error suggested in
Bollerslev and Ghysels (1996) and the QLIKE loss function (see Patton, 2011). However, these statistics
produce rankings very similar to the MAPE-criterion, so we do not discuss them further.

13

same model. The winning model includes daily jumps and negative returns, in addition to
the squared VIX and Corsi’s realized variances at three frequencies.
In comparison with the other models, the Hendry-chosen models rank among the top
three in terms of the Akaike and Bayesian Information Criteria (AIC and BIC henceforth)
in each of the four data samples we considered (winsorized/not winsorized; logged/notlogged).
Forecasting horse race
Table 4 produces the ranks of our 31 considered models according to the five criteria
discussed above for the non-winsorized data. Results for the winsorized sample are quite
similar and are relegated to an online Appendix. Recall that for the logarithmic models,
we are predicting the level of the realized variance as discussed in Section 3. For the first
three criteria, we test for each model whether it generates a statistic significantly different
from the statistic generated by the best ranked model. When such a test fails to reject, the
rank is bolded. We view such tests as critical in model selection. A model may rank
relatively low, but the criterion may have little power to distinguish different models and
generate very similar forecast errors. For example, a quick glance at the table reveals that
the MSE criterion has little power to distinguish alternative models. For the R2 criterion,
we view a difference of more than 5% with the winning model as a significant difference
in economic terms. Models similar in R2 to the winning model are bolded. The 5th column
produces an average correlation, averaging the correlation of each model’s forecasts with
the forecasts of the winning models in all four categories. If a model were to be the top
model on each criterion, it would get a correlation of 1. Finally, the 6th column reports
whether the model is stable or not according to the Chow test (using a 10% significance

14

level). Stable models are bolded.
Using this information, we winnow down our set of models by requiring a good
model to be bolded in at least 3 out of 4 criteria, in both non-winsorized and winsorized
samples. This leaves us with only 6 models: models 1, 4, 8, 10, 12 and 14. However, the
simplest models, models 1 and 4, as well as model 12, are not always stable. We
therefore select models 8, 10 and 14 as the winning models. Model 8 is Corsi’s HAR
model, supplemented with the squared VIX. Model 10 adds jump terms to this model,
whereas Model 14 is the model shown in Table 3, picked by the full sample model
selection procedure.
In Table 5, we show the actual statistics for these 6 models, again focusing on nonwinsorized data, but also for some popular simple models used in the literature: the
squared VIX – realized variance model used in Bekaert, Hoerova, Lo Duca (2013) (our
model 3), the martingale model of BTZ (model 16) and the AR(1) model of Londono
(2011) (model 2). In the last column, we also produce the average ranks of these models
in the forecasting horse race over the 4 different criteria. The MAPE criterion is the most
distinguishing one. Model 4 is the best performing model according to the MAPE
criterion, but the other selected models produce MAPE statistics that are quite close with
the exception of Model 14. Compared to the top models, the martingale and simple
autoregressive models perform an order of magnitude worse but the squared VIX –
realized variance model delivers quite similar performance. The MAE and MSE criteria
have much less power to reject models. Simply investigating the magnitudes of the
average forecast errors, the presence of realized variances at all three frequencies is
important in delivering lower error statistics. Of the simpler models, the squared VIX –

15

realized variance model again performs best. In terms of R2, models 8, 10, 12 and 14
yield substantial higher values than the other models, with the squared VIX – realized
variance model one of the best behind these top models. When computing a simple
average ranking across the four criteria, our selected models have very low average
ranking scores. We also computed the AIC and the BIC criteria for all these models over
the “in sample” period. These criteria favor more complex models, with Model 12
minimizing these criteria in both the non-winsorized and winsorized data.
Additional exercises
We performed two alternative exercises. First, a more dramatic way to deal with the
crisis is to leave it out of the analysis entirely. We performed our analysis using
September 14, 2008 as the end of the sample, thus excluding crisis data points. For this
sample, models 1, 4 and 10 of the level models, and models 1, 4 and 6 of the log models
yield at least 3 bolded criteria. Hence, three of our previously identified models overlap. 6
Moreover, our preferred models (models 8, 10 and 14) display an average correlation of
about 96% with the winning models over this sample period.
Second, we re-consider our forecasting exercise with end-of-month data. In most of
the existing articles (including BTZ, Londono, 2011, and Busch, Christensen and
Nielsen, 2011), end-of-month data are used to estimate conditional variance models. The
use of daily data should lead to more efficient estimates, but the correlation between daily
and monthly data induced by the overlapping data structure, may make the increase in
efficiency minor. We estimated all our models using end-of-the-month data till mid-2005,
mimicking the time span used in our forecasting exercise with daily data. We then use the
obtained regression coefficients to construct daily out-of-sample realized variance
6

Note that none of these models is stable.

16

forecasts for the remainder of the sample. Computing the usual criteria, we check whether
we can accept the various models by looking for three “bolds” (fails to reject) on our four
quantitative criteria (MAPE, MAE, MSE, and R2), and verify the stability criterion.
Not surprisingly, monthly models do not “win” on any of the criteria. Yet, models 1
and 8 still get 3 bolds out of 4. However, only model 8 is also stable. Interestingly, model
8, based on monthly estimates, does well relative to the best models based on the daily
information. The monthly model puts less weight on the squared VIX and more weight on
RV(1) than the daily model does. The more complex models, like our previously winning
models 10 and 14, which include jumps and/or asymmetric volatility, are, not
surprisingly, more difficult to identify with monthly data. The use of monthly estimation
samples should therefore best be restricted to relatively simple models, where the loss of
efficiency is not very costly.

5. Economics and Predictability

Risk and risk aversion
In Figure 1, we plot the daily series for the variance risk premium (VP henceforth;
displayed in Panel A), which may potentially serve as a proxy for risk aversion, and the
conditional (physical) variance of the stock market (CV henceforth; in Panel B), which
may potentially serve as a measure of economic uncertainty. We use the non-winsorized
sample to do so and show the three series obtained from the winning models 8, 10 and 14
on one graph. The VP and CV series display peaks at the expected times. The largest
peaks for CV are observed during the Lehman aftermath in the recent crisis and at the
time of the corporate scandals following the Enron debacle. Interestingly, the 1998
Russian crisis and the Gulf war did not generate much uncertainty, but these events do

17

feature substantially elevated levels of VP. The Lehman event seems to have caused both
massive uncertainty and massive risk aversion. As the three series are generally highly
correlated, they tend to produce similar peaks and valleys; yet, it is visible that model 8,
which does not feature jumps and volatility asymmetry, is less jagged than the other
models, especially for the VP series.
When realized variances show extreme peaks, the VP series can become negative,
which happens more for models 10 and 14 than for model 8. This is a disadvantage of all
these models. It is unlikely that during these periods of stress, there was a sudden increase
in risk appetite. The more mundane explanation is that realized variances likely have
different components with different levels of mean reversion. In a massive crisis, some of
the realized variance movements should probably be allowed to mean-revert more
quickly and not affect the conditional variance as much as they do now. The models with
jumps could theoretically capture this by having negative coefficients on the jump terms.
However, when using non-winsorized data, models 10 and 14 put a very large positive
coefficient on the monthly jump component, and a negative one on the daily jump
component. With the winsorized data, this problem is less prevalent, partially because of
the milder data, but also because model 14 now does not feature a monthly jump
component, and the daily jump term gets a negative coefficient. Overall, it is likely that a
non-linear model may be better equipped to capture the behavior of CV and VP in severe
crises.
Contemporaneous correlations
In Table 6, we report correlation matrices for the full sample. We show the three VP
and CV measures from the winning models, excess stock returns (the S&P500 return in

18

excess of the Fama-French one-month rate; denoted Ret), industrial production growth
(the log-difference of the total industrial production index; denoted IP) and two financial
stress indicators, one created by the Kansas Fed (denoted FS Fed), and one created by the
ECB (called CISS, see Hollo, Kremer and Lo Duca, 2012; denoted FS ECB). The Kansas
Fed indicator combines a large number of interest rate variables such as the TED spread
and the off/on-the-run-Treasury spread; a number of corporate yield spreads, risk
indicators drawn from banking stock returns, but also the stock-bond return correlation
and the VIX itself (see Hakkio and Keeton, 2009, for details). The series starts in
February 1990. The ECB indicator is based on European Monetary Union data,
combining information from the money, equity, bond, and foreign exchange markets, and
some financial intermediaries-related information. The indicators mostly comprise
realized volatilities for various return, currency or interest rate measures.
The different CV measures are very highly correlated (correlations in excess of 94%),
but Model 8’s VP measure shows correlation lower than 90% with the other two VP
measures. Before the crisis, these correlations (unreported) were above 90%. The VP
measures of Models 10 and 14 are 96% correlated. The VP and the CV measures display
correlations roughly in the 25-45% range. In a pre-crisis sample (unreported), these
correlations would be 20% higher.
The financial instability indicators are relatively more correlated with the CV
measures, than with the VP measures. The Kansas Fed measure shows a stronger
association with the VIX components than does the ECB measure, which is not surprising
given that it is based on US data and includes the VIX index itself. Excess returns not
surprisingly correlate negatively with both VIX components, but the correlations are

19

higher (in absolute magnitude) for the CV measure. Industrial Production growth is
negatively correlated with both the CV and VP measures, with the VP – industrial
production growth correlations being generally lower in absolute magnitude. 7
Finally, while not reported, we should point out that when BTZ’s martingale model is
used, it produces the relatively lowest correlation between VP and CV, and it produces
surprisingly positive (but very small) correlations between the variance premium and
both industrial production and excess returns. One reason for this is that the martingale
model generates negative variance premiums during the crisis period more often than our
preferred models.
Predicting stock market returns
The two components of the squared VIX index have been considered as separate
potential predictors of stock market returns. Starting with French, Schwert and
Stambaugh (1987), a large literature focuses on the relationship between aggregate stock
market returns and their conditional variance. In a simple static CAPM model, the
coefficient on the conditional stock market variance would be the wealth weighted risk
aversion coefficient, but such a relationship need not hold perfectly in a dynamic model.
In the literature on the risk–return relationship, estimates vary from positive to negative
and the relationship is often insignificant. Lundblad (2007) suggests that the samples
typically used are too short to uncover a relationship that is robustly and statistically
significantly positive in the sample of over 150 years that he considers. Yet, the
measurement of the conditional variance of stock returns may matter too. The bulk of the
extant literature has considered GARCH-in-mean models to measure the conditional

7

The correlation matrices for winsorized data look similar to the ones discussed here and are therefore not
reported.

20

stock market variance, which likely induces substantial measurement error in the
regression. Ghysels, Santa Clara and Valkanov (2005) recover a positive risk–return
trade-off measuring the conditional variance with a flexible function of past returns,
applying MIDAS modeling.
BTZ recently showed that the variance risk premium has predictive power for future
stock returns, which is logical since it harbors information about aggregate risk aversion.
As we showed above, their measure implicitly uses a volatility model that is strongly
rejected by the data. We therefore reconsider the predictive power of both the equity
variance risk premium (“risk”) and the conditional variance of the stock market
(“uncertainty”), using our improved measures of the conditional variance of stock market
returns.
Given the importance of the BTZ-paper, we start by replicating their results using
their sample period, which ends in December 2007 and therefore conveniently excludes
the crisis period. We also rely on end-of-the-month observations but we consider various
estimates of the variance premium as a predictor of equity returns. Table 7 contains the
results. The left hand side variable is always Ret, as described above. We use three
different horizons, monthly, quarterly and annual (denoted by 1, 3 and 12, respectively).
The overlap in the monthly data creates serial correlation in the error term that must be
corrected for in creating standard errors. We use a relatively large number of NeweyWest lags, namely max{3, 2*horizon}, to do so, rather than create standard errors under
the null of no predictability, as in Hodrick (1992). While the Hodrick estimator has very
good size properties, selecting a large number of lags may improve power (see Sun,
Phillips, and Jin, 2008).

21

In the last specification, we show that the squared VIX itself fails to predict stock
returns. Just above, we repeat the BTZ specification that uses the past realized variance as
the estimate of the conditional variance of stock market returns. The resulting variance
premium proxy predicts stock market returns at all three horizons with the predictive
power strongest at the quarterly horizon, both in terms of statistical significance of the
coefficient and the adjusted R2. These results confirm the results in BTZ. 8 Compared to
the predictability results when using the three best models - models 8, 10 and 14 - to
estimate the variance premium, BTZ’s martingale model maximizes the predictive power
of the variance premium for returns. For the best models, there is only statistical
significant predictive power at the quarterly frequency and the R2 drops from 7% to
somewhere between 3 and 5%. 9
In unreported results, we find that various estimates of the conditional variance do not
predict future stock market returns for this sample. With the exception of model 14,
where the conditional variance predicts future stock market returns next month, we do no
record any significant coefficients.
This generates somewhat of a puzzle regarding the origin of the strong predictive
power of the BTZ-variance premium. If the VIX itself does not predict stock market
returns and aggregate realized variance does not either, why does their difference provide
strong predictive power? The coefficient on the variance premium can be decomposed as
follows:

8

Our results differ slightly from BTZ estimates because our monthly realized variance measure is based on
the sum of squared returns over 22 trading days, whereas the BTZ measure is based on the sum of squared
returns over a calendar month (which is mostly, but not always, 22 trading days).
9
One possibility is that because we pre-estimate the conditional variance and BTZ do not, measurement
noise affects our estimates. However, our measurement provides proxies for the variance premium and the
conditional stock market variance closer to the true economic concepts.

22

VP  VIX

2

varVIX 2 
varRV 
  CV
varVP
varVP

(8)

It turns out that the variance of the squared VIX is higher than the variance of RV,
which is itself rather similar to the variance of the variance risk premium. Therefore, the
variance premium coefficient at the quarterly frequency scales up the positive coefficient
on the VIX, and gets an additional small contribution from the coefficient on stock market
volatility which is negative at the quarterly horizon.
Economically, it does appear that the variance risk premium uncovers a component in
the VIX index that is related to future stock market returns, but the statistical evidence is
not very strong. Apart from the small sample, one possible reason for this is the wellknown fact that equity risk premiums are likely driven by multiple state variables (see
Ang and Bekaert; 2007, Menzly, Santos and Veronesi, 2004) so that the univariate
regressions are necessarily mis-specified. In the consumption-based asset pricing model
of Bekaert, Engstrom and Xing (2009), risk aversion and uncertainty are the two state
variables driving time-variation in the equity risk premium. 10
Switching to the full sample, we therefore investigate bivariate regressions using both
the variance premium and the conditional variance as predictors, a specification not
considered in BTZ. We also performed tests allowing for dummies to capture potential
coefficient changes during the crisis. However, we do not report these regressions with
dummies as the evidence for changes during the crisis is overall econometrically weak.
When there are interesting changes, we simply note them in the text.
The bivariate regression results are in Panel A of Table 8. The VP remains overall the

10

Anderson, Ghysels, and Juergens (2009) also examine the impact of “risk” and “uncertainty”, but in their
paper risk represents physical volatility and uncertainty disagreement among forecasters.

23

stronger predictor, with its coefficients and t-stats increasing relative to the shorter
sample. It is now statistically significant at both the quarterly and annual horizons for all
three preferred measures. The CV coefficients are always negative and sometimes
significantly so for models 8 and 10.
These results have implications for the consumption–based asset pricing literature,
where there is a persistent debate about what economic mechanism generates a large
equity premium, volatile stock market and long–horizon stock return predictability. In the
Bansal–Yaron (2004) long-run risk model, time–variation in the equity premium comes
from time–variation in economic uncertainty. Recent versions of the model (see e.g.
Bansal, Kiku, Yaron, 2012) put more and more emphasis on the role of volatility and
argue that substantial persistence in volatility is necessary to make the models fit the
salient asset return features. However, our empirical results cast doubt on this economic
mechanism. The persistence of the conditional variance varies between 0.67 and 0.73
across models. Moreover, the time-varying risk premium component in equity returns
comes predominantly from the variance risk premium, not from time-varying economic
uncertainty. The effects of economic uncertainty on risk premiums we do document seem
short-lived. This suggests that the alternative class of models (see Campbell and
Cochrane, 1999), which relies on counter-cyclical changes in risk aversion to generate
variation in risk premiums, has more chance of being the true economic mechanism
explaining time-variation in equity risk premiums.
In Panel B, we consider a multivariate regression including other well-known
predictor-variables, namely the real 3-month rate (the three-month T-bill minus CPI
inflation, denoted 3MTB), the log dividend yield (denoted Log(DY)), the credit spread

24

(the difference between Moody’s BAA and AAA bond yield indices, denoted CS) and the
term spread (the difference between the 10-year and the 3-month Treasury yields,
denoted TS). The addition of the other variables strengthens the predictive power of the
variance premium for equity returns, with the coefficients uniformly increasing slightly.
The evidence for the predictive power of CV does change considerably. The uncertainty
coefficients are now mostly small and insignificantly different from zero.
As to the other variables, the term structure variables are never significant. Both the
real rate and the term spread have consistently positive coefficients, reversing a pattern
observed when crisis data are excluded, where they have negative coefficients at the
monthly and quarterly horizons, but positive ones at the annual horizon (which are also
not significant). The credit spread obtains a large negative coefficient that is not
significantly different from zero, and the dividend yield is at best significant at the 10%
level, mostly at the longer horizons. Here, the crisis adversely affected the predictive
power of these variables. Excluding crisis data, the dividend yield and the credit spread
were highly statistically significantly different from zero at all horizons for all
specifications, with the dividend yield having the expected positive coefficient, but the
credit spread negatively affecting the equity premium. 11
The adjusted R2’s remains small at the one month horizon, but now becomes quite
large at the quarterly (12 to 20% range) and annual horizons (around 27%). It is likely
that this high explanatory power may partially reflect statistical bias (see Boudoukh,
11

There is no issue of multi-collinearity in the regression as the dividend yield–credit spread correlation is
in fact close to zero. While the negative credit spread coefficient may surprise some readers, BTZ also
report negative coefficients for the credit spread in univariate excess return regressions. It is conceivable
that the credit spread is a good indicator of economic prospects (for example, it is relatively highly
correlated with economic uncertainty) and therefore helps cleanse the dividend yield from variation driven
by cash flows, rather than risk premiums (see Golez, 2012 for a recent interesting attempt to cleanse the
dividend yield of cash flow effects in a predictability regression).

25

Richardson and Whitelaw, 2007).
We conducted the full sample analysis using winsorized data, finding that our
results are unchanged. We therefore omit the results.
Predicting the Real Economy
In Table 9, we examine the predictive power of the variance risk premium, and stock
market volatility (using our three preferred measures) for economic activity as measured
by industrial production growth. Bloom (2009) shows that uncertainty shocks lead to a
rapid drop and rebound in aggregate output and employment. In a model with adjustment
costs to labour and capital, this occurs because higher uncertainty causes firms to
temporarily pause their investment and hiring. In some of his empirical work, Bloom
actually uses the VIX to help measure uncertainty shocks. Here, we investigate whether
the VIX and/or its two components predict economic activity in a simple regression
framework.
The last specification shows that the squared VIX itself predicts economic activity
with a negative sign at all horizons (significant at the 1% level). The bivariate regressions
with its two components show that whatever predictive power the VIX has for future
output, is coming from the uncertainty component. The coefficient on VP is negative at
monthly and quarterly horizons, but it is always statistically insignificantly different from
zero. The coefficient on CV is always negative, and statistically significant at the 1%
level for all three horizons. We conclude that CV is a robust and significant predictor of
economic activity.

26

6. Conclusions

We decompose the squared VIX, the risk neutral expected stock market variance, into
two components, the conditional (physical) variance of the stock market (CV) and the
equity variance premium (VP), which is the difference between the two (VP=VIX2-CV).
Because this decomposition critically depends on the accuracy of the model for CV, we
first conduct an extensive analysis of state-of-the-art variance forecasting models, where
we make sure to also consider the squared VIX itself as a potential predictor. We find that
the winning models on a number of forecasting criteria and specification tests always
include the VIX. Of the two components, the conditional variance is more strongly
correlated with some recent financial stress indicators, tracked by the Fed and the ECB,
than is the variance premium.
We use these models to re-examine and expand the evidence on the predictive power
of VP and CV for stock returns and economic activity, as measured by industrial
production. We find that the variance premium is a significant predictor of stock returns,
but the conditional variance mostly is not. However, CV robustly and significantly
predicts economic activity with a negative sign, whereas VP has no predictive power for
future output growth.

Acknowledgements

Carlos Garcia de Andoain Hidalgo provided excellent research assistance. The views
expressed do not necessarily reflect those of the European Central Bank or the
Eurosystem.

27

REFERENCES

Andersen, T.G., and O. Bondarenko (2007). “Construction and Interpretation of ModelFree Implied Volatility,” in I. Nelken (Ed.), Volatility as an Asset Class, Risk Books,
London, UK (2007), 141–181.
Andersen, T. G., T. Bollerslev and F. X. Diebold (2007). “Roughing It Up: Including
Jump Components in the Measurement, Modeling, and Forecasting of Return Volatility,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 89(4), 701-720.
Anderson, E., E. Ghysels, and J.L. Juergens (2009). “The Impact of Risk and Uncertainty
on Expected Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 94(2), 233-263.
Ang, A. and G. Bekaert (2007). “Stock Return Predictability: Is it There?” Review of
Financial Studies, 20(3), 651-707.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2007). “Investor sentiment in the stock market,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 21(2), 129-152.
Bakshi, G., N. Kapadia and D. Madan (2003). “Stock Return Characteristics, Skew Laws,
and Differential Pricing of Individual Equity Options,” Review of Financial Studies
16(1), 101-143.
Bali, T.G. (2008). “The Intertemporal Relation between Expected Returns and Risk,”
Journal of Financial Economics 87(1), 101-131.
Bansal R. and A. Yaron (2004). “Risks for the Long-Run: A Potential resolution of Asset
Pricing Puzzles,” Journal of Finance 59(4), 1481-1509.
Bansal R., D. Kiku and A. Yaron (2012). “An Empirical Evaluation of the Long-Run
Risks Model for Asset Prices,” Critical Finance Review 1, 183-221.
Barndorff-Nielsen, O., and M. Shepherd (2004). “Power and Bi-Power Variation with
Stochastic Volatility and Jumps,” Journal of Econometrics 2(1), 1-48.
Bekaert, G., M. Hoerova and M. Lo Duca (2012). “Risk, Uncertainty, and Monetary
Policy,” working paper, Columbia GSB.
Bekaert, G. and E. Engstrom (2010). “Asset Return Dynamics under Bad EnvironmentGood Environment Fundamentals,” working paper, Columbia GSB.
Bekaert, G., E. Engstrom, and Y. Xing (2009). “Risk, Uncertainty, and Asset Prices,”
Journal of Financial Economics 91, 59-82.
Bekaert, G. and G. Wu, (2000), “Asymmetric Volatility and Risk in Equity Markets,”
Review of Financial Studies 13(1), 1-42.
Bloom, N. (2009). “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica 77(3), 623-685.
Bollerslev, T. and E. Ghysels (1996). “Periodic Autoregressive Conditional
Heteroscedasticity,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 14(2), 139-51.

28

Bollerslev, T., G. Tauchen and H. Zhou (2009). “Expected Stock Returns and Variance
Risk Premia,” Review of Financial Studies 22(11), 4463-4492.
Boudoukh, J., M. Richardson, and R.Whitelaw (2007). “The Myth of Long-Horizon
Predictability,” Review of Financial Studies 24(4), 1577-1605.
Britten-Jones, M. and A. Neuberger (2000). “Option Prices, Implied Price Processes, and
Stochastic Volatility,” Journal of Finance 55(2), 839-866.
Busch, T., B.J. Christensen, and M.O. Nielsen (2011). “The role of implied volatility in
forecasting future realized volatility and jumps in foreign exchange, stock, and bond
markets,” Journal of Econometrics 160(1), 48-57.
Campbell, J. Y and J. Cochrane (1999). “By Force of Habit: A Consumption Based
Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 107(2),
205-251.
Campbell, John Y., and Ludger Hentschel (1992). “No News is Good News: An
Asymmetric Model of Changing Volatility in Stock Returns,” Journal of Financial
Economics 31(3), 281-318.
Campos, J., D.F. Hendry, and H.M. Krolzig (2003). “Consistent Model Selection by an
Automatic Gets Approach,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 65, 803-819.
Carr, P. and L. Wu (2009). “Variance Risk Premiums,” Review of Financial Studies
22(3), 1311-1341.
Chen, X. and E. Ghysels (2012). “News – Good or Bad – and its Impact on Volatility
Predictions over Multiple Horizons,” Review of Financial Studies 24(1), 46-81.
Chernov, M (2007). “On the Role of Risk Premia in Volatility Forecasting,” Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics 25(4), 411-426.
Chicago Board Options Exchange (2004). “VIX CBOE Volatility Index,” White Paper.
Christensen, B.J. and N.R. Prabhala (1998) “The Relation between Implied and Realized
Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics 50(2), 125-150.
Corsi F. (2009). “A Simple Approximate Long Memory Model of Realized Volatility,”
Journal of Financial Econometrics 7(2), 174-196.
Corsi F. and R. Renò (2012). “Discrete-time Volatility Forecasting with Persistent
Leverage Effect and the Link with Continuous-time Volatility Modeling,” Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics, forthcoming.
Corsi F., D. Pirino and R. Renò (2010). “Threshold Bipower Variation and the Impact of
Jumps on Volatility Forecasting,” Journal of Econometrics 159(2), 276-288.
Coudert, V. and M. Gex (2008). “Does Risk Aversion Drive Financial Crises? Testing the
Predictive Power of Empirical Indicators,” Journal of Empirical Finance 15, 167-184.
Diebold, F. X. and R.S. Mariano (1995). “Comparing Predictive Accuracy,” Journal of
Business & Economic Statistics 13(3), 253-63.

29

Drechsler, I. (2009). “Uncertainty, Time-Varying Fear, and Asset Prices,” working paper,
Wharton School.
Drechsler, I. and A. Yaron (2011). “What’s Vol Got to Do with It,” Review of Financial
Studies 24(1), 1-45.
Engle, R. and V. Ng (1993). “Measuring and Testing the Impact of News and Volatility,”
Journal of Finance 48(5), 1749-1778.
Fernandes, M., M. C. Medeiros, and M. Scharth (2009). “Modeling and Predicting the
CBOE Market Volatility Index,” working paper.
French, K., W. Schwert and R. Stambaugh (1987), “Expected Stock Returns and
Volatility,” Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3-29.
Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, and R. Valkanov (2005). “There is a risk-return trade-off
after all,” Journal of Financial Economics 76(3), 509-548,
Golez, B. (2012). “Expected Returns and Dividend Growth Rates Implied in Derivative
Markets,” Working paper, University of Notre Dame.
Hakkio, C. S. and W. R. Keeton (2009). “Financial Stress: What Is It, How Can It Be
Measured, and Why Does It Matter?” Kansas Fed Economic Review, second quarter
2009.
Hodrick, R.J. (1992). “Dividend yields and expected stock returns: alternative procedures
for inference and measurement”, Review of Financial Studies 5(3), 357-386.
Holló, D., M. Kremer, and M. Lo Duca (2012). “CISS - a composite indicator of systemic
stress in the financial system,” ECB Working Paper No. 1426.
Londono, J.M. (2011). “The Variance Risk Premium around the World,” IFDP Working
Paper.
Lundblad, C. (2007). “The Risk Return Tradeoff in the Long-Run: 1836-2003,” Journal
of Financial Economics 85, 123-150.
Menzly, L., T. Santos, and P. Veronesi (2004), “Understanding Predictability”, Journal of
Political Economy 112, 1-47.
Mincer, J. and V. Zarnowitz (1969). “The Evaluation of Economic Forecasts,” In: J.
Mincer (Ed.), Economic Forecasts and Expectations, NBER, New York, 3–46.
Newey, W. and K. West (1987). “A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Heteroskedasticity
and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica 55(3), 703-708.
Patton, A. (2011). “Volatility Forecast Comparison using Imperfect Volatility Proxies,”
2011, Journal of Econometrics 160(1), 246-256.
Sun, Y., P.C. B. Phillips and S. Jin (2008). “Optimal Bandwidth Selection in
Heteroskedasticity-Autocorrelation Robust Testing,” Econometrica 76(1), 175-194.
Whaley, R. E. (2000). “The Investor Fear Gauge,” Journal of Portfolio Management,
Spring, 12-17.

30

Table 1: The VIX and variance premium
Panel A: Varying  , Sk  1 , p  0.5 %
Parameters
Sk  1,   2
Sk  1,   4
Sk  1,   6

VIX

VP

15.925
17.342
19.472

0.003
0.008
0.015

Panel B: Varying  , Sk  2 , p  1 %
Parameters
Sk  2,   2
Sk  2,   4
Sk  2,   6

VIX

VP

16.838
19.516
23.194

0.006
0.016
0.031

Panel C: Varying Wbm ,   4 , Sk  1 , p  0.5 %
Parameters
  4, Wbm  0
  4, Wbm  0.25
  4, Wbm  0.50

RRA

VIX

VP

4.000

17.342

0.008

5.323

19.059

0.014

7.968

26.010

0.045

Notes: Values of the VIX on an annualized basis in percent (VIX) and the annualized variance premium
(VP) for different values of the underlying parameters, while keeping the crash return c fixed at -25%. In
Panel A, the varying parameter is the coefficient of relative risk aversion γ while skewness Sk is fixed at -1.
In Panel B, Sk is fixed at -2. Panel C computes, for γ fixed at 4 and Sk fixed at -1, expected relative risk
aversion (RRA), VIX and VP for different values of the benchmark wealth level Wbm.

Table 2: Models considered
Variables

VIX 2

Estimated models
Model 1
X
Model 2
Model 3
X
Model 4
X
Model 5
Model 6
X
Model 7
Model 8
X
Model 9
Model 10
X
Model 11
Model 12
X
Model 13
Model 14
Non-estimated models
Model 15
X
Model 16
Model 17
0.5* X

RV ( 22 )
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

RV ( 5) , RV (1)

J ( 22 )

J ( 5) , J (1)

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Hendry-chosen model - see Table 3

r ( 22 ) 

r ( 5 )  , r (1 ) 

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
0.5*X

Notes: Summary of variables included in estimated and non-estimated models.

31

Table 3: Hendry analysis
Model

(1)

VIX 2
RV ( 22 )
RV ( 5)
RV (1)

J ( 22 )

-0.255
[0.276]
0.216**
[0.103]
0.141***
[0.033]
4.954**
[2.352]

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.203***
[0.074]
0.359***
[0.054]
0.241***
[0.052]
0.101***
[0.014]

0.162**
[0.076]
0.233***
[0.077]
0.204**
[0.087]
0.165***
[0.035]

0.235***
[0.069]
0.349***
[0.052]
0.228***
[0.042]
0.122***
[0.017]

-0.252**
[0.112]

-61.924**
[28.381]

-0.0009***
[0.0003]
0.0002
0.0001
5155

-0.283***
[0.049]
-0.621***
[0.191]
5155

J (5)
J (1)
r ( 22 ) 

-0.308**
[0.145]
-0.013**
[0.006]

r ( 5)
r (1 ) 
Constant
# daily observations

-0.002***
[0.0009]
0.0003**
[0.0001]
5155

-0.356*
[0.195]
-0.231***
[0.060]
-0.810***
[0.186]
5155

Notes: The table reports the OLS estimates for monthly variance forecast regressions. Columns 1-2 use
the daily non-winsorized sample and Columns 3-4 use the daily winsorized sample. Columns 2 and 4
use the data in logarithms. The standard errors reported in brackets are computed using 44 NeweyWest lags. ***, **, * denote significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10-level.

32

Table 4: Model ranking, non-winsorized sample
Model

MAE rank

MSE rank

R2 rank

Corr w/ #1 models

2
18
5
1
17
6
12
3
11
4
13
7
9
10

12
15
9
10
14
7
11
3
8
1
6
2
4
5

22
14
13
19
15
11
9
8
4
7
3
5
2
1

22
14
13
19
15
11
9
8
4
7
3
5
2
1

0.952
0.963
0.977
0.974
0.963
0.983
0.977
0.986
0.981
0.989
0.984
0.991
0.989
0.989

N
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y

31
20
30

31
26
30

25
23
20

25
23
20

0.952
0.963
0.977

N/A
N/A
N/A

8
29
21
14
27
15
26
22
28
16
25
19
23
24

13
24
20
28
29
23
27
17
16
22
25
19
18
21

17
12
18
30
31
29
27
10
6
28
26
24
21
16

17
12
18
30
31
29
27
10
6
28
26
24
21
16

0.955
0.964
0.977
0.719
0.702
0.793
0.830
0.988
0.988
0.818
0.842
0.835
0.842
0.973

N
Y
N
N
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
N
N
N
N

MAPE rank

Stable

Estimated level models
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 6
Model 7
Model 8
Model 9
Model 10
Model 11
Model 12
Model 13
Model 14
Non-estimated models
Model 15
Model 16
Model 17
Estimated log models
Log Model 1
Log Model 2
Log Model 3
Log Model 4
Log Model 5
Log Model 6
Log Model 7
Log Model 8
Log Model 9
Log Model 10
Log Model 11
Log Model 12
Log Model 13
Log Model 14

Notes: Model ranking based on the out-of-sample performance, non-winsorized sample. Parameters are
estimated using data between January 1, 1990 and July 15, 2005 and the rest of the sample (till October 01,
2010) is used to assess forecasting performance. The first three columns produce ranking according to the
mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), mean absolute error (MAE) and mean-squared error (MSE). The
rank is bolded if the Diebold-Mariano test fails to reject (at 10% level) the null of no significant difference
from the best ranked model. The 4th column produces ranking according to the Mincer-Zarnowitz R2, with
the rank bolded if the difference with the winning model is less than 5%. The 5th column produces the
average correlation of each model with the winning models in the 4 categories. The 6th column reports
whether the model is stable or not according to the Chow test (using 10% significance level); stable models
are bolded.

33

Table 5: Selected model statistics, non-winsorized sample
Model

MAPE

Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 8
Model 10
Model 12
Model 14
Model 16

MAE

0.342
0.494
0.354
0.338
0.346
0.353
0.374
0.437
0.501

R2

MSE

1.878E-03
1.914E-03
1.775E-03
1.784E-03
1.693E-03
1.681E-03
1.682E-03
1.711E-03
2.228E-03

Average score

0.410
0.483
0.489
0.466
0.553
0.559
0.565
0.587
0.407

2.840E-05
2.490E-05
2.460E-05
2.570E-05
2.150E-05
2.120E-05
2.090E-05
1.990E-05
2.850E-05

14.50
15.25
10.00
12.25
5.50
4.75
4.75
4.25
23.00

Notes: Selected model statistics based on the out-of-sample performance. The first three columns show the
mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), mean absolute error (MAE) and mean-squared error (MSE). The
statistic is bolded if the Diebold-Mariano test fails to reject (at 10% level) the null of no significant
difference from the best ranked model. The 4th column reports Mincer-Zarnowitz R2, with the statistic
bolded if the difference with the winning model is less than 5%. The 5th column produces the average
ranking score of each model in the 4 categories.

Table 6: Correlation matrix
Correlations
VP 8
VP 8

VP 10

VP 14

CV 8

CV 10

CV 14

FS Fed

Ret

IP

1

VP 10

0.871

1

VP 14

0.838

0.963

1

CV 8

0.375

0.443

0.414

1

CV 10

0.426

0.343

0.318

0.955

1

CV 14

0.418

0.336

0.266

0.942

0.986

1

FS ECB

0.457

0.363

0.360

0.670

0.718

0.696

FS Fed

FS ECB

1

0.584

0.508

0.518

0.772

0.807

0.772

0.837

1

Ret

-0.172

-0.221

-0.050

-0.456

-0.425

-0.515

-0.237

-0.238

1

IP

-0.211

-0.096

-0.147

-0.234

-0.299

-0.260

-0.371

-0.479

-0.004

Notes: Sample period February 1990 – September 2010, monthly observations. Correlations for the three VP
and CV measures from the winning models 8, 10 and 14; two financial stress indicators, one created by the
Kansas Fed (FS Fed) and one created by the ECB (FS ECB); excess stock returns (Ret), and industrial
production growth (IP).

34

1

Figure 1: Variance premium and conditional variance
Panel A: Variance premia
300
Lehman
Aftermath

Russian /
LTCM Crisis

200

09/11

Gulf War

Mexican
Crisis

100

Corporate
Scandals

Asian
Crisis

Euro Area
Debt Crisis

0

‐100

VP 8

VP 10

VP 14

‐200

Panel B: Conditional variances
600
CV 8

CV 10

CV 14
Lehman
Aftermath

500

400

300
Russian /
LTCM Crisis

200

100

09/11
Gulf War

Asian
Crisis

Corporate
Scandals

Euro Area
Debt Crisis

Mexican
Crisis

0

Notes: Daily series for the variance premium (VP) and the conditional variance (CV) from the winning
models 8, 10 and 14 (full non-winsorized sample).

35

Table 7: Stock return regressions, sample till 2007
Monthly, quarterly and annual regressions with variance premium
Horizon

VP 8

1

3

12

0.381

0.462***

0.116

[0.237]

[0.171]

[0.140]

VP 10

1

3

12

0.232

0.382**

0.0643

[0.246]

[0.174]

[0.143]

VP 14

1

3

12

0.123

0.351**

0.0592

[0.266]

[0.172]

[0.139]

VP 16

1

3

12

0.363*

0.501***

0.188**

[0.189]

[0.097]

[0.086]

VIX2
constant
Adj. R

2

1

3

12

-0.007

0.192

0.188

[0.134]

[0.122]

[0.100]

0.231

-1.423

3.626

2.496

-0.356

4.422

4.286

0.133

4.501

-0.0402

-2.826

2.184

-0.0439

-0.262

5.732

[4.117]

[4.012]

[3.914]

[4.180]

[3.829]

[3.441]

[4.393]

[3.813]

[3.543]

[3.843]

[3.507]

[4.062]

[4.426]

[4.424]

[3.779]

0.007

0.049

0.006

0.000

0.035

-0.001

-0.003

0.029

-0.002

0.008

0.070

0.028

0.005

0.023

-0.005

Notes: Sample period January 1990 – December 2007. All regressions are based on monthly observations. The standard errors reported in brackets are computed using
max{3, 2*horizon} Newey-West lags. ***, **, * denote significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10-level.

36

Table 8, Panel A: Stock return regressions, full sample
Panel A: Monthly, quarterly and annual regressions with variance premium and conditional variance
Horizon

VP 8
CV 8

1

3

12

0.487

0.705***

[0.347]

[0.134]

[0.095]

-0.269*

-0.294***

-0.025

[0.139]

[0.050]

[0.059]

1

3

12

1

3

12

1

3

12

CV 10

0.393

0.485***

[0.327]

[0.133]

[0.119]

-0.239

-0.209*

-0.034

[0.231]

[0.119]

[0.066]

CV 14

0.317

0.410***

0.260**

[0.311]

[0.143]

[0.118]

-0.200

-0.170

-0.035

[0.229]

[0.123]

[0.060]

VP 16
CV 16

0.459**

0.572***

0.204**

[0.182]

[0.109]

[0.084]

-0.057

-0.010

0.053

[0.080]

[0.054]

[0.062]

VIX2

2

12

0.059

0.254**

VP 14

Adj. R

3

0.245**

VP 10

constant

1

-0.036

0.014

[0.167]

[0.140]

[0.047]

1.548

-1.772

1.175

2.604

0.358

1.228

3.068

0.802

1.111

-2.274

-5.239

0.326

5.913

3.993

2.733

[5.157]

[4.072]

[5.098]

[4.624]

[3.857]

[4.999]

[4.794]

[4.123]

[5.056]

[4.574]

[4.071]

[5.257]

[5.563]

[4.689]

[4.452]

0.017

0.111

0.034

0.012

0.056

0.042

0.008

0.045

0.050

0.032

0.132

0.037

-0.003

-0.004

0.010

Notes: Sample period January 1990 – September 2010. All regressions are based on monthly observations. The standard errors reported in brackets are computed
using max{3, 2*horizon} Newey-West lags. ***, **, * denote significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10-level.

37

Table 8, Panel B: Stock return regressions, full sample
Panel B: Monthly, quarterly and annual regressions with variance premium, conditional variance and other predictors
Horizon

1

3

12

1

3

12

1

3

12

1

3

12

3MTB

4.146
[3.351]

3.472
[3.426]

3.716
[3.205]

4.073
[3.157]

3.654
[3.660]

3.532
[3.119]

3.961
[3.103]

3.456
[3.696]

3.314
[3.068]

3.897
[3.452]

3.450
[3.506]

3.726
[3.209]

Log(DY)

19.19
[14.54]

21.67*
[13.08]

19.20*
[10.69]

19.60
[14.40]

21.72
[13.36]

19.63*
[10.69]

19.96
[14.38]

22.26*
[13.37]

20.11*
[10.67]

19.38
[14.48]

21.46
[13.04]

19.13*
[10.67]

CS

-13.92
[16.98]

-16.40
[12.45]

-6.016
[4.890]

-12.27
[18.50]

-14.53
[14.59]

-5.253
[5.141]

-14.82
[17.77]

-17.53
[14.89]

-6.496
[4.922]

-10.28
[16.47]

-12.23
[12.59]

-5.138
[4.976]

TS

2.420
[4.022]

2.297
[4.369]

4.224
[3.671]

2.357
[3.987]

2.431
[4.505]

4.076
[3.618]

2.270
[3.953]

2.277
[4.490]

3.905
[3.575]

2.123
[4.033]

2.161
[4.365]

4.207
[3.662]

VP 8

0.562**
[0.283]

0.809***
[0.141]

0.274***
[0.102]

CV 8

-0.078
[0.210]

-0.090
[0.091]

0.076
[0.050]

VP 10

0.421
[0.312]

0.539***
[0.166]

0.271***
[0.079]

CV 10

-0.045
[0.290]

-0.002
[0.118]

0.062
[0.057]

VP 14

0.388
[0.304]

0.514***
[0.188]

0.291***
[0.089]

CV 14

0.005
[0.261]

0.050
[0.116]

0.069
[0.052]

VP 16

0.513***
[0.177]

0.646***
[0.107]

0.233***
[0.078]

CV 16

0.069
[0.126]

0.130
[0.096]

0.125**
[0.054]

constant
Adj. R

2

-12.65
[16.55]

-15.25
[13.00]

-20.39
[13.01]

-12.49
[17.50]

-14.52
[14.03]

-20.63
[12.76]

-10.58
[16.87]

-12.31
[14.16]

-19.79
[12.63]

-17.54
[16.22]

-20.37
[12.98]

-21.44
[13.03]

0.034

0.189

0.270

0.027

0.131

0.272

0.025

0.126

0.278

0.045

0.199

0.270

Notes: Sample period January 1990 – September 2010. All regressions are based on monthly observations. The standard errors reported in
brackets are computed using max{3, 2*horizon} Newey-West lags. ***, **, * denote significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10-level.

38

Table 9: Industrial production regressions
Monthly, quarterly and annual regressions with variance premium and conditional variance
Horizon

VP 8
CV 8

1

3

12

-0.043

-0.027

0.020

[0.043]

[0.041]

[0.024]

-0.097***

-0.109***

-0.053***

[0.019]

[0.007]

[0.011]

VP 10
CV 10

1

3

12

-0.042

-0.015

0.038

[0.060]

[0.038]

[0.023]

-0.098***

-0.116***

-0.063***

[0.028]

[0.008]

[0.016]

VP 14
CV 14

1

3

12

-0.053

-0.021

0.038

[0.059]

[0.038]

[0.024]

-0.092***

-0.113***

-0.063***

[0.023]

[0.008]

[0.015]

VP 16
CV 16

1

3

12

-0.036

-0.027

0.014

[0.033]

[0.030]

[0.019]

-0.082***

-0.086***

-0.033***

[0.019]

[0.010]

[0.011]

2

VIX

constant
Adj. R

2

1

3

12

-0.031***

-0.080***

-0.084***

[0.020]

[0.018]

[0.009]

4.792***

4.728***

2.724**

4.808***

4.671***

2.617**

4.887***

4.695***

2.591**

4.370***

4.263***

2.411**

5.103***

5.205***

3.145***

[0.846]

[0.694]

[1.118]

[0.885]

[0.659]

[1.133]

[0.951]

[0.711]

[1.139]

[0.849]

[0.701]

[1.178]

[0.820]

[0.678]

[0.959]

0.123

0.278

0.083

0.124

0.294

0.118

0.122

0.293

0.129

0.131

0.296

0.095

0.122

0.257

0.056

Notes: Sample period January 1990 – September 2010. All regressions are based on monthly observations. The standard errors reported in brackets are computed
using max{3, 2*horizon} Newey-West lags. ***, **, * denote significance at the 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10-level.

39

