                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CAUTION! MEN NOT AT WORK:
  GENDER-SPECIFIC LABOR MARKET CONDITIONS AND CHILD MALTREATMENT

                                        Jason M. Lindo
                                       Jessamyn Schaller
                                       Benjamin Hansen

                                      Working Paper 18994
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w18994


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2013




Previously circulated as "Economic Conditions and Child Abuse." The authors thank Steven
Haider, Hilary Hoynes, Magnus Lofstrom, Ron Oaxaca, Nick Sly, Gary Solon, Peter Siminski,
Glen Waddell, Reed Walker, Sally Wallace, Wes Wilson, and Madeline Zavodny for valuable
feedback, in addition to seminar participants at Arizona State University, Louisiana State
University, Michigan State University, Texas A&M University, University of Oregon, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and University of Wollongong and conference participants at
the IZA's 5th Annual Meeting on the Economics of Risky Behaviors, the NBER Children's
Program Meetings, and the China Meeting of the Econometric Society. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jason M. Lindo, Jessamyn Schaller, and Benjamin Hansen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Caution! Men Not at Work: Gender-Specific Labor Market Conditions and Child Maltreatment
Jason M. Lindo, Jessamyn Schaller, and Benjamin Hansen
NBER Working Paper No. 18994
April 2013, Revised October 2016
JEL No. I10,J13,J16,J63,K42

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines the effect of labor market conditions—measured through unemployment,
mass layoffs and predicted employment—on child abuse and neglect using county-level data
from California. Using these indicators we separately estimate the effects of overall and gender-
specific economic shocks. We find only modest evidence of a link between overall economic
conditions and child maltreatment. However, analysis by gender reveals robust evidence that
maltreatment decreases with indicators for male employment and increases with indicators for
female employment. These opposite-signed effects are consistent with a theoretical framework
that builds on family-time-use models and is supported by analysis of time-use data.


Jason M. Lindo                                  Benjamin Hansen
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Texas A&M University                            1285 University of Oregon
4228 TAMU                                       Eugene, OR 97403
College Station, TX 77843                       and NBER
and NBER                                        bchansen@uoregon.edu
jlindo@econmail.tamu.edu

Jessamyn Schaller
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall 401PP
Tucson, AZ 85721
and NBER
jschaller@email.arizona.edu
1       Introduction
    In 2014 alone, child protective services agencies in the United States inves-
tigated nearly 2 million referrals for child maltreatment and identified more
than 700,000 victims—a rate of 9.4 victims per 1000 children.1 Child abuse
and neglect have grave and long-lasting consequences both for victims and for
society. In addition to the immediate suffering that they experience, victims
of maltreatment suffer from poor physical and emotional health and are at
increased risk for depression, behavioral problems, and high-risk health be-
haviors (Fletcher 2009, Thornberry, Henry, Ireland, and Smith 2010). Abuse
and neglect also have important long-term implications, as maltreated children
are more likely to be unemployed, in poverty, and using Medicaid in adulthood
(Zielinski 2009, Currie and Widom 2010) and are more likely to commit crimes
(Currie and Tekin 2012). Meanwhile, child maltreatment imposes a number
of direct and indirect costs on society—costs of hospitalization and ongoing
physical and mental health care for victims, expenses for law enforcement and
child welfare agencies, increased pressure on the criminal justice system, and
lost productivity.
    A large body of research establishes that poverty and parental unemploy-
ment are key predictors of child maltreatment. Thus, it is natural to assume
that aggregate economic downturns should be associated with increases in child
maltreatment. Perhaps surprisingly, the existing evidence on the relation-
ship between macroeconomic conditions and maltreatment is mixed. Despite
the onset of the Great Recession in December 2007, national child victimiza-
tion rates fell from 2007 to 2012, continuing a downward trajectory that has
spanned nearly two decades.2 Meanwhile, a growing multi-disciplinary litera-
ture exploring the link between economic conditions and child maltreatment at
the state and county level has generated seemingly contradictory results, with
    1
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2015).
    2
    The national child victimization rate was 15.3 (per 1000 children) in 1993 (U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services 2001), 10.6 in 2007 (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2010), and 9.1 in 2012 (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2015).



                                             1
some researchers finding a positive association between local unemployment
rates and rates of child maltreatment (Frioux, Wood, Oludolapo, Luan, Lo-
calio, and Rubin 2014), others finding a negative association (Raissian 2015),
and several studies generating mixed or inconclusive evidence on whether ag-
gregate economic conditions influence rates of abuse and neglect (Paxson and
Waldfogel 2002, Wood, Medina, Feudtner, Luan, Localio, Fieldston, and Ru-
bin 2012, Bitler and Zavodny 2004, and Seiglie 2004).
    Moreover, there exists an important gap in the literature on child mal-
treatment surrounding estimation of the effects of gender-specific labor mar-
ket conditions on child maltreatment. There are several reasons why economic
shocks that disproportionately one gender may have different effects on child
maltreatment than economic shocks that disproportionately affect the other
gender. Maltreatment data show that males and females are involved with dif-
ferent shares of abuse and neglect cases: males are more likely to perpetrate
abuse, while females are more likely to be held responsible for child neglect
(Sedlak, Mettenburg, Basena, Peta, McPherson, Greene, et al. 2010). It is
also possible that many of the factors that may contribute to abuse and ne-
glect, such as income, stress, substance abuse, childcare provision, household
bargaining, and family structure, respond differently to changes in male and
female labor market conditions. However, because of the difficulty of obtain-
ing plausibly-exogenous and comparable indicators of labor market conditions
facing men and women, few researchers have explored these relationships sep-
arately.3
    This paper provides insight into the economic determinants of child abuse
and neglect using county-level administrative data from California. In order
to gain a better understanding of the relationship between overall economic
conditions and child maltreatment, we construct new aggregate labor market
variables that are more likely to be exogenous with respect to child maltreat-
ment than standard economic indicators. These include predicted employment
   3
    Two existing state-level studies (Paxson and Waldfogel 1999, Cherry and Wang 2016)
lend supporting evidence on this matter. These studies, along with their limitations, are
discussed in Section 2.



                                           2
rates and employment growth rates that capture demand-induced variation in
labor market opportunities, as well as mass layoffs. Then, with gender-specific
versions of these economic indicators, we separately estimate the effects of ex-
ogenous changes in labor market opportunities facing males and females on
child abuse and neglect.
    Focusing on measures of overall economic conditions, we find only modest
evidence that the state of the local labor market is linked with child maltreat-
ment. Specifically, while our estimates suggest that local unemployment rates
are negatively related to rates of maltreatment, we do not find convincing
evidence of any such effects when we instead consider our overall economic
indicators that are more likely to be exogenous. Turning to the analysis of
gender-specific economic conditions, we find that these estimates conceal im-
portant patterns by gender. In particular, decreases in male layoff rates and
increases in male predicted employment rates are associated with decreases
in child maltreatment, while decreases in female layoff rates and increases in
female predicted employment rates are associated with increases in maltreat-
ment.
    While our empirical approach does not allow us to pin down the mecha-
nisms underlying these effects, the pattern of estimates is informative. Because
the signs of the effects of male and female employment on income, stress, sub-
stance abuse, and family structure are likely to be the same (even if the effects
are not of the same magnitude), any model of the household that focuses
on these mechanisms will have trouble explaining the asymmetry uncovered
by our empirical analysis.4 A bargaining model also does not explain why
male employment appears to decrease maltreatment while female employment
appears to increase maltreatment, as it seems unlikely that reducing women’s
bargaining power would promote children’s welfare, especially in light of earlier
work showing that women’s bargaining power is negatively related to domestic
violence (Aizer 2010).
   4
     Eliason and Storrie (2009a) and Eliason and Storrie (2009b) show that both male and
female job losses leads to increased risk of hospitalization and death from self-harm or
alcohol-related causes while Charles and Stephens Jr (2004) and Eliason (2012) show that
both male and female job losses increase the risk of divorce.


                                           3
    A family-time-use model of the household with differential risks of mal-
treatment associated with a child’s time spent with different caregivers can
explain opposite-signed effects of male and female labor market conditions in
a straightforward and intuitive manner: men’s employment decreases child
maltreatment by shifting childcare provision toward mothers, while women’s
employment increases child maltreatment by shifting childcare provision away
from mothers.5 In order to gain insight into the plausibility of this explanation,
we supplement our analysis of maltreatment reports with an investigation of
the relationship between parental employment and time spent with children
using data from the American Time Use Survey. The results provide further
support for the notion that the effects of job loss on child maltreatment may
be driven by impacts on the distribution of childcare.
    In addition to improving upon our understanding of the determinants of
child maltreatment, this paper also contributes to a small but growing liter-
ature in economics that uses aggregate gender-specific economic variables to
test the implications of economic models of individual and family decision-
making.6 Given the dramatic rise in female labor force participation and the
prevalence of dual-earner families, models that allow for separate effects of
shocks to male and female labor market opportunities are increasingly rele-
vant. The results from this paper suggest that a gender-focused approach may
be particularly important for understanding of the effects of economic shocks
on child outcomes, and that the distribution of childcare within households
may be an important mechanism mediating these effects.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we
provide further background on child maltreatment victimization and perpe-
tration, on the potential mechanisms through which local labor market oppor-
tunities may affect maltreatment, and on prior studies estimating the effects
of local economic conditions on child maltreatment. We then discuss our data
   5
     This might be due to increased neglect, the blame for which is more likely to be assigned
to mothers (even in two-parent households), or to increased abuse, which is more likely to be
perpetrated by males. We discuss differential risks of maltreatment associated with different
childcare providers in Section 2.
   6
     See, e.g. Blau, Kahn, and Waldfogel (2000), Qian (2008), Aizer (2010), Schaller (2016).



                                              4
and key variables in Section 3, including the set of novel economic indicators
that allow us to address potential endogeneity concerns and to separately iden-
tify shocks to labor market opportunities facing males and females. We explain
our empirical strategy that uses these measures in Section 4 and present the
results of our analysis of the effects of overall and gender-specific labor market
conditions on child maltreatment in Section 5. Section 6 includes a discussion
of mechanisms in light of our findings, along with an analysis of how parental
employment relates to family time use using data from the American Time
Use Survey. Section 7 concludes.


2       Background
2.1     Victims and Perpetrators of Child Maltreatment
    According to a 2010 report to Congress based on the Fourth National Inci-
dence Study (NIS-4) of Child Abuse and Neglect (Sedlak, Mettenburg, Basena,
Peta, McPherson, Greene, et al. 2010), more than 1.25 million children expe-
rienced demonstrable harm resulting from maltreatment in the United States
during a single study year (2005-06).7 Sixty-one percent of these children were
victims of neglect, while 44 percent experienced physical, sexual, or emotional
abuse. The incidence of child maltreatment varies as a function of the so-
cioeconomic characteristics of children’s families. In the NIS-4, children with
unemployed parents experienced neglect at rates two to three times higher
than children with employed parents, and children in low-socioeconomic-status
households (as defined by poverty, low parental education, or participation in
a social assistance program) were more than three times as likely to be abused
and seven times as likely to be neglected as children who were not in low-
socioeconomic-status households.
    7
    The NIS-4 is a congressionally mandated study by the United States Department of
Health and Human Services that measures the total number of children abused and neglected
in the United States. The study collects data on children investigated by Child Protective
Services (CPS) agencies and also gathers data from additional sources to estimate the scope
of maltreatment beyond official statistics.



                                            5
   The NIS-4 report also reveals important asymmetrical patterns of maltreat-
ment based on the gender of the perpetrator. Overall, children are more likely
to be maltreated by females than by males (68% of maltreated children were
maltreated by a female perpetrator, while 48% were maltreated by a male).
However, the predominant sex of perpetrators is quite different for abuse and
neglect cases, with females more likely to be involved with neglect (86% of
neglect cases, versus only 38% for males) and males more likely to commit
abuse (62% of abused children experienced abuse by a male perpetrator and
41% experienced abuse by a female perpetrator). The report attributes the
predominance of females in neglect cases to the fact that mothers tend to be
primary caregivers and are thus held accountable for failures in care.


2.2    Potential Mechanisms
    While the correlations between child maltreatment and measurable house-
hold characteristics such as income, parental employment, and family structure
are clearly documented and well-studied, theory suggests that the underly-
ing causal relationships are likely very complex. Etiological models of child
maltreatment from the fields of psychology and social work posit that child
maltreatment is a result of the joint influence of—and interactions between—
dozens of individual, family, environmental, and societal risk factors (Berger
and Slack 2014, Stith, Liu, Davies, Boykin, Alder, Harris, Som, McPherson,
and Dees 2009). Economists, meanwhile, have considered child maltreatment
within the framework of theoretical models of investment in children, family
bargaining, and criminal behavior (Berger 2005, Paxson and Waldfogel 2002,
Seiglie 2004). Empirically, it has proven difficult to isolate causal relationships
due to the likelihood that unobservable characteristics that lead to relatively
poor economic outcomes (for example, mental health problems or high dis-
count rates) also contribute to parents’ likelihood of neglecting or abusing
children. Given the variety of theoretical models, the multitude of known risk
factors, and the limited empirical evidence on causal relationships, it is dif-
ficult to predict how changes in aggregate economic conditions might affect


                                        6
rates of child maltreatment.
    With these caveats in mind, here we briefly outline three main pathways
through which changes in aggregate economic conditions might affect rates
of child abuse and neglect. First, reductions in family income may result in
increased rates of child maltreatment (and child neglect in particular) if they
cause families to be unable to provide for children’s basic physical, medical,
educational, or emotional needs. Alternatively, reductions in income could
reduce maltreatment by reducing substance abuse.8 Changes in family in-
come might also alter the distribution of power between perpetrators of mal-
treatment and other adults within a household, or alter the expected loss a
perpetrator expects to incur if he or she is caught (Berger 2005).9 Second,
adults and children may experience stress and other mental health problems
as a result of loss of family income, involuntary employment changes, and
general economic uncertainty that might lead to increased maltreatment risk.
Finally, changes in economic conditions might affect rates of child maltreat-
ment through changes in time use. In particular, exogenous shocks to parental
work hours or employment status could alter the amount of time that potential
perpetrators spend in contact with children and directly caring for them.
    In light of these possible mechanisms, there are several reasons to believe
that the effects of aggregate economic shocks on rates of child abuse and
neglect might mask differing effects of shocks to economic conditions facing
males and females. For example, since fathers are often primary earners, la-
bor market shocks that disproportionately affect males might have stronger
income effects. There is also some indirect evidence that the mental health
effects of male job losses are larger than the mental health effects of female job
losses (Kalil and Ziol-Guest 2008, Schaller and Stevens 2015), though there
are no studies (to our knowledge) focusing directly on parents’ mental health.
Meanwhile, we clearly expect changes in labor market opportunities that dis-
proportionately affect one gender to have asymmetrical effects on bargaining
   8
     Notably, Ruhm and Black (2002) show that drinking falls during recessions, particularly
among heavy drinkers.
   9
     See Berger and Waldfogel (2011) for further discussion of these and other possible
reasons for a causal association between family income and child maltreatment.


                                             7
power and family time use. Holding labor market opportunities for men con-
stant, an improvement in labor market opportunities for women is likely to
increase women’s bargaining power within a partnership and also to reduce
women’s share of childcare provided. And holding labor market opportunities
for women constant, an improvement in labor market opportunities for men
is likely to increase men’s bargaining power within a partnership and also to
reduce men’s share of childcare provided. Finally, as discussed in the previous
section, the types of maltreatment that men and women are typically involved
in are different. In particular, men are more likely to commit abuse, while
women are more likely to commit (or to be held responsible for) child neglect.
To the extent that the mechanisms driving abuse and neglect are different, this
too might contribute to differences in the effects of labor market conditions
for males and females on maltreatment rates.


2.3    Existing Literature
    A number of studies have used state- or county-level panel data to estimate
the effects of various economic indicators on rates of child maltreatment, with
mixed results. Early work using state-level data by Paxson and Waldfogel
(1999, 2002), Seiglie (2004), and Bitler and Zavodny (2004) provides some
evidence that economic variables, including child poverty rates, state median
income, and unemployment rates, are associated with rates of child maltreat-
ment. Focusing on parental employment status, Paxson and Waldfogel also
find that increases in the fraction of children with working mothers and in-
creases in the fraction of children with nonworking fathers are associated with
increases in rates of child maltreatment. However, they do not address the
potential endogeneity of these measures and are thus unable to assign a causal
interpretation to their findings.
    More recently, using state-level data, Cherry and Wang (2016) find an
inverse association between male employment rates and child maltreatment
but do not find an association between female employment rates and child
maltreatment. Like Paxson and Waldfogel, Cherry and Wang do not address


                                      8
the potential endogeneity of the gender-specific employment variables used in
their analyses. In particular, there may be unobservable shocks that are cor-
related both with male and female labor supply choices and with the incidence
of child maltreatment, or there may be reverse causality. Thus, while their
estimates are informative about the reduced form associations between child
maltreatment and male and female employment, they may not reflect causal
effects.
    Because of serious concerns about both the comparability of data across
different states and possible unobserved confounding state-level shocks (see
Paxson and Waldfogel 1999), other recent studies have used county level data
within a single state to identify the association between overall economic con-
ditions and child maltreatment rates. Using data from New York from 2000–
2010, Raissian (2015) finds a negative association between county unemploy-
ment rates and rates of child maltreatment. By contrast, using data from
Pennsylvania from 1990–2010, Frioux, Wood, Oludolapo, Luan, Localio, and
Rubin (2014) find that increases in county unemployment rates are associated
with increases in rates of child maltreatment. Meanwhile, using hospital dis-
charge data linked to macroeconomic data for metropolitan statistical areas,
Wood, Medina, Feudtner, Luan, Localio, Fieldston, and Rubin (2012) find no
evidence of any link between local unemployment rates and rates of severe
physical child abuse. None of these studies consider labor market shocks that
disproportionately affect men or women.


3     Data and Key Variables
3.1    Abuse and Population
    Our data on child maltreatment are state child welfare administrative data,
obtained from the California Child Welfare Indicators Project, a collaboration
between the University of California Berkeley and the California Department
of Social Services. The data cover the period 1998–2012. We separately iden-
tify (1) reports of any maltreatment, (2) reports of abuse, including physical,


                                      9
sexual, and emotional abuse, and (3) reports of severe or general neglect.
Note that category (1) is not the sum of categories (2) and (3) because it
additionally includes exploitation, caretake absence/incapacity, and “at risk
because a sibling was abused.” The data are counts of children who are the
subject of a maltreatment allegation in a given analysis year.10 We combine
the maltreatment counts with population counts from the National Cancer
Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program in
order to create rates of reported maltreatment, abuse, and neglect per 1,000
children, which we use as the outcome variables in our analyses. We also use
the SEER population counts to construct demographic control variables, i.e.,
the fractions of the population in each of four race/ethnicity groups and the
fractions of the population in each of eight age groups.
    Our analysis of county-level data within a single state is motivated by two
concerns about state-level data. The first is a lack of comparability of data
on reported abuse across states. States differ in how they define abuse, who
is required to report abuse, and in how they record and respond to reports of
abuse. A second concern with state-level data is that it is difficult to iden-
tify changes in definitions of abuse, reporting expectations, and standards for
screening allegations of abuse that may have substantial implications for the
number of reports that are observed in a given state and year. Because these
confounding factors vary primarily at the state level rather than the county
level, we are able to adjust for them in our analysis by controlling for year
fixed effects.
    Even at the county level, data quality is an issue for all studies of child
abuse and neglect. Given that our outcome variables are based on reports of
maltreatment—and reports of maltreatment can diverge from the true amount
of abuse or neglect for a variety of reasons—they are best thought of as a proxy
  10
     Each child is counted only once in each county in a given time period, even if he or she
is the subject of multiple allegations. If a child has more than one allegation in a given year,
they are counted in the cell considered to be the most severe occurrence of maltreatment
(the severity hierarchy ranks sexual abuse first, followed by physical abuse, neglect, then
emotional abuse). If a child is subject of allegations in multiple counties, the child will be
counted in each county where referred.



                                              10
for the outcome of interest. For our purposes, there are two primary concerns
with using such a proxy. First, our constructed measures of child maltreatment
are likely to understate the true prevalence of child maltreatment because
underreporting is such a serious issue (Waldfogel (1998)). That said, the bias
that this issue might introduce can be eliminated by considering the effects in
percentage terms rather than in levels.
    A second issue is that the estimated effects of economic conditions can be
biased if economic conditions have an effect on reports of maltreatment that is
independent of effects on actual cases of maltreatment. Although some stud-
ies use this as motivation for focusing on substantiated reports rather than all
reports, that approach introduces the possibility that the estimates would be
biased by changes in the likelihood and speed of report substantiation, both of
which may be affected by the changing availability of resources to local child
welfare services agencies. For this reason, we instead focus most of our analyses
on all reports of maltreatment. To address possible reporting bias, we incor-
porate controls for employment per capita in the highest-reporting sectors into
our analysis. We obtain information on employment per capita in primary and
secondary schools, social services, and hospitals from the US Census Bureau’s
County Business Patterns and employment per capita in law enforcement from
the Uniform Crime Report’s Law Enforcement Officers Killed and Assaulted
(LEOKA) database.11 Later, we also confirm that the patterns in our findings
are robust to considering substantiated cases of maltreatment.
    Summary statistics, presented in Table 1, show that the average rate of
maltreatment across counties in our sample is approximately 52 reports per
1000 children in a county, with abuse and neglect rates at 20 and 22 reports
per 1000 children respectively. Figure 1 demonstrates statewide trends in child
abuse and maltreatment rates in California. The patterns in the two series
are noticeably different. In particular, the abuse rate declined between 2000
and 2007, then increased slightly during the Great Recession and subsequent
  11
     In 2014, law enforcement personnel, school employees, social services workers, and med-
ical professionals were responsible for 18.1, 17.7, 11.0, and 9.2 percent of reports to Child
Protective Services, respectively (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2015).



                                             11
recovery between 2008 and 2012, while the neglect rate increased over almost
the whole sample period, from less than 18 reports per 1000 children in 1998
to around 25 reports per 1000 children in 2012.


3.2     Economic Conditions
    We consider several different economic indicators in our analyses. We begin
with the local (county) unemployment rate, which is the measure most com-
monly used in studies examining the link between economic conditions and
health in the United States. This variable, which we obtain from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS), reflects both short- and long-run unemployment as
well as movements in and out of the labor force, and is intended to proxy for
the overall state of the economy. One caveat about the unemployment rate is
that it is potentially endogenous with respect to changes in child maltreatment
because it depends on the size of the population actively participating in the
labor force at a given time. In particular, there may be unobservable factors
at the county level that are associated both with labor supply and with child
maltreatment.
    To address the potential endogeneity of the unemployment rate and to
explore the robustness of our estimates to alternative labor market indicators,
we construct three other economic indicators. The first of these is the county
mass layoff rate, which we calculate by dividing the number of workers involved
in an extended mass layoff event (also from the BLS) by the population of
adults between the ages of 18 and 64.12 We also use data from the 1990
decennial census (Ruggles, Genadek, Goeken, Grover, and Sobek 2015) and
March CPS (Flood, King, Ruggles, and Warren 2015) to construct predicted
employment rates and employment growth rates in the spirit of the work of
Bartik (1991), Katz and Murphy (1992), and Blanchard and Katz (1992).13
While these are imperfect proxies for actual labor market conditions, they have
  12
      An “extended mass layoff event” is one in which more than 50 workers are separated
from a private non-farm employer for at least 31 days.
   13
      Because information on counties with population less than 100,000 is not available in
the public-use version of the 1990 census, regressions on these index include only the 34
largest counties.

                                            12
the major benefit of isolating demand -driven changes in employment.
    To calculate annual predicted employment rates for each county-year ob-
servation, we first calculate annual predicted employment levels by multiplying
each county’s base-period (1990) shares of statewide industry employment by
statewide annual industry employment counts and take the sum across indus-
tries for each county-year as follows:

                                            X           Eci90
                                   Êct =       Eit ∗                                      (1)
                                            i
                                                        Ei90

where Eit is the total employment in industry i in California in year t and
Eci90
 Ei90
      is the share of total employment in industry i in 1990 accounted for by
individuals from county c.14 This formula yields employment levels predicted
for county c in year t based on its share of employment across different in-
dustries in 1990 and statewide employment levels across industries in year t.
To convert this to an employment rate, we divide the predicted employment
level by the current population of adults between the ages of 18 and 64 in the
county.
     To calculate predicted employment growth rates, we take a slightly different
approach: we multiply the base-period share of each county’s workforce that is
employed in a given industry by statewide annual industry employment growth
rates and take the sum across industries for each county-year as follows:
                                            X           Eci90
                                  Ĝct =        Git ∗                                      (2)
                                            i
                                                        Ec90

This formula yields the rate at which employment is predicted to grow in
county c in yeart based on its distribution of employment in 1990 across in-
dustries and the statewide growth of these industries in year t.
  14
    We define 20 industry categories: agriculture, forestry, and fishing; mining; construction;
low-tech manufacturing; basic manufacturing; high-tech manufacturing; apparel/textiles
manufacturing; transportation; telecommunications; utilities; wholesale trade; retail trade:
motor vehicle, home, farm; retail trade: food, drugs, apparel, and general merchandise;
finance, insurance, and real estate; business and transportation services; technical and repair
services; personal services; entertainment and recreation services; professional and related
services; public administration.


                                                13
    As shown in Table 1, the average unemployment rate in our sample is 7.5
and the average layoff rate is 1.2 per 100 adults. Time trends in the two
variables, shown in Figure 2 largely follow similar patterns, though the layoff
rate slightly leads the unemployment rate and experiences a brief decline in
the midst of the Great Recession. The average predicted employment rate in
our sample is 73.54 and the average predicted employment growth rate is 0.9
percent.
    To estimate the effects of shocks to labor market conditions facing males
and females on child maltreatment rates, we construct an analogous set of
gender-specific economic indicators, intended to represent demand-induced
changes in labor market opportunities for men and women. We begin by
again using the BLS mass layoff statistics, which are available by gender, to
construct rates of males and females involved in mass layoff events.
    To construct annual predicted employment rates by county and gender, we
construct annual predicted employment levels by county and gender by mul-
tiplying the base-period (1990) shares of statewide industry employment for
each gender in each county by statewide annual industry employment counts
and taking the sum across industries for each county-year as follows:
                                       X           Egci90
                             Êgct =       Eit ∗                              (3)
                                       i
                                                   Ei90

where Eit is the total employment in industry i in California in year t and
Egci90
 Ei90
       is the share of total employment in industry i in 1990 accounted for
by individuals from group g (male or female) in county c. Intuitively, the
argument of the sum is the number of individuals predicted to be employed in
industry i from group g in county c in year t on the basis of its share of overall
employment levels in 1990 and the overall employment level in year t. As such,
this measure captures variation in employment that is generated by changes in
the overall state of the California economy but that varies across counties and
gender because of historical differences in the distribution of statewide industry
employment by gender and geographic location. To convert this measure into
rates, we divide by the number of individuals from group g living in county c


                                           14
in year t, which is based on the SEER population data described above.
    To generate predicted annual employment growth rates by county and
gender, we interact the base-period (1990) share of workers in each county-
by-gender cell employed in each industry with annual industry employment
growth rates for California, and take the sum across industries by gender and
county as follows:
                                              Eigc90
                             Γ̂cgt = Σi Git ∗                              (4)
                                              Egc90
                                                                       E
where Git is the statewide growth rate of industry i in year t and Eigc90
                                                                        gc90
                                                                             is the
share of individuals from group g in county c that was employed in industry
i in 1990. Intuitively, the argument of the sum is the predicted employment
growth for individuals from group g in county c in year t on the basis of the
share working in industry i in 1990 and the overall growth rate for industry
i in year t. As such, this measure captures variation in employment that is
generated by variation across industries and over time in employment growth
that has differing effects across counties and gender because of historical differ-
ences between county-by-gender cells in the distribution of employment across
industries.
    These gender-specific predicted employment variables by gender are in the
spirit of Aizer (2010), who uses a similar strategy to construct indices of rela-
tive wages in order to determine the effects of relative female wages on domestic
violence and Schaller (2016), who uses similar indices to study the effects of
gender-specific labor demand shocks on fertility. The advantage of these vari-
ables is that they are unlikely to be driven by localized shocks in labor supply,
and are thus plausibly exogenous with respect to child maltreatment.
    Figure 3 contains scatterplots of these gender-specific measures of eco-
nomics conditions. Panel A focuses on mass layoffs, with the scatterplot on
the left presenting raw data, while that on the right presents residualized
data after a regression controlling for county fixed effects, year fixed effects,
county-specific linear trends, county demographic composition, and controls
for employment in high-reporting sectors. Both figures suggest a positive cor-
relation, that more female mass layoffs are associated with more male mass


                                        15
layoffs. However, while the raw data exhibits significant clustering, the resid-
ualized data show considerable variation off the 45 degree axis with minimal
clustering. This suggests that there is independent variation in male and fe-
male mass layoffs that can be used to separately identify their effects. Panel
B presents similar comparisons for predicted employment rates. Again the
gender-specific measures of economic conditions exhibit a positive correlation.
Furthermore, the clustering is even more apparent. The residualized measures
eliminate the apparent clustering in the data and again suggest that, while
the two measure are correlated, that there is independent variation that can
be used to identify gender-specific shocks. Panel C provides similar evidence
using predicted employment growth rates.


4     Empirical Strategy
    Our empirical strategy closely follows in the footsteps of previous researchers
that have investigated the causal effects of aggregate economic conditions on
health outcomes. In particular, since Ruhm (2000), a standard approach in
this literature has been to use area-level panel data and regression models that
control for area fixed effects, area-specific trends, and year fixed effects. This
approach eliminates both the possibility that the estimates might reflect spuri-
ous trends in the aggregate and the possibility that the estimates might reflect
fixed or linearly-trending differences across high- and low-unemployment ar-
eas. In concrete terms, this “area approach” estimates how health outcomes
in an area change from trend over and above changes occurring across all ar-
eas when its economic conditions change from trend over and above changes
occurring across all areas. The estimates are identified using variation across
areas in the timing and severity of changing economic conditions. Assuming
that unobservable variables related to the outcome of interest do not deviate
from an area’s trend when its economic conditions deviate from trend, this
approach will uncover the causal effect of aggregate economic conditions.




                                       16
       We operationalize this strategy with Poisson models of the following form:15

                     E[Yct ] = exp(Φct β + αt + γc + θc t + Xct λ)                        (5)

where Yct is the number of maltreatment reports per 100,000 children in county
c and year t, Φct is a measure (or set of measures) of economic conditions in
county c and year t, αt are year fixed effects to capture changes occurring across
all counties in each year, γc are county fixed effects to control for time-invariant
county characteristics, θc t are county-specific linear time trends, which are
included in some specifications to control for linearly-trending county char-
acteristics, and Xct (in some specifications) captures additional time-varying
characteristics of the county, including county demographic composition and
controls for employment in high-reporting sectors.16 Estimates are weighted
by the number of children in each county and year.17 All analyses allow errors
to be correlated within counties over time when constructing standard-error
estimates.18
    We begin by estimating separate regressions for each of our general eco-
nomic indicators—the unemployment rate, the mass layoff rate, the predicted
employment rate, and the predicted employment growth rate. Next, we es-
timate the effects of male and female economic indicators, including both
together in the same regression so that the coefficients on each can be inter-
  15
      Because Poisson models are typically thought of as considering counts and not neces-
sarily counts per capita, we note that this model can be expressed alternatively estimating
the natural log of the expected count of maltreatment reports while controlling for the
population of children and constraining its coefficient to be equal to one.
   16
      Results from log-linear specifications are nearly identical. The differences between OLS
log-linear models and the count data models arise due to the slight difference in the assump-
tion about the conditional mean. The count models assume E(Y |X) = exp(X 0 β), while the
OLS log linear model assumes E(ln(Y )|X) = X 0 β. Although those conditional means look
similar to one another, Jensen’s inequality suggests that the E(F(X) is less than or equal to
F(E(X)). This causes the count models to be more sensitive to outlier observations than the
OLS log-linear model. Thus, we proceed using a poisson specifications due to the inherent
count nature of our data.
   17
      Unweighted specifications generate results that are similar in magnitude to our main
results.
   18
      In so doing, we are relaxing the Poisson model’s typical assumption of equality between
the conditional mean and variance.



                                             17
preted as the effects of changes in labor market conditions facing one gender,
holding labor market conditions for the opposite gender constant. Because the
difference between the male and female economic indicators might depend on
the overall state of the local economy, we also show results in which we include
controls for the county unemployment rate in our gender-specific regressions.
Finally, because it is possible that changes in the male and female mass layoff
rates and predicted employment growth rates may be driven by changes in the
relevant “at-risk” populations, we also estimate models in which we control
for predicted male and female employment levels when estimating the effects
of these variables.


5     Results
5.1    Estimates for Indicators of Overall Economic Con-
       ditions
    Table 2 contains estimates of the effects of changes in overall economic
conditions on maltreatment reports (all reports, abuse reports, and neglect
reports). We present results from three specifications: baseline models con-
trolling only for county and year fixed effects; models that additionally control
for demographics and employment in high-reporting sectors; and models that
additionally control for county-specific linear trends.
    In Panel A, we find evidence that the unemployment rate is negatively
related to reports of maltreatment, with similar point estimates regardless of
the inclusion of additional controls. The estimates suggest a one percentage
point increase in the unemployment rate is associated with a 2.1–2.4 percent
decline in the reported maltreatment rate, as the estimated coefficients from
the Poisson regressions can be interpreted as semi-elasticities. When we focus
on abuse, we find point estimates that are small in magnitude and not statisti-
cally significant (the point estimates range from -0.001 to 0.004 depending on
the specification). The models that focus on neglect produce point estimates
that suggest a one percentage point increase in unemployment would decrease


                                       18
neglect from 2.2 to 2.7 percent, but these estimates also lack precision. These
findings are similar to, though smaller in magnitude than, the results of Rais-
sian (2015) who also finds a negative association between unemployment rates
and child maltreatment referral rates at the county level in New York, with
larger negative effects on neglect than on abuse.
    Across panels B through D, which consider the plausibly exogenous eco-
nomic indicators that we constructed instead of the unemployment rate, the
results tell a different story. There is some evidence of effects when we con-
sider the mass layoff measure, which notably suggests effects in the opposite
direction as our analysis unemployment rates. However, this estimate is not
robust to the inclusion of additional control variables. The estimates consider-
ing our measures of predicted employment and employment growth rates also
show no clear evidence that demand-induced changes in labor market condi-
tions affect child maltreatment. This could possibly imply that endogeneity is
driving some of the relationship between unemployment rates and child mal-
treatment in Panel A, or that there is not sufficient meaningful variation in
these measures at the county level to identify any association.


5.2    Estimates Focusing on Gender-Specific Economic
       Indicators
    In Table 3 we allow for separate effects of economic shocks that dispropor-
tionately affect males and females. Here, the pattern of results from our pre-
ferred model is quite interesting. Across all three sets of plausibly-exogenous
gender-specific explanatory variables, the estimates suggest that male employ-
ment is negatively associated with rates of child maltreatment while female
employment is positively associated with rates of child maltreatment. In Panel
A, a one percentage point increase in the male mass layoff rate, holding the fe-
male mass layoff rate constant, is associated with a 3.7 to 6.0 percent increase
in maltreatment reports, with even larger effects on abuse and neglect specif-
ically. Meanwhile, a one percentage point increase in the female mass layoff
rate is associated up to a 6.5 percent decrease in maltreatment reports, though


                                      19
the size of the effect varies across specifications and outcome variables. Results
in Panels B and C show robust positive effects of female predicted employment
and employment growth on maltreatment reports, and opposite-signed effects
of male predicted employment and employment growth.
    The similarity of the patterns across panels in Table 3 is especially notable
because there are dramatic differences in the sources of variation that are
identifying the effects. Another interesting feature of these results is that the
magnitudes suggest that an additional layoff per adult has a slightly larger
effect on maltreatment than an additional employed person per adult. This
is perhaps not surprising, since the effects of mass layoffs are likely to be
concentrated among a less-educated segment of the labor market, who are
greater at-risk of child maltreatment to begin with.
    In order to consider whether gender-specific employment levels have dif-
ferent effects from gender-specific flows into and out of employment, Table 4
simultaneously considers the effects of predicted employment levels and mass
layoff rates (in Panel A) and predicted employment levels and predicted em-
ployment growth (in Panel B).19 Results from these models closely resemble
those from the previous models that included these economic measures in-
dependently. Again, our richest specifications indicate that male predicted
employment reduces maltreatment while male layoffs increase rates of mal-
treatment. Meanwhile, female economic conditions are again consistently es-
timated to have the opposite effect, wherein increased female employment is
associated with more maltreatment and more female mass layoffs are associ-
ated with less maltreatment. The estimates corresponding to the employment
growth rate measures are more modest but exhibit the same pattern.
  19
     Panel B can also be thought of as addressing the concern that the gender-specific mass
layoff rates reflect changes in the populations of men and women “at risk” for employment
gain/loss (i.e., changes in the number of employed workers).




                                            20
5.3    Economic Conditions and Substantiated Maltreat-
       ment
    One potential issue with our analysis thus far is the possibility that eco-
nomic conditions might have effects on reports of maltreatment that is inde-
pendent of effects on actual cases of maltreatment. If this is the case, then
the estimates of the effects of economic conditions on maltreatment reports
may not provide an accurate characterization of the determinants of maltreat-
ment. Thus far, we have addressed this issue by including controls for county
employment in high-reporting sectors: education, health care, social services,
and police. An alternative approach, which others in the literature have used,
is to focus instead on the counts of child maltreatment reports that have
been substantiated by child welfare services. This strategy is also potentially
problematic, in that the likelihood that child welfare service agencies will sub-
stantiate reports, and the speed with which they do so, may be determined
by unobservable factors (such as resource constraints) that may respond inde-
pendently to changes in local economic conditions. Nonetheless, we confirm in
Table 5 that the patterns shown in our main results are largely similar if we
instead focus on substantiated reports.


6     Possible Mechanisms
   As discussed in Section 2.2, there are a wide variety of mechanisms through
which economic conditions might affect child maltreatment. In this section, we
revisit these potential mechanisms in light of our findings, which suggest that
improvements in labor market conditions for males reduce child maltreatment
whereas improvements in labor market conditions for females increase child
maltreatment. We begin with an extensive consideration of the link between
parental employment and time spent with children.




                                       21
6.1     Parental Employment and Time With Children
    A theoretical framework that builds on family-time-use models (such as
Lundberg 1985, Killingsworth and Heckman 1987, and Stephens 2002) and
acknowledges differential risks associated with a child’s time spent with dif-
ferent caregivers can explain our main results.20 Recall from Section 2.1 that
males are more likely to commit child abuse, while females are more likely
to commit (or at least to be held responsible for) child neglect. As such, if
increases in male employment causes children to spend less time with their
fathers and more time with their mothers, rates of both types of maltreatment
could decrease. Similarly, if increases in female employment (and reductions
in female layoffs) cause children to spend less time with mothers and more
time with fathers, they could be associated with increases in both types of
maltreatment.
    Of course, whether this explanation is compelling depends on the extent
to which parental employment actually relates to parental time use in such
a manner. In particular, if this mechanism is truly at work, then we should
observe that fathers spend less time with children when they are employed and
more time with children when their spouses are employed. Similarly, we should
observe that mothers spend less time with children when they are employed
and more time with children when their spouses are employed. We test these
predictions using repeated cross-sections of the American Time Use Survey
(ATUS) from 2003 to 2011.21
  20
      We forgo presenting a formal the theoretical model along these lines in this paper because
the value added would be negligible. Prior theoretical models have established that both
own employment status and partner’s employment status are likely to affect an individual’s
time use. In particular, family-time-use models suggest that a worker who is laid off will
increase time in non-market activities (e.g., childcare, leisure, or, more generally, “home
production”) while his or her partner increases time spent in the labor market to make up
for the lost household income. The point we make here is simply that such changes in time
allocation could have mechanical effects on child maltreatment.
   21
      In related work, both Fox, Han, Ruhm, and Waldfogel (2012) and Colman and Dave
(2011) are informative about the effects of parental employment and time spent with chil-
dren. In particular, Fox et al. (forthcoming) demonstrate that parents working full time
spend less time than nonworking parents in primary childcare activities. And Colman and
Dave (2011) demonstrate that own-gendered employment rates (at the state level) are asso-
ciated with less time in childcare and opposite-gender employment rates are associated with


                                              22
    The ATUS provides information on the activities that an individual per-
formed during a 24-hour period.22 Moreover, the ATUS asks who else was
around during each activity. As such, we can separately consider time spent
with children around, time spent with children around but no spouse around,
and time spent performing childcare activities. All of these measures are meant
to serve as proxies for childcare responsibilities. For our purposes, we focus
on surveyed individuals who are currently living with a spouse or partner in
a household with a child under age 18. This restriction leads to a sample of
approximately 13,000 fathers and 15,000 mothers. Notably, the fathers and
mothers in the sample come from different households because the ATUS only
surveys one individual per household.
    Our analysis considers how own employment status and spouse’s employ-
ment status relate to the amount of time that an individual spends with chil-
dren.23 At the same time, we acknowledge that neither own employment status
nor spouse’s employment status are exogenous. A nice feature of the ATUS
that should help us to mitigate omitted variable bias is the fact that the ATUS
sample is drawn from individuals surveyed in the Current Population Survey
(CPS) and is conducted two-to-five months following the CPS. This feature
of the data allows us to control flexibly for the economic circumstances of the
family a few months prior to the time-use survey. In our richest specification,
we control for the triple interaction of the individual’s employment status in
the CPS survey, the spouse’s employment status in the CPS survey, and the
income category for their annual family income reported in the CPS survey.24
    Table 6 separately reports means for the sample of fathers and the sample
of mothers. These statistics demonstrate the dramatic difference in mothers’
more time in childcare. For our purposes, however, it is important to separately consider
males and females. In addition, we want to consider broader measures of time spent with
children since abuse can occur while parents are together with children outside of primary
childcare activities. This is an especially important consideration given that time spent per-
forming primary childcare activities represents only 20 percent of father’s time spent with
children and only 28 percent of mother’s time spent with children.
  22
     We omit from the sample time-use surveys that correspond to holidays.
  23
     Note that the ATUS does not distinguish between individuals who are unemployed and
individuals who are not in the labor force.
  24
     The ATUS provides incomes in 16 different categories.


                                             23
and fathers’ time spent with children. On average, mothers spend 385 min-
utes per day with children whereas fathers spend 251 minutes with children;
mothers spend 229 minutes of alone time with children whereas fathers spend
87 minutes of alone time with children; and mothers spend 109 minutes in pri-
mary childcare whereas fathers spend 54 minutes in primary childcare. These
statistics also highlight the fact that primary childcare activities represent only
a small share of parental time with children.
    Columns 1 through 3 of Table 7 focus on a father’s time with children as
a function of his own employment status and his spouse’s employment status.
Each of these columns control for survey year fixed effects and day of week
fixed effects. Column 2 additionally controls for a rich set of demographic char-
acteristics for the individual and his spouse.25 Column 3 presents estimates
from our preferred specification which controls flexibly for the economic cir-
cumstances of the family a few months prior to the time-use survey.26 Columns
4 through 6 are structured similarly but instead focus on a mother’s time with
children as a function of her own employment status and her spouse’s employ-
ment status. Panels A, B, and C separately consider time spent with children,
time spent alone with children, and time spent in primary childcare activities.
    These estimates consistently indicate that employment is associated with
less time spent with children, for both fathers and mothers. Moreover, con-
sistent with models of family time use, the estimates also demonstrate that
having a spouse who is employed is associated with more time spent with chil-
dren. Notably, all prior studies that have considered the extent to which there
are “added worker effects” have focused on the labor supply of wives since
  25
      Specifically, this column controls for age fixed effects, spouse’s age fixed effects, educa-
tional attainment (less than high school, exactly high school, some college, or four-or-more
years of college) fixed effects, spouse’s educational attainment fixed effects, race (white,
black, or other) and ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic) fixed effects, spouse’s race and
ethnicity fixed effects, state fixed effects, age of youngest child fixed effects, and household
size fixed effects.
   26
      Specifically, this column controls for the triple interaction of the individual’s employment
status, spouse’s employment status, and prior year family income at the time of the CPS,
in addition to fixed effects for the industry, occupation, and hours usually worked for the
individual and the spouse (with additional categories created for these variables for those
who were not working at the time of the CPS).



                                               24
working-age men tend to be very strongly attached to the labor market and,
thus, may have little scope to change their allocation of time between market
work and home production. That said, while women’s time spent with children
is much more sensitive to their spouses’ employment status than men’s time
spent with children, our estimates suggest that men’s time spent with children
is affected by their wives’ employment status. In particular, the estimates in-
dicate that having a wife who is employed is associated with 29 percent more
time alone with children.27
    Overall, these results support the idea that the distribution of childcare
may be a key mechanism linking economic conditions and child abuse. They
suggest that father’s employment results in children spending less time with
fathers and more time with mothers, whereas a mother’s employment results
in children spending less time alone with fathers and more time with mothers.
Negative employment shocks would have the opposite effects. Although we
have tried to address potential confounders with a model that controls for a rich
set of covariates, we cannot rule out the possibility that other unobservables
may be contributing to the estimates. As such, we think of these estimates
as “proof of concept” that the impacts of male and female employment on
child maltreatment that we document can be explained by their impacts on
childcare.


6.2     Other Mechanisms
    Though our discussion thus far has emphasized parental time use and the
differential risks associated with children’s time spent with fathers and moth-
ers, there are many other mechanisms that may contribute to the estimated
effects of male and female labor market conditions on child maltreatment. In
  27
    To better match the variation used in our analysis of mass layoffs at the county level,
we have also estimated specifications focusing solely on variation induced by transitions
out of employment by omitting from the sample any families in which an individual or an
individual’s spouse transitions into employment between the Current Population Survey and
the American Time Use Survey. In addition, we have examined the relationship between
parental employment and time spent with children in “non-traditional families,” defined as
households with unmarried partners, step-children, and foster children. Results from these
analyses, shown in the Appendix, are similar to our main estimates.


                                            25
particular, many factors associated with layoffs may have direct impacts on
individuals’ propensity to abuse or neglect children, and it is possible that the
role of these factors differs by gender.
    Income is a known correlate of child maltreatment, and it is possible that
the size of the income shocks associated with changes in labor market condi-
tions for male and female are different. However, both male and female em-
ployment should be positively associated with family income, and both male
and female layoffs should cause family income to fall, so it is unlikely that this
mechanism could explain the opposite-signed effects of male and female labor
market indicators that we find.
    Mental health is another known correlate of child abuse and neglect that
could help to explain a link between economic conditions and maltreatment
rates. Mental health may be a particularly salient consideration when consid-
ering the effects of layoffs, which are a stressful negative employment shock.
In particular, if deteriorating mental health increases an individual’s propen-
sity to abuse or neglect their children, then effects of economic conditions on
mental health should generate corresponding effects on maltreatment rates.
However, while it is possible that male layoffs may have greater impacts on
mental health than female layoffs (perhaps due to larger shocks to family in-
come), there is no evidence to suggest that female layoffs reduce household
stress. In fact, the existing literature suggests that both male and female lay-
offs have significant effects on smoking (Black, Devereux, and Salvanes 2012),
suicide (Eliason and Storrie 2009a) and alcohol abuse (Eliason and Storrie
2009b).
    Family structure is another appealing mechanism to consider given evi-
dence that job loss increases the incidence of divorce (Charles and Stephens Jr
2004, Eliason 2012, Doiron and Mendolia 2011). In fact, there are several
possible reasons that an increased divorce rate could increase the rate of child
maltreatment. First, divorce may increase parents’ stress levels and lead to
increased mental health problems and substance abuse. Second, divorce may
increase children’s exposure to unrelated adults, and in particular unrelated
males, who are responsible for disproportionate shares of child abuse (Sedlak,


                                       26
Mettenburg, Basena, Peta, McPherson, Greene, et al. 2010). Third, divorce
increases a child’s likelihood of living with a single parent, and thus may in-
crease the likelihood of neglect for financial reasons or because of lack of quality
childcare options. That said, because both male and female layoffs increase
the incidence of divorce (Charles and Stephens Jr 2004, Eliason 2012), this
mechanism is also unlikely to explain the asymmetric effects we find.
    Motivated by Aizer (2010), we might think that the link between economic
conditions and abuse is driven by changes in household bargaining power. In
particular, Aizer (2010) finds that increases in female wages relative to male
wages reduces domestic violence against females. Since females are usually
the primary caregivers, we might expect child maltreatment, and abuse in
particular, to follow a similar pattern. That is, this view of the household
would lead us to expect that female employment (and male layoffs) should
increase women’s bargaining power and thus reduce child abuse while male
employment (and female layoffs) should decrease women’s bargaining power
and thus increase abuse. However, our findings are not consistent with these
predictions.
    Finally, we might think that economic conditions affect reported abuse
through impacts on the rate at which abuse is reported. Though we have
taken steps to address this potential source of bias empirically by controlling
for employment in the highest-reporting sectors, we can never be sure that it
has been fully addressed. That said, it is hard to imagine how male layoffs
would increase the rate at which abuse is reported and female layoffs would
reduce the rate at which abuse is reported, especially when we have controlled
for employment in the highest-reporting sectors.
    In summary, though some of these other mechanisms may play a role in the
link between economic conditions and child abuse, we think they are unlikely
to play as large a role as parental time use, which provides a straightforward
explanation for our main results when one considers the differential risks as-
sociated with children’s time spent with different childcare providers.




                                        27
7     Conclusion
    In this paper, we explore the relationship between various measures of
aggregate economic conditions and child maltreatment, with an emphasis on
gender. In so doing, we make several contributions to the literature on child
maltreatment. We offer a more convincing analysis of the effects of local eco-
nomic conditions by considering plausibly exogenous economic indicators and
we explore the importance of local economic shocks that disproportionately
affect on one gender. Our results suggest a potential explanation for why “the
estimated effect of local economic conditions” varies so much across prior stud-
ies: different types of local economic shocks have different effects on child mal-
treatment. On average, overall economic conditions appear to be only weakly
related to child maltreatment. However, downturns that disproportionately
affect men increase maltreatment whereas downturns that disproportionately
affect females reduce abuse (while positive shocks have the opposite effects).
An overarching lesson from this study is that we should not think about “in-
come” in the context of child maltreatment without considering its source.
Moreover, the pattern of estimated effects on maltreatment—and our sup-
porting analysis of time use—suggests that childcare provision may play a
pivotal role in determining how economic shocks affect child maltreatment.
    Our results have several implications for policy. In particular, they sug-
gest that child maltreatment may be reduced by targeting employment search
assistance, childcare subsidies, and mental-health services to displaced house-
hold heads. Though gender-specific policies may not be politically feasible,
this sort of gender-neutral policy would primarily affect males and thus could
reduce maltreatment. In addition, these results can be used by authorities to
plan for the aftermath of economic shocks. Finally, it is important to note that
reducing abuse can serve the broader goal of improving the health of children
from disadvantaged families and limiting the intergenerational transmission of
poverty and violence.
    We view this work as a step towards thinking about the link between
economic conditions and child abuse in a new way, acknowledging that much


                                       28
work remains to be done on the topic. In addition to bringing new data
sources to bear on the research question, it will be important for future work
to consider differential impacts on abuse committed by mothers and fathers
and to examine whether the effects are disproportionate for any particular
groups of children.




                                     29
References
Aizer, A. (2010): “The gender wage gap and domestic violence,” American
  Economic Review, 100(4), 1847.
Bartik, T. (1991): “Who benefits from state and local economic development
 policies?,” Books from Upjohn Press.
Berger, L. M. (2005): “Income, Family Characteristics, and Physical Vio-
 lence Toward Children,” Child Abuse & Neglect, 29(2), 107–133.
Berger, L. M., and K. S. Slack (2014): “Child Protection and Child
 Well-Being,” Handbook of Child Well-Being.
Berger, L. M., and J. Waldfogel (2011): “Economic Determinants and
 Consequences of Child Maltreatment,” OECD Social, Employment and Mi-
 gration Working Papers, (111).
Bitler, M., and M. Zavodny (2004): “Child maltreatment, abortion avail-
  ability, and economic conditions,” Review of Economics of the Household,
  2(2), 119–141.
Black, S. E., P. J. Devereux, and K. G. Salvanes (2012): “Losing
 Heart? The Effect of Job Displacement on Health,” NBER Working Paper.
Blanchard, O., and L. Katz (1992): “Regional evolutions,” Brookings
 papers on economic activity, pp. 1–75.
Blau, F., L. Kahn, and J. Waldfogel (2000): “Understanding Young
 Women’s Marriage Decisions: The Role of Labor and Marriage Market Con-
 ditions,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, pp. 624–647.
Charles, K., and M. Stephens Jr (2004): “Job Displacement, Disability,
 and Divorce,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2), 489–522.
Cherry, R., and C. Wang (2016): “The link between male employment
 and child maltreatment in the US, 2000–2012,” Children and Youth Services
 Review.
Colman, G., and D. Dave (2011): “Exercise, physical activity, and exertion
 over the business cycle,” NBER Working Paper.
Currie, J., and E. Tekin (2012): “Understanding the Cycle Childhood
 Maltreatment and Future Crime,” Journal of Human Resources, 47(2), 509–
 549.

                                   30
Currie, J., and C. Widom (2010): “Long-term consequences of child abuse
 and neglect on adult economic well-being,” Child Maltreatment, 15(2), 111–
 120.
Doiron, D., and S. Mendolia (2011): “The impact of job loss on family
 dissolution,” Journal of Population Economics, 25(1), 367–398.
Eliason, M. (2012): “Lost jobs, broken marriages,” Journal of Population
 Economics, pp. 1–33.
Eliason, M., and D. Storrie (2009a): “Does job loss shorten life?,” Jour-
 nal of Human Resources, 44(2), 277–302.
          (2009b): “Job loss is bad for your health–Swedish evidence on cause-
  specific hospitalization following involuntary job loss,” Social science &
  medicine, 68(8), 1396–1406.
Fletcher, J. (2009): “Childhood mistreatment and adolescent and young
  adult depression,” Social Science & Medicine, 68(5), 799–806.
Flood, S., M. King, S. Ruggles, and J. R. Warren (2015): Integrated
  Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 4.0. Uni-
  versity of Minnesota.
Fox, L., W.-J. Han, C. Ruhm, and J. Waldfogel (2012): “Time for
 Children: Trends in the Employment Patterns of Parents, 1967–2009,” De-
 mography, pp. 1–25.
Frioux, S., J. N. Wood, F. Oludolapo, X. Luan, R. Localio, and
 D. M. Rubin (2014): “Longitudinal association of county-level economic
 indicators and child maltreatment incidents,” Maternal and Child Health
 Journal, 18(9), 2202–2208.
Kalil, A., and K. Ziol-Guest (2008): “Parental employment circum-
 stances and childrens academic progress,” Social Science Research, 37(2),
 500–515.
Katz, L., and K. Murphy (1992): “Changes in relative wages, 1963-1987:
 Supply and demand factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1),
 35–78.
Killingsworth, M. R., and J. J. Heckman (1987): “Female labor supply:
 A survey,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, ed. by O. Ashenfelter, and
 R. Layard, vol. 1, chap. 2, pp. 103–204. Elsevier.

                                     31
Lundberg, S. (1985): “The Added Worker Effect,” Journal of Labor Eco-
 nomics, 3(1), 11–37.

Paxson, C., and J. Waldfogel (1999): “Parental resources and child abuse
  and neglect,” The American Economic Review, 89(2), 239–244.

       (2002): “Work, Welfare, and Child Maltreatment,” Journal of Labor
  Economics, 20(3), 435–474.

Qian, N. (2008): “Missing women and the price of tea in China: The ef-
 fect of sex-specific earnings on sex imbalance,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 123(3), 1251–1285.

Raissian, K. M. (2015): “Does unemployment affect child abuse rates? Ev-
 idence from New York State,” Child abuse & neglect, 48, 1–12.

Ruggles, S., K. Genadek, R. Goeken, J. Grover, and M. Sobek
 (2015): Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey:
 Version 6.0. University of Minnesota.

Ruhm, C. (2000): “Are recessions good for your health?,” The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 115(2), 617–650.

Ruhm, C., and W. Black (2002): “Does drinking really decrease in bad
 times?,” Journal of Health Economics, 21(4), 659–678.

Schaller, J. (2016): “Booms, Busts, and Fertility Testing the Becker Model
  Using Gender-Specific Labor Demand,” Journal of Human Resources, 51(1),
  1–29.

Schaller, J., and A. H. Stevens (2015): “Short-run effects of job loss on
  health conditions, health insurance, and health care utilization,” Journal of
  Health Economics, 43, 190–203.

Sedlak, A., J. Mettenburg, M. Basena, I. Peta, K. McPherson,
  A. Greene, et al. (2010): “Fourth national incidence study of child abuse
  and neglect (NIS-4),” US Department of Health and Human Services.

Seiglie, C. (2004): “Understanding child outcomes: An application to child
  abuse and neglect,” Review of Economics of the Household, 2(2), 143–160.

Stephens, M. (2002): “Worker Displacement and the Added Worker Effect,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 20(3), 504–537.


                                      32
Stith, S. M., T. Liu, L. C. Davies, E. L. Boykin, M. C. Alder, J. M.
  Harris, A. Som, M. McPherson, and J. Dees (2009): “Risk Factors in
  Child Maltreatment: A Meta-analytic Review of the Literature,” Aggression
  and Violent Behavior, 14(1), 13–29.

Thornberry, T., K. Henry, T. Ireland, and C. Smith (2010): “The
 causal impact of childhood-limited maltreatment and adolescent maltreat-
 ment on early adult adjustment,” Journal of Adolescent Health, 46(4), 359–
 365.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2001): Child Mal-
  treatment 1999. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.

              (2010):     Child Maltreatment 2008. Available         from:
  http://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/research-data-technology/statistics-
  research/child-maltreatment.

              (2015):     Child Maltreatment 2014. Available         from:
  http://www.acf.hhs.gov/cb/research-data-technology/statistics-
  research/child-maltreatment.

Waldfogel, J. (1998): “Child Welfare Research: How Adequate are the
 Data?,” Children and Youth Services Review, 22(9), 705–741.

Wood, J., S. Medina, C. Feudtner, X. Luan, R. Localio, E. Field-
 ston, and D. Rubin (2012): “Local Macroeconomic Trends and Hospital
 Admissions for Child Abuse, 2000–2009,” Pediatrics, 130(2), e358–e364.

Zielinski, D. (2009): “Child maltreatment and adult socioeconomic well-
  being,” Child Abuse & Neglect, 33(10), 666–678.




                                    33
                        Figure 1
     Abuse Rate and Neglect Rate, California 1998-2012




                       25        20
         Reports per 1000 Children
               10      5
                       015




                                      2000                2005                  2010
                                                          Year

                                             Abuse Rate          Neglect Rate


Notes: Abuse and neglect counts are from the California Child Welfare Indicators Project,
a collaboration between the University of California Berkeley and the California Depart-
ment of Social Services. Child population counts (ages 0-17) are from the National Cancer
Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program.




                                                    34
                       Figure 2
Unemployment Rate and Mass Layoff Rate, California 1998-2012




                2.5




                                                                                 12
                2




                                                                                                 10
                                                                                 Unemployment Rate
           Layoff Rate
                1.5




                                                                                        8
                1




                                                                                 6
                .5




                                                                                 4
                         1995   2000           2005         2010          2015
                                               Year

                                 Layoff Rate          Unemployment Rate


  Notes: Unemployment rates are produced directly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
  (BLS). Mass layoff rates are calculated by dividing the count of individuals involved in
  a mass layoff event, obtained from the BLS, by the adult population between the ages
  of 18 and 65, obtained from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology,
  and End Results (SEER) program.




                                               35
                                    Figure 3
      Variation in Gender-Specific Economic Indicators in the Pooled Data
                                                                                              Panel A: Mass Layoffs
                         10




                                                                                                                                            2
                         8




                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                        Residual Male Layoff Rate
        Mass Layoff Rate, Male
                       6




                                                                                                                                   0
             4




                                                                                                                       -1
                         2




                                                                                                                                            -2
                         0




                                           0             2            4              6             8        10                                                    -2     -1               0                 1           2
                                                                  Mass Layoff Rate, Female                                                                                    Residual Female Layoff Rate




                                                                                   Panel B: Predicted Employment
                         120




                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                       Residual Male Predicted Employment Rate
        Predicted Employment Rate, Male
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                      1
                       80




                                                                                                                                           0
            60




                                                                                                                              -1
                         40




                                                                                                                                            -2




                                               40            60              80              100            120                                                   -2     -1                0                1           2
                                                             Predicted Employment Rate, Female                                                                         Residual Female Predicted Employment Rate




                                                                         Panel C: Predicted Employment Growth
                         15




                                                                                                                       Residual Male Predicted Emp. Growth Rate
                                                                                                                                                             4
        Predicted Emp. Growth Rate, Male
                                  10




                                                                                                                                                   2
                        5




                                                                                                                                        0
               0




                                                                                                                             -2
                         -5




                                                                                                                                            -4




                                                    -5          0              5             10        15                                                         -4    -2              0               2           4
                                                             Predicted Emp. Growth Rate, Female                                                                        Residual Female Predicted Emp. Growth Rate


Notes: This figure displays scatterplots of gender-specific economic indicators for counties in CA 1998-2012. Con-
struction of the variables is described in section 3.2. The figures on the left display raw data (weighted by population)
while the figures on the right display residuals after controlling for county and year fixed effects, county-specific
linear time trends, county demographic composition, and employment in high-reporting sectors. N=817 in Panel A
and N=510 in Panels B and C.




                                                                                                                  36
                                  Table 1
Sample Means for Child Maltreatment, Economic Conditions, and Demographics
                               in California


                                                        Observations                    Mean
Maltreatment Reports per 1000 Children                      817                         52.28
Abuse Reports per 1000 Children                             817                         19.89
Neglect Reports per 1000 Children                           817                         21.46
Unemployment Rate                                           817                          7.54
Mass Layoff Rate                                            817                          1.20
Predicted Employment Rate                                   510                         73.54
Predicted Employment Growth Rate                            510                          0.90
Male Mass Layoff Rate                                       817                          1.37
Female Mass Layoff Rate                                     817                          1.02
Male Predicted Employment Rate                              510                         79.42
Female Predicted Employment Rate                            510                         67.63
Male Predicted Employment Growth Rate                       510                          0.75
Female Predicted Employment Growth Rate                     510                          1.10
Fraction Black                                              817                          0.07
Fraction Hispanic                                           817                          0.36
Fraction Other Race/Ethnicity                               817                          0.13
Fraction Age 0-5                                            817                          0.09
Fraction Age 6-12                                           817                          0.10
Fraction Age 13-17                                          817                          0.08
Fraction Age 18-29                                          817                          0.18
Fraction Age 30-39                                          817                          0.15
Fraction Age 40-49                                          817                          0.15
Fraction Age 50-59                                          817                          0.12
School Employment per 1000 Adults                           570                          3.79
Hospital Employment per 1000 Adults                         413                         19.96
Social Services Employment per 1000 Adults                  702                          5.74
Police Employment per 1000 Adults                           817                          4.72
Notes: Abuse and neglect counts are from the California Child Welfare Indicators Project, a collaboration
between the University of California Berkeley and the California Department of Social Services. Population
counts and demographic controls are from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results (SEER) program. Unemployment rates and mass layoff counts are obtained from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (BLS). Construction of predicted employment variables is described in Section 3.2 (these
variables are only available for the 34 largest counties due to restrictions on the public use census data).
Employment in schools, hospitals, and social services is from the US Census Bureau’s County Business
Patterns database. Police employment is from the Uniform Crime Report’s Law Enforcement Officers Killed
and Assaulted (LEOKA) database.




                                                  37
                                                          Table 2
                              Economic Conditions and Child Maltreatment Reports in California

                                                         Panel A: Unemployment Rate
                                                Maltreatment Reports                Abuse Reports                      Neglect Reports
     Unemployment Rate                        -0.024     -0.023    -0.021     -0.001    0.004      0.002     -0.024     -0.027         -0.022
                                             (0.010)    (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.016)   (0.013)    (0.013)   (0.016)    (0.017)        (0.022)

     County Controls                            No        Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes       No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                       No        No        Yes        No        No         Yes       No        No               Yes


                                                           Panel B: Mass Layoff Rate
                                                Maltreatment Reports                Abuse Reports                      Neglect Reports
     Mass Layoff Rate                         0.055      0.021     0.018      0.089     0.049      0.012     0.037      0.027          0.058
                                             (0.020)    (0.012)   (0.013)    (0.030)   (0.017)    (0.014)   (0.036)    (0.026)        (0.023)

     County Controls                            No        Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes       No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                       No        No        Yes        No        No         Yes       No        No               Yes




38
                                                     Panel C: Predicted Employment Rate
                                                Maltreatment Reports                Abuse Reports                      Neglect Reports
     Predicted Employment Rate                0.014      0.009     -0.004     0.018     0.001      -0.006    0.001      -0.015         -0.012
                                             (0.004)    (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.010)   (0.006)    (0.010)        (0.016)

     County Controls                            No        Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes       No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                       No        No        Yes        No        No         Yes       No        No               Yes


                                                Panel D: Predicted Employment Growth Rate
                                                Maltreatment Reports                Abuse Reports                      Neglect Reports
     Predicted Employment Growth Rate         0.001      -0.000    -0.004     0.000     -0.001     -0.005    -0.000     0.001          -0.004
                                             (0.006)    (0.005)   (0.004)    (0.008)   (0.007)    (0.005)   (0.008)    (0.008)        (0.005)

     County Controls                            No        Yes       Yes        No        Yes        Yes       No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                       No        No        Yes        No        No         Yes       No        No               Yes

     Notes: N=817 in Panels A and B and N=510 in Panels C and D. Robust standard errors which allow for clustering at the county level are
     shown in parentheses. Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. County controls include fraction
     black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction other race/ethnicity (nonwhite), and the fractions of the population in each of eight age groups: 0-5,
     6-12, 13-17, 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59. For data sources, see Table 1 notes.
                                                            Table 3
                         Male and Female Economic Conditions and Child Maltreatment Reports in California

                                                                  Panel A: Mass Layoff Rates
                                                       Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                        Neglect Reports
     Male Mass Layoff Rate                           0.037       0.033     0.060     0.082      0.097     0.042      0.073     0.065           0.091
                                                    (0.021)     (0.020)   (0.012)   (0.034)    (0.031)   (0.023)    (0.032)   (0.020)         (0.027)

     Female Mass Layoff Rate                         0.012       -0.022    -0.065    -0.015     -0.083    -0.046     -0.066    -0.063          -0.061
                                                    (0.035)     (0.030)   (0.015)   (0.058)    (0.054)   (0.028)    (0.046)   (0.036)         (0.037)

     County Controls                                  No         Yes       Yes       No          Yes         Yes     No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                             No         No        Yes       No          No          Yes     No        No               Yes
     P-value (test male est. = female est.)          0.630      0.263     0.000     0.270       0.031       0.069   0.052     0.012            0.012


                                                             Panel B: Predicted Employment Rates
                                                       Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                        Neglect Reports
     Male Predicted Employment Rate                  -0.017      -0.014    -0.032    -0.019     -0.031    -0.045     -0.025    -0.030          -0.043
                                                    (0.011)     (0.010)   (0.008)   (0.023)    (0.018)   (0.013)    (0.018)   (0.022)         (0.025)

     Female Predicted Employment Rate                0.038       0.028     0.044     0.045      0.039     0.060      0.033     0.022           0.054




39
                                                    (0.016)     (0.013)   (0.014)   (0.031)    (0.026)   (0.019)    (0.023)   (0.026)         (0.036)

     County Controls                                  No         Yes       Yes       No          Yes         Yes     No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                             No         No        Yes       No          No          Yes     No        No               Yes
     P-value (test male est. = female est.)          0.045      0.051     0.000     0.232       0.110       0.000   0.153     0.272            0.098


                                                      Panel C: Predicted Employment Growth Rates
                                                       Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                        Neglect Reports
     Male Predicted Employment Growth Rate           -0.004      -0.004    -0.009    0.008      0.001     -0.003     -0.011    -0.009          -0.007
                                                    (0.005)     (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.011)    (0.007)   (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.004)         (0.004)

     Female Predicted Employment Growth Rate         0.010       0.010     0.013     -0.017     -0.004    -0.001     0.030     0.027           0.011
                                                    (0.006)     (0.006)   (0.005)   (0.016)    (0.011)   (0.008)    (0.009)   (0.009)         (0.007)

     County Controls                                  No         Yes       Yes       No          Yes         Yes     No        Yes              Yes
     County Linear Trends                             No         No        Yes       No          No          Yes     No        No               Yes
     P-value (test male est. = female est.)          0.178      0.101     0.002     0.312       0.727       0.811   0.001     0.002            0.090

     Notes: N=817 in Panel A and N=510 in Panels B and C. Robust standard errors which allow for clustering at the county level are shown in parentheses.
     Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. County controls include fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction
     other race/ethnicity (nonwhite), and the fractions of the population in each of eight age groups: 0-5, 6-12, 13-17, 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59. For data
     sources, see Table 1 notes.
                                                          Table 4
                  Male and Female Economic Conditions and Child Maltreatment Reports, Combined Regressions

                                             Panel A: Mass Layoff Rates and Predicted Employment Rates
                                                            Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                      Neglect Reports
     Male Predicted Employment Rate                       -0.014    -0.014     -0.036    -0.011      -0.027    -0.048     -0.021    -0.028        -0.051
                                                         (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.009)   (0.020)     (0.018)   (0.014)    (0.017)   (0.022)       (0.026)

     Female Predicted Employment Rate                     0.036     0.030      0.051     0.037       0.038     0.066      0.029     0.022         0.069
                                                         (0.014)   (0.013)    (0.014)   (0.027)     (0.026)   (0.021)    (0.022)   (0.026)       (0.037)

     Male Mass Layoff Rate                                0.049     0.036      0.079     0.110       0.092     0.052      0.068     0.059         0.113
                                                         (0.021)   (0.022)    (0.011)   (0.037)     (0.037)   (0.029)    (0.031)   (0.023)       (0.029)

     Female Mass Layoff Rate                              0.007     -0.017     -0.080    -0.044      -0.075    -0.050     -0.053    -0.048        -0.072
                                                         (0.034)   (0.031)    (0.015)   (0.063)     (0.062)   (0.036)    (0.049)   (0.037)       (0.043)

     County Controls                                       No        Yes       Yes        No          Yes         Yes     No        Yes            Yes
     County Linear Trends                                  No        No        Yes        No          No          Yes     No        No             Yes
     P-value (test male MLR est. = female MLR est.)       0.432     0.299     0.000      0.115       0.083       0.109   0.103     0.054          0.008
     P-value (test male PER est. = female PER est.)       0.035     0.055     0.000      0.307       0.138       0.001   0.199     0.289          0.047




40
                                  Panel B: Predicted Employment Growth Rates and Predicted Employment Rates
                                                            Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                      Neglect Reports
     Male Predicted Employment Rate                       -0.017    -0.013     -0.030    -0.022      -0.034    -0.051     -0.024    -0.030        -0.048
                                                         (0.012)   (0.012)    (0.011)   (0.024)     (0.020)   (0.018)    (0.019)   (0.025)       (0.031)

     Female Predicted Employment Rate                     0.037     0.027      0.040     0.048       0.043     0.067      0.031     0.020         0.057
                                                         (0.017)   (0.014)    (0.014)   (0.033)     (0.027)   (0.021)    (0.023)   (0.029)       (0.041)

     Male Predicted Employment Growth Rate                -0.002    -0.002     -0.003    0.010       0.008     0.007      -0.006    -0.004        0.002
                                                         (0.005)   (0.005)    (0.004)   (0.011)     (0.008)   (0.008)    (0.004)   (0.007)       (0.007)

     Female Predicted Employment Growth Rate              0.007     0.005      0.008     -0.021      -0.012    -0.010     0.025     0.025         0.005
                                                         (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.005)   (0.017)     (0.014)   (0.009)    (0.008)   (0.009)       (0.010)

     County Controls                                       No        Yes       Yes        No         Yes         Yes       No       Yes               Yes
     County Linear Trends                                  No        No        Yes        No         No          Yes       No       No                Yes
     P-value (test male MLR est. = female MLR est.)
     P-value (test male PER est. = female PER est.)       0.065     0.118     0.002      0.226       0.097       0.001   0.186     0.349          0.138

     Notes: N=817 in Panel A and N=510 in Panel B. Robust standard errors which allow for clustering at the county level are shown in parentheses.
     Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. County controls include fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction
     other race/ethnicity (nonwhite), and the fractions of the population in each of eight age groups: 0-5, 6-12, 13-17, 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59. For data
     sources, see Table 1 notes.
                                                              Table 5
                                  Male and Female Economic Conditions and Substantiated Maltreatment

                                             Panel A: Mass Layoff Rates and Predicted Employment Rates
                                                              Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                     Neglect Reports
     Male Predicted Employment Rate                          -0.057    -0.052    -0.052     -0.089     -0.068    -0.077     -0.056    -0.080       -0.088
                                                            (0.017)   (0.014)   (0.012)    (0.038)    (0.022)   (0.024)    (0.021)   (0.024)      (0.020)

     Female Predicted Employment Rate                        0.095     0.070     0.103      0.162      0.079     0.137      0.086     0.083        0.125
                                                            (0.025)   (0.016)   (0.018)    (0.054)    (0.033)   (0.035)    (0.029)   (0.029)      (0.035)

     Male Mass Layoff Rate                                   0.102     0.063     0.063      0.165      0.116     0.086      0.117     0.122        0.075
                                                            (0.024)   (0.033)   (0.026)    (0.060)    (0.066)   (0.055)    (0.038)   (0.034)      (0.034)

     Female Mass Layoff Rate                                 0.015     -0.020    -0.048     -0.058     -0.141    -0.103     0.025     -0.050       0.002
                                                            (0.052)   (0.055)   (0.036)    (0.118)    (0.096)   (0.057)    (0.065)   (0.050)      (0.049)

     County Controls                                          No        Yes       Yes       No          Yes         Yes     No        Yes           Yes
     County Linear Trends                                     No        No        Yes       No          No          Yes     No        No            Yes
     P-value (test male MLR est. = female MLR est.)          0.229     0.330     0.047     0.205       0.101       0.082   0.325     0.030         0.360
     P-value (test male PER est. = female PER est.)          0.000     0.000     0.000     0.006       0.006       0.000   0.003     0.002         0.000




41
                                  Panel B: Predicted Employment Growth Rates and Predicted Employment Rates
                                                              Maltreatment Reports                 Abuse Reports                     Neglect Reports
     Male Predicted Employment Rate                          -0.061    -0.048    -0.033     -0.107     -0.081    -0.070     -0.055    -0.074       -0.070
                                                            (0.021)   (0.018)   (0.016)    (0.042)    (0.026)   (0.034)    (0.025)   (0.029)      (0.028)

     Female Predicted Employment Rate                        0.096     0.062     0.081      0.180      0.092     0.138      0.081     0.068        0.096
                                                            (0.034)   (0.020)   (0.019)    (0.061)    (0.035)   (0.038)    (0.038)   (0.033)      (0.044)

     Male Predicted Employment Growth Rate                   -0.001    -0.005    -0.009     0.024      0.011     0.006      -0.010    -0.007       -0.006
                                                            (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.006)    (0.023)    (0.018)   (0.013)    (0.005)   (0.007)      (0.007)

     Female Predicted Employment Growth Rate                 0.000     0.003     0.004      -0.058     -0.031    -0.029     0.020     0.019        0.008
                                                            (0.017)   (0.014)   (0.009)    (0.039)    (0.031)   (0.015)    (0.016)   (0.015)      (0.016)

     County Controls                                          No        Yes       Yes       No          Yes         Yes     No        Yes           Yes
     County Linear Trends                                     No        No        Yes       No          No          Yes     No        No            Yes
     P-value (test male PEGR est. = female PEGR est.)        0.969     0.703     0.309     0.171       0.371       0.178   0.136     0.155         0.537
     P-value (test male PER est. = female PER est.)          0.004     0.003     0.000     0.005       0.004       0.002   0.026     0.019         0.017

     Notes: N=817 in Panel A and N=510 in Panel B. Robust standard errors which allow for clustering at the county level are shown in parentheses.
     Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. County controls include fraction black, fraction Hispanic, and fraction
     other race/ethnicity (nonwhite), and the fractions of the population in each of eight age groups: 0-5, 6-12, 13-17, 18-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59. For data
     sources, see Table 1 notes.
                                       Table 6
                   Sample Means from the American Time Use Survey


                                          Fathers’ Time Use Sample    Mothers’ Time Use Sample
      Minutes With Children                        251.03                       385.33
      Minutes Alone With Children                   87.12                       229.44
      Minutes Primary Childcare                     54.13                       109.34
      Father is Employed                             0.90                         0.90
      Father Employed in CPS Survey                  0.90                         0.90
      Mother is Employed                             0.64                         0.62
      Mother Employed in CPS Survey                  0.65                         0.60
      Father’s Age                                  39.60                        39.67
      Mother’s Age                                  37.52                        37.30
      Father is White                                0.85                         0.84
      Father is Black                                0.08                         0.06
      Father is Other Race                           0.07                        0.07
      Father is Hispanic                             0.19                         0.19
      Mother is White                                0.84                         0.87
      Mother is Black                                0.07                         0.06
      Mother is Other Race                           0.07                         0.07
      Mother is Hispanic                             0.19                         0.20
      Father’s Education < HS                        0.13                         0.13
      Father’s Education = HS                        0.29                         0.27
      Father Has Some College                        0.24                         0.28
      Father Has 4+ Years College                    0.34                         0.35
      Mother’s Education < HS                        0.11                         0.12
      Mother’s Education = HS                        0.24                         0.26
      Mother Has Some College                        0.32                         0.26
      Mother Has 4+ Years College                    0.37                         0.36
      Age of Youngest Child                          6.52                         6.43
      Household Size                                 4.27                         4.29
      Observations                                 12985                        15456


Notes: Data are from the the American Time Use Survey, 2003-2011. The sample is limited to individuals
living with a spouse or partner in a household with a child under the age of 18. Estimates are weighted
using ATUS sampling weights.




                                                 42
                                     Table 7
        Parental Employment Status And Parents’ Time Spent With Children
                   Evidence from the American Time Use Survey


                                               Father’s Time With Children      Mother’s Time With Children

                                                 (1)          (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

      Panel A: Minutes With Children Around

      Father is Employed                       -62.280   -100.274    -96.636    76.144     37.545      24.824
                                               (9.896)    (9.195)   (12.008)    (9.211)    (8.018)    (10.055)

      Mother is Employed                        -8.995    1.900       -0.796   -173.503   -143.206    -117.476
                                               (4.822)   (4.629)     (7.382)    (5.148)    (4.660)     (7.845)

      Observations                             12985      12985      12980      15456       15456      15451
      Demographic Controls                      no         yes        yes        no          yes        yes
      Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no         no         yes        no          no         yes

      Panel B: Minutes Alone With Children

      Father is Employed                       -47.824   -62.056     -52.953    85.836     59.537     50.452
                                               (6.981)   (6.889)     (8.815)    (6.920)    (6.511)    (8.067)

      Mother is Employed                       30.966    33.703      25.626    -131.865   -115.215    -95.007
                                               (3.285)   (3.012)     (4.390)    (4.503)    (4.133)    (6.954)

      Observations                             12985      12985      12980      15456       15456      15451
      Demographic Controls                      no         yes        yes        no          yes        yes
      Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no         no         yes        no          no         yes

      Panel D: Minutes Doing Primary Childcare

      Father is Employed                       -21.354   -36.167     -25.253    30.365      9.946      7.726
                                               (4.015)   (3.785)     (5.331)    (3.824)    (3.395)    (4.162)

      Mother is Employed                        3.248     8.053       4.997     -62.109    -52.386    -38.802
                                               (2.306)   (1.966)     (3.715)    (2.549)    (2.334)    (4.103)

      Observations                             12985      12985      12980      15456       15456      15451
      Demographic Controls                      no         yes        yes        no          yes        yes
      Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no         no         yes        no          no         yes



Notes: Data are from the the American Time Use Survey, 2003-2011. The sample is limited to individuals
living with a spouse or partner in a household with a child under the age of 18. All columns control for
survey year fixed effects and day of week fixed effects. The estimates in columns 2 and 5 additionally control
for age fixed effects, spouse’s age fixed effects, educational attainment (less than high school, exactly high
school, some college, or four-or-more years of college) fixed effects, spouse’s educational attainment fixed
effects, race (white, black, or other) and ethnicity (Hispanic or non-Hispanic) fixed effects, spouse’s race and
ethnicity fixed effects, state fixed effects, age of youngest child fixed effects, and household size fixed effects.
Columns 3 and 6 use employment and income information from the CPS, taken two to five months prior
to the time use survey. In particular, it incorporates controls for the triple interaction of the individual’s
employment status, spouse’s employment status, and prior year family income at the time of the CPS, in
addition to fixed effects for the industry, occupation and hours usually worked for the individual and the
spouse (with additional categories created for these variables for those who were not working at the time
of the CPS). Estimates are weighted using ATUS sampling weights. Heteroskedastic-robust standard errors
are shown in parentheses.
Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                         43
                                    Table A1
       Parental Employment Status And Parents’ Time Spent With Children
                  Evidence from the American Time Use Survey
          Only Considering Employment to Non-employment Transitions


                                             Father’s Time With Children      Mother’s Time With Children

                                              (1)           (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

    Panel A: Minutes With Children

    Father is Employed                       -61.176   -101.798   -111.834   77.782     38.692      14.872
                                            (10.140)    (9.413)   (17.127)   (9.430)    (8.134)    (13.610)

    Mother is Employed                      -10.793      0.445     -4.459    -178.001   -145.871   -129.643
                                            (4.931)     (4.768)   (10.243)    (5.297)    (4.772)   (11.607)

    Observations                             12060      12060      12058      13853      13853      13850
    Demographic Controls                      no         yes        yes        no         yes        yes
    Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no         no         yes        no         no         yes

    Panel B: Minutes Alone With Children

    Father is Employed                      -47.879     -63.441    -55.229   85.717     58.619      43.191
                                            (7.134)     (7.002)   (12.535)   (7.177)    (6.745)    (10.984)

    Mother is Employed                      31.065      33.351    26.628     -134.794   -115.862   -106.181
                                            (3.359)     (3.139)   (5.647)     (4.646)    (4.238)   (11.073)

    Observations                             12060      12060      12058      13853      13853      13850
    Demographic Controls                      no         yes        yes        no         yes        yes
    Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no         no         yes        no         no         yes

    Panel C: Minutes Doing Primary Childcare

    Father is Employed                      -22.910     -38.795   -27.890    29.378      8.469      2.816
                                            (4.128)     (3.838)   (6.932)    (3.940)    (3.468)    (5.386)

    Mother is Employed                       3.356       8.333     6.754     -64.401    -54.268    -38.578
                                            (2.299)     (2.001)   (5.408)    (2.618)    (2.374)    (6.295)

    Observations                             12060      12060      12058      13853      13853      13850
    Demographic Controls                      no         yes        yes        no         yes        yes
    Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no         no         yes        no         no         yes



Notes: The sample omits families in which a spouse changes from being unemployed to being employed
between the CPS and ATUS surveys. For additional notes, see Table 7.
Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                       44
                                    Table A2
       Parental Employment Status And Parents’ Time Spent With Children
                  Evidence from the American Time Use Survey
                   Only Considering Non-traditional Couples


                                             Father’s Time With Children      Mother’s Time With Children

                                              (1)           (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)

    Panel A: Minutes With Children

    Father is Employed                       -87.065   -110.994   -195.279    58.656     59.054     53.455
                                            (31.367)   (29.446)   (50.098)   (24.009)   (22.631)   (45.993)

    Mother is Employed                       -40.648    -12.338    -16.123   -190.278   -137.395   -106.308
                                            (24.072)   (20.577)   (43.455)   (20.126)   (20.064)   (46.180)

    Observations                              872           872     872        955        955        955
    Demographic Controls                      no            yes     yes        no         yes        yes
    Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no            no      yes        no         no         yes

    Panel B: Minutes Alone With Children

    Father is Employed                       -58.144    -81.444   -101.749    53.853     59.920     60.853
                                            (22.957)   (21.619)   (42.218)   (21.232)   (19.765)   (39.700)

    Mother is Employed                       23.075     49.094     24.428    -142.758    -98.079    -68.132
                                            (21.052)   (14.627)   (33.917)   (18.163)   (16.250)   (35.178)

    Observations                              872           872     872        955        955        955
    Demographic Controls                      no            yes     yes        no         yes        yes
    Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no            no      yes        no         no         yes

    Panel C: Minutes Doing Primary Childcare

    Father is Employed                       -20.335    -49.293    -69.571    11.687      3.868      8.127
                                            (13.041)   (13.057)   (24.012)   (11.775)   (10.547)   (19.198)

    Mother is Employed                       -11.123     6.948     44.820    -74.040    -47.143     -50.641
                                            (13.360)    (9.461)   (16.319)   (9.168)    (9.898)    (22.120)

    Observations                              872           872     872        955        955        955
    Demographic Controls                      no            yes     yes        no         yes        yes
    Prior-Economic-Circumstances Controls     no            no      yes        no         no         yes



Notes: The sample is limited to families in which the respondent lives with an unmarried partner and
household containing stepchildren or foster children. The sample is restricted to 2007-2011 when this
information is available. For additional notes, see Table 7.
Significance at 1%, 5%, 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.




                                                       45
