                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               KEEPING IT FRESH:
                   STRATEGIC PRODUCT REDESIGNS AND WELFARE

                                       Bruce A. Blonigen
                                      Christopher R. Knittel
                                        Anson Soderbery

                                       Working Paper 18997
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18997


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Bruce A. Blonigen, Christopher R. Knittel, and Anson Soderbery. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Keeping it Fresh: Strategic Product Redesigns and Welfare
Bruce A. Blonigen, Christopher R. Knittel, and Anson Soderbery
NBER Working Paper No. 18997
April 2013
JEL No. L11,L13,L62

                                              ABSTRACT

Product redesigns happen across virtually all types of products. While there is substantial evidence
that new varieties of goods increase welfare, there is little evidence on the effect of product redesigns.
We develop a model of redesign and exit decisions in a dynamic oligopoly model (a la Bajari et al
(2007)) and use it to analyse redesign activity in the U.S. automobile market. We find that automobile
model designs become obsolete quickly in this market, leading to fairly frequent redesigns of models
despite an estimated average redesign cost around $1 billion. Our model and estimates show that firm
redesign decisions depend crucially on competition for market share through introductions of new
redesigns, as well as internal incentives for planned obsolescence of the existing model design. Based
on our structural model estimates and the simulated counterfactuals, we find that redesigns lead to
large increases in welfare, as well as substantial profit for firms, due to the strong preferences consumers
display for new model designs. We also show that welfare would be improved if redesign competition
were reduced, allowing redesign activity to be more responsive to the planned obsolescence channel.
The net effect of these changes would reduce total redesigns by roughly 10%, increasing total welfare
by roughly 3%. While our model and welfare simulations are focused on the new automobile market,
we provide some evidence that the gains from redesigns in the new automobile market are an order
of magnitude larger than the losses in the secondhand automobile market.


Bruce A. Blonigen                                    Anson Soderbery
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
1285 University of Oregon                            Purdue University
Eugene, OR 97403-1285                                Krannert Building
and NBER                                             403 W. State St,
bruceb@uoregon.edu                                   West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-2056
                                                     asoderbe@purdue.edu
Christopher R. Knittel
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-513
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
knittel@mit.edu
1.     Introduction

Product redesigns happen across virtually all types of products from breakfast cereals to
tennis shoes to automobiles, and likely occur with much greater frequency than new variety
introductions. For example, we find in the data we use in this paper that redesigns of existing
automobile models (e.g., a Honda Civic) occur with twice the frequency of the introduction
of entirely new models. Surprisingly, there has been little economic analysis of the decision
by producers to redesign existing products and the effects these redesigns have on consumer
decisions and overall welfare.
     There are a number of factors that may cause producers to redesign existing products.
One may be to incorporate new functional technology, upgrading the quality of an existing
variety while maintaining brand recognition with consumers. For example, a company may
develop a revised formula for their laundry detergent to better clean clothes and introduce
a “new and improved” version of their product. A second reason may be to simply update
the product’s appearance for consumers who value design changes. This would imply that
consumers not only value having many variety choices at a given point in time, but also
respond positively to dynamic changes in existing varieties, even if function and quality
are essentially unchanged. For example, the fashion industry introduces frequent seasonal
changes in colors and styling of clothes by brand name designers that have little to do with
quality or functionality changes.
     Importantly, these redesign decisions have both internal and external strategic implica-
tions in the marketplace. Externally, redesign timing of products is a dimension in which
a firm may compete with other firms in the marketplace. This is particularly true if con-
sumers strongly value the “new” features that come with redesign, such that newly redesigned
products steal market share at the expense of other competitors.
     Independent of these external considerations, a main internal consideration for a firm
is that a redesigned model will be replacing the firm’s own existing variety. This is most
important in the case of durable goods, as secondhand sales may significantly erode demand
for current production of a product. This creates an incentive for the firm to introduce a


                                              1
redesigned model of the product to limit the competition of the secondhand markets with
its current product. This phenomenon has been termed “planned obsolescence.”
   In this paper, we use a model of strategic redesign decisions by U.S. automobile manufac-
turers in a dynamic oligopolistic setting to estimate the impact of these external and internal
strategic considerations on the redesign decisions and its resulting impacts on the market-
place. We employ a model of dynamic oligopoly that follows Bajari et al. (2007), in order
to model redesign and exit decisions. The estimation procedure allows us to estimate both
the structural parameters determining current period demand and profits for each product,
but also the dynamic parameters (costs) determining exit and redesign decisions. Because
the specification is tied to a structural model, we can also simulate counterfactual scenarios
and tie our results back to implications for welfare.
   We find that redesigns are a costly activity in the automobile market, averaging about $1
billion in costs. Yet, redesigns are fairly frequent because consumers value redesigns strongly.
Model designs become obsolete quickly as demand falls with a model’s age, leading to fairly
frequent redesigns by automobile firms and almost a 20% gain in a model’s market share
the year of a new redesign. The incentives to develop new designs to recapture declining
market share is what we call the “obsolescence effect,” and comes through strongly in our
estimates. We also find evidence that model redesign decisions are influenced by redesigns of
competing models, which we term the “competitive redesign effect”. Based on our structural
model estimates, we then simulate an entire set of counterfactuals that consider different
combinations of reduced or increased strength of these two forces on redesign activity. We
show that welfare would be improved if redesign competition were reduced, allowing redesign
activity to be more responsive to the planned obsolescence channel. The net effect of these
changes would reduce total redesigns by roughly 10%, increasing total welfare by roughly
3%. While our model and welfare simulations are focused on the new automobile market,
we provide some evidence that the gains from redesigns in the new automobile market are
an order of magnitude larger than the losses in the secondhand automobile market.
   The high valuation that consumers put on newly-designed models drives fairly frequent



                                               2
redesigns and gives automobile manufacturers fairly substantial market power, with a 4-to-1
ratio of firm profits to consumer surplus. We also note that we find quite heterogeneous
effects across classes of automobiles (e.g., trucks versus cars). While our model and welfare
simulations are focused on the new automobile market, we provide some evidence that the
gains from redesigns in the new automobile market are an order of magnitude larger than
the losses in the secondhand automobile market.
    Our analysis relates in important ways to some prior literature. First, there has been
a significant number of theoretical analyses of planned obsolescence. Much of the earlier
literature concerns the monopolist’s choice on durability and pricing of products, assuming
that new and used goods are perfect substitutes.1 This led to some surprising results, such
as prices being driven to marginal cost. Recent papers have relaxed many assumptions
(such as perfect substitutability between old and used goods), but can then derive a wide
variety of predictions. For example, depending on assumptions, a durable goods producer
may redesign a product more frequently than is socially optimal (Waldman (1993, 1996)) or
less than is socially optimal (Fishman and Rob (2000)). Likewise, studies come to different
conclusions on whether these forces tend to decrease or increase firm profits, or decrease or
increase consumer welfare. Surprisingly, these ambiguous conclusions obtain even though
these studies invariably consider the case of a monopolist producer.2 Thus, our estimates
provide some of the very first empirical evidence for many of these theoretically ambiguous
effects, including the frequency of redesigns, firm profitability and overall welfare.
    There has been a smaller set of empirical studies that have examined the issue of planned
obsolescence or related issues connected with secondhand markets for durable goods. Unlike
our analysis, however, these studies have been primarily focused on modeling and estimating
consumer behavior across the new and secondhand markets, taking introductions of new
and redesigned varieties as given. For example, Purohit (1992) estimates how much new
automobile model introductions affects prices of secondhand models, while Porter and Sat-
   1
     Most point to Swan (1970) and Coase (1972) as the initial papers in this literature. Waldman (2003) and
Grout and Park (2005) provide surveys of the literature from fields of economics and marketing, respectively.
   2
     An exception is Grout and Park (2005).



                                                     3
tler (1999) show that the greater the substitutability between the used and new automobile
model, the more transactions one sees in the secondhand market, consistent with a view that
the secondhand market facilitates vertical product differentiation for consumers. Esteban
and Shum (2007) and Chen et al. (2008) build a structural model of a secondhand market
of consumers and analyze how much this affects firm profitability by new automobile manu-
facturers. Finally, Chevalier and Goolsbee (2009) show that consumers are forward-looking
and become much more price-elastic in their purchases of a textbook when a new edition in
the coming period is likely. We view these studies as more complementary than similar, as
our focus is on modeling strategic redesign decision by firms. This allows us to focus directly
on the internal and external factors that affect this redesign decision and its ultimate effect
on profits and welfare.
   The papers closest in spirit to our paper is perhaps Iizuka (2007) and Kim (2013). Iizuka
(2007) estimates the factors that affect when a new edition of a textbook is introduced. The
hazard-model analysis finds significant evidence for a planned obsolescence effect, as greater
used textbook sales and age of the textbook make a new edition more likely. However,
there is no evidence for competitive effects from rival textbooks on the timing of a new
textbook. The reduced-form approach by Iizuka (2007) does not allow one to examine
how new model introductions affect the dynamic nature of redesign competition or the
implications for firm profits and consumer welfare, as does our approach. Kim (2013) also
combines a discrete choice model with a two-step approach similar to Bajari et al. (2007)
to analyze the interaction of innovation, production and the used market in the jumbo jet
market. She uses the parameter estimates to analyze the welfare effects of governmental
subsidies; her focus is on new products. Our paper differs from these by examining more
concretely the relative effects of redesign competition versus planned obsolescence on the
timing of redesigned models.
   On a final note, our analysis also relates to prior research demonstrating that consumers
realize considerable welfare gains from the development of new products (Petrin (2002))
and the introduction of new varieties within product class (Feenstra (1994) and Broda and



                                              4
Weinstein (2006)). While these studies demonstrate the effect of new varieties on welfare,
we show that redesigns of existing varieties can likewise be an important source of changes
in overall welfare.
     Our paper proceeds in the following fashion. In the next section we provide some basic
descriptive information on the patterns of redesign of automobile models we find in our
data. In sections 3 and 4, we construct a dynamic model of redesign and competition
in the automobile market, and estimate the model’s parameters. Sections 5 and 6 present
simulation results from our dynamic model, focusing on the effects of redesign on firm profits
and consumer welfare. We also show how various motives for redesign (obsolescence versus
redesign competition) affect redesign activity and welfare. Section 7 concludes.


2.       Redesigns in the Automobile Industry: A First Look

Before developing a more formal empirical model to examine the motivations and effects
of redesigns, we next provide basic information on how automobile manufacturers redesign
vehicles, as well as key features of the empirical patterns we see in the data we have on
redesign activity.
     Redesigns in the automobile industry allow manufacturers to not only incorporate new
technology into the engineering of their vehicle, but also the opportunity to re-style its
interior and exterior.3 For example, a recent Automotive News article says General Motor’s
two main concerns with an upcoming redesign of the Camaro is how to reduce its weight to
meet fuel efficiency standards and how to come up with new styling that will be as popular
as the current model’s styling.4 We focus on redesigns of models rather than minor updates
that can occur annually, typically termed “refreshings” or “facelifts.” 5 Redesigns receive
     3
      Drivetrain changes, such as engines and transmissions, often occur during redesigns. Therefore one
obvious motivation for redesigns is to incorporate technological advances in drivetrain components. Knittel
(2011) estimates that holding weight and horsepower constant, fuel economy increases roughly 2 percent per
year because of technological improvements.
    4
      See http://www.autonews.com/article/20120313/BLOG06/120319962
    5
      For example, the 2004 refreshing of the Honda Civic included introducing a new shape for the car’s
headlights. Other examples of more minor “refreshings” include adding bluetooth technology and introducing
new exterior color options.


                                                    5
substantial attention by industry magazines, trade journals, and even popular media, while
refreshings receive relatively little attention, even in trade journals. As a result, our focus is
solely on redesigns.
   Redesigns are an involved and costly process. Automobile manufacturers employ teams
of engineers and designers that work for years on new redesigns, and which also involve
substantial coordination of suppliers, retooling of assembly lines, etc. While redesign cost
numbers are closely guarded by automobile manufacturers, anecdotal information suggests
that it can sometimes be over $1 billion.6 Our estimates below are quite consistent with this,
averaging $750 million over the various classes of automobiles. Thus, redesigns are major
economic decisions facing automobile manufacturers.
   While redesigns are costly, redesigns of existing automobile models happen with consid-
erable frequency. Table 1 provides a number of statistics by class of vehicle. The age of a
vehicle when it is redesigned (Design Age) averages about 6-8 years, with around 70% of all
vehicles taking 4-7 years between redesigns. The likelihood that a vehicle will be redesigned
in any given year (Design Prob) is around 10%. There is clearly some variation in redesign
times across class of vehicles. Our analysis will be able to provide evidence on the extent
to which various factors (redesign costs versus redesign competition features) explain this
heterogeneity.
   Our paper is obviously interested in the timing of redesigns and the factors that determine
that timing. Figure 1 documents market shares and timing of redesign patterns for the top-
selling models by various class of vehicles. A number of interesting patterns emerge. First,
redesign timing varies considerably across class of vehicle (e.g., compact cars redesign on
average more frequently than vans), across models (e.g., the Audi A4 is redesigned much more
frequently than the other top-selling luxury vehicles) and even over time for the same model.
The latter fact importantly establishes that automobile manufacturers do not generally follow
a fixed-year schedule for their redesigns (also see Figure 2).
   Second, there are interesting patterns in market shares with the timing of redesigns that
   6
       See http://www.forbes.com/2006/03/31/spring-luxury-cars_cx_dl_0403feat.html



                                                6
may be suggestive of internal and external strategic considerations. For example, the market
share of the top-selling van, the Dodge Caravan, sees a big shift up in a number of years
after a redesign with a fall off in market share as the model ages, creating an oscillating
pattern. Also in the van market, the Dodge Caravan’s redesigns occur more rapidly towards
the end of our sample as it starts to lose significant market share to new entrants, suggesting
possible strategic responses to the success of these rivals.7
     We now turn to developing a structural dynamic model of the automobile market, where
we focus on the manufacturers’ strategic decisions to redesign their models to maximize
current expected profits. This will allow us to then separately identify the importance of
various forces affecting the redesign decision and the resulting implications for profits and
welfare.


3.     The Dynamic Model and Estimation of Static Parameters

The auto industry is made up of a handful of firms overseeing a number of brands that
each produce a set of models (varieties). We are foremost interested in modeling the role
of redesign in the dynamics of competition between each model and its competitors. We
therefore treat each model as an individual entity maximizing its own payoffs. As in Sweeting
(2007), we are assuming away firms internalizing a redesigning model’s cannibalization of
demand for its other models for tractability. Denote each firm’s model by j. These models
fall into a particular class of vehicle g.
     Each firm makes decisions at times t = 1, ..., ∞ of which actions to take, given current
states, in order to compete in the oligopolistic market. In our model, we specify three
different sets of states which firms face—the direct effects of their model’s age, the indirect
(obsolescence) effects of the model’s age, and the competitive redesign effects in response
to their direct competitors’ (re)designs. The full set of states in period t is denoted as
ψjt = ψjt (djt , ojt , cjt ) ∈ S ⊂ RL . The direct effects, djt , include age of the current design,
     7
       There is certainly anecdotal evidence for such strategic responses as well. For example, according to
Lassa (2010), the radical redesign of the 2006 Honda Civic caused a one-year delay by Toyota in its redesign
of its Corolla model, as it scrambled to revamp its redesign in response.


                                                     7
which equals unity for a newly redesigned model and increases by one each period the
model is sold, and an indicator for redesign. Obsolescence states, ojt , are meant to capture
the potential internal incentive to obsolesce the secondary market for the model, which we
control for by constructing the total stock of units of the current model sold in previous
periods: Stockjt = tt=1 1(Designjt = Designjt−1 ) ∗ qjt−1 . Competitive redesign effects, cjt ,
                   P

represent the external pressure to redesign due to competing rival models’ redesign activities.
We proxy for these effects using the average age of competing models and total redesigns
of models by competitors within the model’s class. We note that we will be primarily
interested in "redesign competition” in our analysis (i.e., firms timing redesigns to compete
with redesigns of competing models), not the underlying market structure of competition.8
    The actions ajt ∈ Aj available to firms in period t are: 1) do nothing, 2) redesign, or
3) exit. Suppose in period t firm j takes no action to change a model whose design is 3
periods old. In t + 1 the age of their model increases by one to 4, and stock increases by
the number of units that were sold in t. If this same firm decided to release a redesign of
this model next period, in t + 1 the age of the model is reset to unity and stock is reset to
zero. The competitive redesign states evolve according to the actions taken by firms in the
same product class. For example, if no models of compact cars are redesigned in t + 1 the
average age of competitors (AgeCompgt ) increases by one, and total competitor redesigns
equals zero (T otRedesigngt = 0). Firms that exit receive a value to scrap their model, and
cannot reenter the market.9
    Firm j’s profits in t as a function of current actions and states is defined by Πij (at , ψt ).
Firms dynamically optimize the present value of current and future profits,
                                           "   ∞
                                                                                      #
                                               X
                        Vj (ψ; a; θ) = E             β t−1 Πij (at (ψt ), ψt ; θ) ψt ; θ ,
                                               t=1

   8
      In other words, we will not be examining in this paper what would happen if the market goes from
many competitors to a single monopolist.
    9
      In what follows we make the simplifying assumption that firms do not form expectations about the exit
of their competition. We assume that, in expectation, a firm presumes their competitors will redesign and
produce according to their optimal policies for as long as it remains in the market. This is an important
assumption since all states and actions are interlinked across all producers.



                                                         8
where β is a common discount factor shared by firms, and at denotes the set of actions taken
by the firm and its competitors in t, which depends on the accompanying set of states ψt .
Our goal is to estimate the vector θ that rationalizes observed firm behavior. This vector is
defined θ = [θX , θR ], where the parameters θX and θR capture the value of exit and cost of
redesign, respectively.
   To estimate the dynamic parameters, we follow the methodology developed by Bajari
et al. (2007), which proceeds in three steps. First, we estimate static behavior, which includes
profits and the optimal policies firms follow when taking actions. Second, we construct value
functions by forward simulating static markets using policy functions to transition between
states. Third, we perturb the policy rules and resimulate the markets in order to estimate
the parameters that rationalize our observed market outcomes. We now describe these three
steps in more detail.


3.1.   The Static Effects of Redesigns

To estimate the static effects of redesign on market share and profits for individual automobile
models, we follow the standard discrete choice techniques described in Berry (1994) for
specifying the demand structure over automobiles. In particular, assume that consumer i
makes a discrete choice over automobiles j ∈ Jg nested by automobile class g = 0, 1, . . . , G
to maximize her utility,


                            uij = xj β − αpj + ξj + ζig + (1 − σ)ij

                               = δj + ζig + (1 − σ)ij ,


where ij is an i.i.d extreme value random variable. The common group (automobile class
denoted by g) demand parameter ζ follows a distribution depending on σ ∈ [0, 1] such that,
since  is an extreme value random variable, ζ + (1 − σ) is also an extreme value ran-
dom variable. Characteristics, price and unobservables of product j ∈ Jg are xj , pj and ξj ,
respectively.


                                               9
   Under the extreme value assumption of , market share for product j is,

                                                                       δj
                                                                   e 1−σ
                                    sj (δ, σ) = sj/g sg =          P (1−σ)                                     (1)
                                                               Dgσ    Dg
                                                                   g




              P      δj
where Dg ≡          e 1−σ . Assume the outside good represents the option to not buy a new
             j∈Jg
                                                                                     1
automobile. Normalizing δ0 = 0 and D0 = 1 implies s0 (δ, σ) =                   P    (1−σ) .   Given this model of
                                                                                    Dg
                                                                                g

demand, Berry (1994) shows the demand parameters can be estimated as,


                          ln(sjt ) − ln(s0 ) = xjt β − αpjt + σln(sj/gt ) + ξjt .                              (2)


We address the endogeneity of price as Berry et al. (1995) suggest with instruments drawn
from the characteristics of a model’s competitors.
   Static profits are calculated each period from the solution of the nested logit demand
discussed above, and Bertrand competition. Static profits each period are,


                 πjt (pt , xt , ψt , ξt ; σ, α) = (pjt − mcjt )M sjt (pt , xt , ψt , ξt ; σ, α),


where M is market size, defined as the total number of households in the US, and mcjt
are firm specific marginal costs. Given these assumptions, price must satisfy the first order
condition

                                                               ∂sjt (pt , xt , ψt , ξt ; σ, α)
              sjt (pt , xt , ψt , ξt ; σ, α) + (pjt − mcjt )                                   = 0.
                                                                           ∂pjt

Optimal pricing, combined with our nested logit specification, yields price as marginal costs
plus a markup:

                                                          1−σ
                              pjt = mcjt +                                   .
                                               α[1 − σs̄j/g t − (1 − σ)sjt ]

   It is important to note how our obsolescence term, stock of prior production of the model,


                                                      10
is specified in our empirical framework describing static demand and profits. The stock of
prior production of any model provides consumers the potential option of purchasing a used
automobile rather than a new one. Thus, used vehicles are part of the consumer’s “outside”
option in the model to buying a new automobile. As a result, prior stock does not appear
as a direct term in an individual’s utility derived from a model’s attributes, unlike redesign
and age-related variables. In other words, we assume that the stock of prior production is
not an attribute of a model that directly affects a consumer’s utility from consuming that
particular model. It will affect the consumer’s ultimate demand choice as they compare their
utility levels from consuming this model versus that of the outside good, which includes used
automobiles. Also note that it will appear as a state variable that directly affects a model’s
redesign decision, which we discuss more below.
   Table 2 provides our estimates of the determinants of market share from our nested
logit discrete choice demand specification. Column 1 provides OLS estimates of our base
specification with the standard controls, which include the price of the model, the market
share of the model within its own group, and physical attributes of the model—fuel efficiency,
horsepower, torque, weight, width, seating, and interior size. This base specification has an
R2 of 0.806, with many of the variables statistically significant and expected signs. The price
term is negative and statistically significant, even without yet controlling for endogeneity.
Also, the estimates suggest that larger cars with lower horsepower increase the relative
market share of the model.
   In Column 2 we add variables to account for the age and redesign attributes of the model.
Our estimates suggest that each additional year of a model’s current design lowers its relative
market share by nearly 3.4%. In column 5 we include a full set of age effects (minus the
effect for age 10 years and older). These OLS estimates do not suggest that market share is
differently affected by a redesign year.
   In Columns 4 through 6 of Table 2 we provide 2SLS estimates of these same specifica-
tions. As expected, the coefficient on price becomes larger in magnitude after controlling for
endogeneity. In addition, most of the physical attribute characteristics are also statistically



                                              11
significant and accord with that found by previous studies. Most notably, the coefficient
on horsepower is now significantly positive. Controlling for endogeneity also has substantial
impacts on our estimated effects of redesign and age of a model on its relative market share.
Their coefficient estimates are much larger than with OLS, and both are now statistically
significant at the 1% level. Each additional year for a model decreases its relative market
share by 4.9%, but there is now a 19.7% relative gain in a model’s market share for the initial
redesign year. We also estimate a less restricted model that includes a full set of dummy vari-
ables, minus the indicator representing cars models that are 10 years or older. We are able
to identify the coefficient capturing a new model, from the redesign effect, because we also
observe completely new models.10 The age-effects model shows an interesting non-linearity
in the lifecycle of a vehicle. Following a redesign, the first-year age effect is roughly 1.44,
the demand effects falls by nearly .6 in the second year, but then stays relatively flat until
it begins to fall again after year five.
    These 2SLS estimates are our preferred model for estimating the static effects of redesign
activity on relative market shares for a given history of redesigns in the market place. In
order to understand how the history of redesigns evolves dynamically, we next specify and
estimate the policy functions that explain redesign and exit decisions of models. Then our
third step is to use our estimated static market share model and optimal policy functions to
estimate the dynamic (cost) parameters governing these decisions in the following section.
  10
     We have also estimated the even-more flexible model where we have separate year effects for entrants and
redesigns, but we cannot reject equality for ages two onward. Therefore, we report the more parsimonious
specification.




                                                     12
3.2.     Optimal Policy Functions

3.2.1.    The Redesign Decision

We estimate the probability that a model will be redesigned next period with the following
logit specification,


                        Rjt+1 (σ) = γd djt + γc cjt + γo ojt + βR ln(s̄j/g ) + R
                                                                                jt .



In addition to a within-group market share control (s̄j/g ), the probability of redesigning next
period (Rjt+1 ) depends on the direct, obsolescence, and competitive effects of redesign—the
state variables in our model.11 The direct effects are proxied by the age of the model, the
redesign competition effects are captured by the total redesigns by competitors in the current
period and the average age of competitors, and the obsolescence effects are captured by the
stock of previous production of the model. To provide as much flexibility as possible to fit
the redesign patterns we observe in the data, we also examine specifications with interactions
between state variables.
    Table 3 displays the results of various specifications of our redesign policy model, where
we introduce additional terms sequentially. We start in Column 1 of Table 3 with simply a
constant term, the log of the model’s overall relative share within its automobile class and age
of the model. We hypothesize that automobile manufacturers will focus their redesign efforts
on automobile groups with larger shares of the automobile market and on older models. The
coefficient on each variable is positive and statistically significant at the 1% significance level.
    In Columns 2 through 4, we sequentially introduce the direct, competitive redesign, and
obsolescence effects, respectively. The coefficients on these variables have the expected sign
and all these variables, except total redesigns by competitors in the current period, are
statistically significant. Older models and ones with a greater stock of previous production
(even after controlling for age of model) are more likely to introduce a redesign in the
  11
     Our redesign policy function specification is also similar to Iizuka (2007) who estimates a hazard model
for redesigns in the textbook market.



                                                     13
coming period. This is consistent with an obsolescence effect. The older the average age
of a model’s competitors, the less likely a model will redesign, providing evidence for a
competitive redesign effect.
   Columns 5 and 6 add various interaction and higher-order terms of our state variables.
Many of these additional terms are statistically significant, suggesting non-linearities in how
the state variables affect the probability of a model’s redesign, and also nearly doubling
the pseudo-R2 . The final column also adds group fixed effects, which also increases the
pseudo-R2 , but has hardly any quantitative effect on our estimates. Importantly, there is
evidence that all three state variables (direct, competitive redesign, and obsolescence) and
their interactions are important for the redesign policy function. The independent effects
of model age and stock are statistically significant at the 1% level, as well as some of the
non-linear and interaction terms involving these variables. The competitive redesign effects
come through as statistically important in their interactions with other variables, namely
the interaction of competitors’ average age with the stock variables.
   We use Column 7 estimates as our optimal redesign policy function for the dynamic
forward simulations we undertake below. To better interpret Column 7, Figure 4 fits a
lowess curve through the predicted policy of redesign and displays the effect of a model’s
age, stock of past production, and competitors’ average age on the probability of redesign by
type of vehicle (passenger cars, trucks (including SUVs and minivans), and luxury vehicles).
In general, we see that older models with higher stock are significantly more likely to redesign,
but that there is substantial variation across vehicle class. The competitive redesign effects,
seen in Panel (c), are highly nonlinear as they depend greatly on their interaction with the
other states.




                                               14
3.2.2.   The Exit Decision

In a similar fashion we estimate the probability that the model will exit the market (i.e.,
discontinue the model) as,


                      Xjt+1 (σ) = φd djt + φc cjt + φo ojt + βx ln(s̄j/g ) + X
                                                                              jt .



We specify exit as a function of the same state variables as redesign and report our estimation
results in Table 4 as we did for the redesign function in Table 3. We see that the direct effects
work in the same direction on a firm’s exit decision as it does for the redesign decision—the
older the model, the more likely it will exit the market completely. There is evidence that
redesign competition affects the exit decision as well. As seen in Column 4, having older
competitors makes exit less likely and a greater number of redesigns in the current period
lowers the exit probability. Once we include interactions (Column 7) statistical significance
of the many individual interaction terms for these effects are a bit below standard confidence
levels. The obsolescence effects on exit decisions and their interactions with the other states
work in the opposite direction from that in the redesign policy function. Models with high
stocks of previous production are more likely to redesign, but less likely to exit. This is due
to the correlation of stock with the success of a model. Maintaining a high stock model’s
accrued brand recognition is likely worth the investment by firms in redesign rather than
scrapping the model altogether through exit. As with the redesign policy function, we use
Column 7 estimates for our optimal exit policy function for the dynamic forward simulations
we describe next. Similar to Figure 4 for the redesign policy function, Figure 5 displays the
effect of a model’s age, stock of vehicles, and competitor age effects on the probability of
exit for various types of vehicles.


4.   Estimating the Dynamic Model

Estimating the dynamic model hinges on forward simulations of state variables. Using the
preceding optimal policy functions of firms, we forward simulate the market as firms take

                                                  15
actions dictated by these policies given transitions of the state variable. The second stage
to be estimated relies on constructing firms’ expected present value of future profits. We
assume these firm value and profit functions are linearly separable, and take the form,


    Vj (at (ψt ), ψt ; θ) =W1 (at (ψt ), ψt ) + W2 (at (ψt ), ψt )) ∗ θX − W3 (at (ψt ), ψt )) ∗ θR
                             "∞                                  #
                              X
                          =E       β t−1 πij (at (ψt ), ψt )) ψt
                               t=1
                                "   ∞
                                                                     #
                                    X
                          +E               β t−1 Xj,t+1 (at (ψt ), ψt ) ∗ θX
                                " t=1
                                   ∞
                                                                     #
                                 X
                          −E               β t−1 Rj,t+1 (at (ψt ), ψt ) ∗ θR .
                                     t=1


The present discounted value of static profits given each simulated strategy is W1 . The
present value of a firm’s simulated actions, scrapping production and the costs of redesign,
are W2 ∗ θX and W3 ∗ θR , respectively. θR includes such costs as research and development
expenditures for redesign, as well as costs from production line retooling and advertising to
inform consumers of the new model. One concern may be that redesigns require significant
planning and are on relatively inflexible schedules. However, discussion with members of a
development team from one of the domestic “Big Three” suggests that they employ teams of
engineers and designers doing overlapping work toward model redesigns, which allows signif-
icant flexibility in timing of re-designs. And the data also bear out that there is significant
variation in length of redesign, even over time within models. Therefore, we will allow a
re-design the possibility of occurring in any period, and let the actual timing be borne out
by policy functions.
   Following Bajari et al. (2007), the dynamic model is estimated by choosing θ̂ to minimize
the objective function,
                       Z 
                                                                                   2
                             min 0, Vj (at (ψt ), ψt ; θ) − Vj (a0t (ψt ), ψt ; θ)
                                
              Q(θ) ≡                                                                   dH(x).


Working from the presumption that each model is choosing the strategy that optimizes its


                                                        16
value function, it must be the case in equilibrium that,


                            Vj (at (ψt ), ψt ; θ) ≥ Vj (a0t (ψt ), ψt ; θ)


Plainly, observing actions ajt implies that choosing a0jt would have been suboptimal, and we
minimize the error rate in order to rationalize the firm outcomes we observe.


4.1.   Forward Simulation

We first construct value functions for each model-year observation by forward simulating
expected profits from future actions given expected states. Following the estimated policy
functions and implied transition of the state variables allows us to construct firms’ expecta-
tions about future profits. Most of our state variables are constructed from market realiza-
tions (e.g., average age of competitors). Therefore, we assume that each model’s expected
states and actions are known for computational feasibility. As we forward simulate this al-
lows us to look across the behavior expected by each firm to construct market conditions.
We track each model’s actions and static market outcomes over 50 simulated periods in order
to construct value functions at each period for every firm.
   Given current states, a firm will redesign next period when its predicted logit inclusive
value R̂jt+1 ≥ R̄ and exit when X̂jt+1 ≥ X̄. To best match moments of the data we choose
the threshold redesign and exit values R̄ = 0.275 and X̄ = 0.4. Table 5 displays the accuracy
of our policy functions (percent of correctly predicted outcomes) for various predicted value
thresholds, which informs our choice of 0.275 and 0.4. At a standard threshold of 0.5, non-
events are very precisely matched, but events (redesign or exit) are rarely matched correctly.
In other words, events are underpredicted for the sake of model fit. At lower levels (such as
0.10), events are more often matched correctly, but then we get over-prediction of the events
at the expense of correctly predicting the non-events.
   Applying the second stage estimator involves constructing value functions for alternative
policies and the transitional dynamics that these alternatives imply. Bajari et al. (2007)



                                                 17
demonstrates that by perturbing the estimated policy functions, the second stage estimator
is consistent. Srisuma (2010) points out linear perturbations can lead to inconsistencies
and proposes perturbations of the form, a0 (·) =  ∗ a(· ; θ0 ) to be more stable. We thus
draw  ∼ U nif orm[0, 2] independently for the exit and redesign policies for 500 perturbed
policies.12 Using these perturbed policy functions we forward simulate each model’s value
function in parallel to the optimal path.
    Table 6 presents our estimates of the dynamic parameters using the Bajari et al. (2007)
technique. Our estimates suggest that redesign costs average nearly $1 billion across all types
of vehicles. There is some heterogeneity across types of vehicles with redesign costs smallest
for sport and compact cars cars at around $500 million to the largest for pick-ups at $1.3
billion. While automobile firms undoubtedly know (at least, ex post) their redesign costs,
these numbers are closely guarded and we cannot verify the credibility of these estimates with
publicly available information. However, we compare our estimates to a variety of sources in
the popular press. A recent AOL Autos article states that the price tag of a remodel starts
at $1 billion and, “It can be as much as $6 billion if it’s an all-new car on all-new platform
with an all-new engine and an all-new transmission and nothing carrying over from the old
model.” A recent Forbes article suggests the developments costs are at least $1 billion. In
addition, a Business Insider article quotes Nissan as saying that they normally spend $300-
500M on a remodel. Finally, a private conversation with a former manager in one of the
major U.S. automobile manufacturers suggest that our estimates are very reasonable.
    Unlike redesign costs, scrap values are likely something that is even less observable, as
they represent an opportunity cost to the continuation of production of the model. Our
estimated scrap values are estimated to be significantly smaller in general than redesign
costs. While this seems quite plausible to us, it is difficult to compare these estimates to
anecdotal evidence on these values, and we note that there are relatively few exits of models
in our sample from which to identify these estimates in our data, in contrast to the high
frequency of redesigns, the focus of our study.
  12
    We have investigated various forms of perturbations, and the resulting estimates are similar across either
method.


                                                     18
5.        Baseline Welfare Estimates

Given our estimates of redesign and scrap values, we now have a fully dynamic model from
which we can construct and track estimated welfare effects over time. Figure 6 provides
baseline estimates of welfare in the model over time. Panel (a) of Figure 6 graphs discounted
present value of firm value, consumer utility, and total welfare for the automobile market
over a 50-year horizon at every year of our sample. In particular, our measure of welfare
within vehicle class each period is the present discounted value of the nested logit inclusive
value (see Nevo (2003)),
                                                                          
                               ∞                 X           1−σ
                             X           1     X         δ jt
                    Ugt = E      β t−1 ∗ ln         e 1−σ         ∗ M sgt 
                              t=1
                                         α     g  j∈J       g


                                                                          P
such that the total utility from new auto purchases in period t is           g   Ugt . We then apply the
within class estimates of redesign cost and scrap value to each of our 50 forward simulations
and discount by the factor β = 0.95 to calculate present discounted values (or “Firm Value”)
for each model in our sample and then sum.
      Figure 6 displays a number of important features of our the market. First, as shown in
Panel (a), firm value is around $2.5 trillion for many years in our sample, which means an
average of about $50 billion in annual firm value flow.13 Panels (b), (c), and (d) of Figure 6
break out the automobile market into three major segments. These are “cars,” which include
standard compact, midsize, and full-size vehicles; “trucks,” which includes minivans, pickups,
SUVs, and vans; and “luxury” vehicles. There are a number of interesting observations that
one can take from Figure 6 . First, firm value is high relative to consumer surplus (about a
ratio of 4 to 1), suggesting that firms are extracting a significant amount of the total surplus
in the automobile market.14 Second, the recessions of the early 1990s and late 2000s show
up quite clearly in our estimates, with firm values and total welfare falling considerably.
     13
      These estimates seem plausible given stock market valuations of the auto industry. For instance, the
market capitalization of Auto Manufacturers is around $8.5 trillion as of January 2013.
   14
      We note that our estimates are for the primary automobile market, as we do not model the secondary
car market. We will discuss this more below.


                                                   19
Third, the truck and luxury segments of the market appear to have been more affected by
the recent recession than the standard cars market.
     Figure 7 further decomposes just the firm value component of welfare by the three main
automobile segments and the three components of firm value - profits from sales, redesign
expenditures, and scrap value. As one can see in Panel (a), the truck segment (which includes
minivans and SUVs) increased substantially from the early 1990 until the recent recession
in terms of its contribution to firm profits. The segment even surpassed the standard car
segment in the late 1990s, but also suffered the largest decline when the recent recession hit.
Redesign expenditures by car segment show a consistent ranking over time, with the truck
segment accounting for about half of automobile manufacturers’ redesign expenditures, with
cars next, and the luxury segment (a relatively small market segment) accounting for the
least amount of redesign expenditures. The estimated scrap value component is very small
compared to the other two components and fairly volatile. Cars and trucks are estimated to
have a significantly higher average scrap value than luxury vehicles.


6.     Counterfactual: Obsolescence, Redesign Competition and Wel-
       fare

We can now also use our model to address our initial goals in the paper—an analysis of
how the dynamic forces of redesign competition and obsolescence not only affect redesign
expenditures, but ultimately firm profits and overall welfare.
     We analyze how welfare changes when we intensify and reduce the impact of both of
these channels. Doing this is somewhat complicated by the flexibility of our policy function.
To see this, take the general form of our redesign policy function:


                     Rjt+1 (σ) = γd djt + γc cjt + γo ojt + βR ln(s̄j/g ) + R
                                                                             jt .



In the simple case where there is one state variable capturing redesign competition and one
capturing obsolescence, and both γc and γo are positive, to intensify or reduce the effects of


                                                 20
each channel, we could introduce two new parameters, δc and δo , defining the policy function
as:


                       Rjt+1 (σ) = γd djt + δc γc cjt + δo γo ojt + βR ln(s̄j/g ) + R
                                                                                     jt .



We could then analyze how welfare changes when we vary γc and γo . This exercise would
identify the pair of γs that maximize total welfare; a γ < 1 would reduce the channel, while
a γ > 1 would increase the channel.
      Our redesign policy function is more flexible, and therefore more complicated, than this
simple example. Two complications arise: sign changes across the γs and interaction terms.
To see why sign changes across the parameters of the competitive redesign or obsolescence
effects matter, suppose we had two variables capturing the redesign competition effects, c1jt
and c2jt :


                  Rjt+1 (σ) = γd djt + γ1c c1jt + γ2c c2jt + γo ojt + βR ln(s̄j/g ) + R
                                                                                       jt .



Now suppose that γ1c > 0, while γ1c < 0. If we multiplied both variables by the same δ > 1,
this would tend to increase the probability of a redesign by making γ1c c1jt more positive,
but at the same time, it would tend to reduce the probability of a redesign by making γ2c c2jt
more negative. The net effect of this could be to increase or decrease the probability of a
redesign, and δ would no longer carry the interpretation we seek.
      This issue is easy to overcome. In our counterfactuals, we multiply by δj whenever γj is
positive and divide by δj whenever γj is negative. Therefore, in the example above, a δ > 1
                                      1
would make both δc γ1c c1jt and         γ c
                                      δc 2c 2jt
                                                  more positive.
      The second issue—the existence of interaction terms—cannot be completely accounted
for and changes the interpretation of the δj s slightly. To see the complication here, suppose
our δ-augmented redesign policy function was:


              Rjt+1 (σ) = γd djt + δc γc cjt + δo γo ojt + δc δo γoc cjt ojt + βR ln(s̄j/g ) + R
                                                                                                jt .




                                                       21
Ideally, δc and δo scale the derivatives of the probability of a redesign with respect to the
two channels. In this simple set up those derivatives are:

                                 ∂Rjt+1 (σ)
                                            = δc cjt + δc δo γoc ojt ,
                                   ∂cjt
                                 ∂Rjt+1 (σ)
                                            = δo ojt + δc δo γoc ojt .
                                   ∂ojt

With interaction terms, δc is present in both the derivative with respect to the redesign
competition channel and the derivative of the obsolescence channel. If we interpret δc as
magnifying the size of the redesign competition state variables, then the interaction terms
do not present a problem. If, however, we want to interpret δc as magnifying the parameter
estimates associated only with the redesign competition channel, then our set up is not ideal.
   To identify welfare under different δj s, we perform a grid search varying the size of the
δj s from 0 to 2 in 0.1 increments. We search for the pair of δj s that maximize total welfare
in each year of our sample, forward simulating out 50 years from that given year. Therefore,
we can have a different pair of δj∗ s in each year.
   We begin by summarizing our results by showing a contour plot of the sum of total
welfare across each year in our sample. Figure 8 plots these for the market as a whole,
as well as for each of the car, truck, and luxury vehicle segments of the market. As one
can see, the baseline scenario, where both parameters are at 1, is in a region where welfare
is already fairly high relative to that when the parameters are perturbed. It is also clear
that perturbations to reduce the responsiveness of the redesign policy function to either
(or both) of the redesign competition or obsolescence effects results in major welfare losses,
whereas perturbations to increase responsiveness of the redesign policy function results in
much smaller welfare losses. In other words, too frequent redesigns in this market would
be much less costly than too infrequent redesign activity. While our baseline sees relatively
high welfare, our contour of counterfactuals suggests that welfare could be improved in this
marketplace by moving southeast from the baseline to a region that represents a reduced
redesign competition effect and a greater obsolescence effect. The black diamonds represent


                                                 22
combinations of δj s that maximize welfare in at least one single year, which we term our
"optimal counterfactuals." These suggest that in the typical year, welfare is maximized
by reducing the redesign competition channel by roughly 50 percent, but increasing the
obsolescence channel by between 50 and 100 percent. The welfare difference between the
optimal counterfactual and our baseline is roughly 3 percent. Interestingly, these observations
are true not only for the entire market, but also for each market segment. All four plots
suggest that the welfare-maximizing policy functions correspond to a ridge in the welfare
mapping that runs from the northwest to the southeast in Figure 8.
   We can also use our simulations to show how consumer utility, firm value, and total
welfare in these optimal counterfactuals compare to the baseline estimates in each year. It is
possible that either firms or consumers can be made worse off in the optimal counterfactual,
even if total welfare is a bit higher. And these comparisons may vary over time in the
market. Figure 9 plots the welfare difference of the optimal counterfactual to the baseline
for consumer utility, firm value, and total welfare over the years of our sample. We plot
these for the entire market in panel a, as well as for each of the car, truck, and luxury vehicle
segments of the market in Panels (b), (c), and (d). Under the optimal counterfactuals, firm
value is higher in each year. In contrast, consumer utility under the optimal counterfactual
can sometimes be lower than for our baseline scenario. Lower relative consumer utility in the
optimal counterfactual is especially pronounced from 1991 to 1993 and from 2008 and 2009.
The first of these periods was a macroeconomic downturn, while the second encompassed
both an increase in gasoline prices and the beginning of the Great Recession. Comparing
the results across market segments, we find that the luxury vehicle segment has the largest
(positive) welfare difference in the counterfactual relative to the baseline, while the car
market segment has the smallest.
   Finally, in Figure 10 we show the relative differences between the optimal counterfactual
and the baseline for the components of firm value (profit from sales, redesign expenditures,
and scrap values). As with Figure 9, we show these for the market as a whole, as well as for
each of the car, truck, and luxury vehicle segments of the market, in four separate panels. As



                                               23
shown above, the optimal counterfactual is consistently one where the competitive redesign
channels are weakened and the obsolescence channels are strengthened. These should have
opposite effects on how often firms redesign and, thus, total redesign expenditures. As
seen in Figure 10, the weaker competitive redesign channel in the optimal counterfactual
appears to dominate with respect to the effect on redesign expenditures, as they are lower
in the optimal counterfactual relative to the baseline by 10%, or $20B, on average. In
contrast, Panel (c) shows more exit in the optimal counterfactual. However the increase
in exit is large in percentage terms (30% on average to a maximum of 400%) but small
in relative value ($1B on average to a maximum of $5B). We interpret the change in firm
behavior from the optimal perturbation as enhancing social efficiency by reducing inefficient
redesigns coming from redesign competition, enhancing redesigns valued by consumers that
come from obsolescence, and discontinuing weak varieties. Panel (a) demonstrates that
the more efficient timing of redesigns results in very little change to profits from sales and
consumer welfare. Welfare gains are thus realized as firms acquire significant savings by
eliminating excess redesigns with minor distortions to the final goods market.


7.     Secondhand Market Considerations

Our model and welfare analysis is clearly focused on the new automobile market. We do
account for the secondhand market for automobiles in two indirect, but important, ways
in our model. First, it is implicitly accounted for as part of the outside option consumers
have in the discrete-choice demand model we specify. Second, the appeal of secondhand
automobile models is presumably a factor in how quickly demand for new automobiles falls
as the current model ages.
     One may be concerned that the channels which produce welfare gains in our characteriza-
tion of the optimal counterfactual may be at the expense of used car value. Our framework
admittedly does not explicitly model the secondhand market, as that goes beyond the scope
of this paper, and we cannot describe how redesigns of new automobiles directly affect trans-
actions and welfare of participants in the secondhand market. However, to get some sense


                                             24
of the possible welfare effects on the secondhand automobile market, we did the following.
First, using auction data of secondhand vehicles, we estimated the impact of redesigns of a
model on the current generation of used automobiles of the same model, controlling for other
observable factors, such as annual depreciation (which average around 20%) and manufac-
turer and automobile class effects. From this analysis, we estimate that a redesign leads to,
at most, a 4% fall in the value of the used car models of the most recent model generation.
Furthermore, this result is not robust. We also assume that the value of used automobiles
from models more than one generation ago see their value fall to zero. This is likely a very
strong assumption, but will give us an upper-bound estimate of how much impact redesigns
have on the secondhand market.15
     Using these assumptions, we can estimate the impact of redesigns on the total value of
the stock of used automobiles in our simulation of the model. In our baseline simulations,
we find that if we eliminate redesign activity there is an increase of about $250 billion (or
roughly 7.5%) in the total value of used vehicles. Applying the same thought experiment
to our optimal counterfactual, eliminating redesign activity implies an increase of about
$200 billion (or roughly 7%) in the total value of used vehicles. To reiterate, we think of
these effects as upper bounds on the losses from redesign activity, and in both the baseline
and counterfactual simulations are small when compared to the welfare losses in the new
automobile market if we were to eliminate redesign.16


8.     Conclusion

This paper builds the first empirical structural model of product redesign. We use it to
examine redesign decisions in the U.S. automobile market and their effects on firm profits,
consumer utility, and total welfare. Unlike the few prior empirical studies of product re-
designs, we find that both redesign competition among models and planned obsolescence to
   15
      However, we note that since redesigns happen about every 5 years and annual depreciation is around
20% annually, the residual value of these used automobiles beyond the most recent generation will be quite
small anyway.
   16
      Eliminating redesign in the baseline or counterfactual leads to anywhere from a 40%-50% loss in total
surplus, which is approximately $1.5 trillion in our simulations.

                                                    25
recapture market share play an important role. Our counterfactual simulations find evidence
that there is wasteful redesign competition that then precludes more redesign activity tar-
geted to obsolete models at the optimal time. We find that welfare would be maximized by
reducing the redesign competition channel by roughly 50 percent, but increasing the obso-
lescence channel by between 50 and 100 percent. This would have a net effect of reducing
redesign expenditures by about 10% and increasing welfare by roughly 3%.
   A handful of existing studies have estimated consumer gains from new automobile product
varieties. In particular Blonigen and Soderbery (2010) estimate consumer valuation of new
product variety to be on the order of 10% of utility. As noted in the introduction, the
redesign of existing autos occurs twice as often as the introduction of new varieties. Our
analysis points to the importance of redesigns, as the redesign activity in our counterfactual
has nearly six times the effect on consumer welfare as previous estimates of new variety
introduction.




                                             26
References

Bajari, P., C. Benkard, and J. Levin (2007): “Estimating dynamic models of imperfect
  competition,” Mimeo.

Berry, S. (1994): “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” Rand
  Journal of Economics, 25, 242–262.

Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
  rium,” Econometrica, 63, 841–890.

Blonigen, B. A. and A. Soderbery (2010): “Measuring the benefits of foreign product
  variety with an accurate variety set,” Journal of International Economics, 82, 168–180.

Broda, C. and D. Weinstein (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 121, 541–585.

Chen, J., S. Esteban, and M. Shum (2008): “How much competition is a secondary
  market?” Mimeo.

Chevalier, J. and A. Goolsbee (2009): “Are durable goods consumers forward-looking?
  Evidence from college textbooks,” The Quarterly Journal of . . . , 124, 1853–1884.

Coase, R. (1972): “Durability and monopoly,” JL & Econ., 15, 143.

Esteban, S. and M. Shum (2007): “Durable???goods oligopoly with secondary markets:
  the case of automobiles,” The RAND Journal of Economics, 38, 332–354.

Feenstra, R. C. (1994): “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International
  Prices,” The American Economic Review, 84, 157–177.

Fishman, A. and R. Rob (2000): “Product Innovation by a Durable-Good Monopoly,”
  The RAND Journal of Economics, 31, 237–252.

Grout, P. and I.-U. Park (2005): “Competitive Planned Obsolescence,” The RAND
  Journal of Economics, 36, 596–612.

Iizuka, T. (2007): “An empirical analysis of planned obsolescence,” Journal of Economics
  & Management Strategy, 16, 191–226.

Judd, K. (1998): Numerical Methods in Economics, MIT Press.

                                              27
Kim, M. (2013): “Strategic responses to used-goods markets: Airbus and Boeing since 1997,”
  Working paper, Boston University.

Knittel, C. R. (2011): “Automobiles on Steroids: Product Attribute Trade-Offs and Tech-
  nological Progress in the Automobile Sector,” American Economic Review, 101, 3368–99.

Knittel, C. R. and K. Metaxoglou (Forthcoming): “Estimation of Random Coefficient
  Demand Models: Two Empiricists’ Perspective,” The Review of Economics and Statistics.

Nevo, A. (2003): “New Products, Quality Changes, and Welfare Measures Computed from
  Estimated Demand Systems,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 266–275.

Petrin, A. (2002): “Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan,”
  Journal of Political Economy.

Porter, R. and P. Sattler (1999): “Patterns of trade in the market for used durables:
  Theory and evidence,” NBER Working Paper.

Purohit, D. (1992): “Exploring the Relationship between the Markets for New and Used
  Durable Goods: The Case of Automobiles,” Marketing Science, 11, 154–167.

Srisuma, S. (2010): “Estimation of Structural Optimization Models: A Note on Identifica-
  tion,” Mimeo.

Swan, P. (1970): “Durability of consumption goods,” The American Economic Review, 60,
  884–894.

Sweeting, A. (2007): “Dynamic Product Repositioning in Differentiated Product Markets:
  The Case of Format Switching in the Commercial Radio Industry,” Working Paper 13522,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Waldman, M. (1993): “A new perspective on planned obsolescence,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 108, 273–283.

——— (1996): “Durable goods pricing when quality matters,” Journal of Business, 489–510.

——— (2003): “Durable goods theory for real world markets,” The Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, 17, 131–154.
A         Appendix: Details of the Non-Linear Search

Our empirical model requires a non-linear search over the dynamic parameters representing
the cost of redesign and the scrap value of eliminating a model. We investigated the sensitiv-
ity of this non-linear search to both starting values and non-linear search algorithms drawing
on the lessons learned in Knittel and Metaxoglou (Forthcoming). Ultimately, we found that
unless one uses the Nelder-Mead (Simplex) algorithm, convergence is always met in the
same location (down to the fourth decimal point) of the parameter space. Furthermore,
if we restart the non-linear search at points where the Nelder-Mead algorithm “converged”
and use another non-linear search algorithm, we again end up where the non-Nelder-Mead
algorithms converge, which corresponds to a smaller GMM objective function value. That
is, the Nelder-Mead algorithm appears to converge at points that are not actually extrema.
     We used the Optimize() command within Stata to estimate the GMM problem associated
with the dynamic parameters.17 While Stata is more limited than alternative programs,
such as Matlab, in terms of the options for undertaking the non-linear search, it includes a
Simplex algorithm, a Newton-Raphson algorithm, and three quasi-Newton algorithms. Stata
also allows the programmer to set starting values and tolerances.
     Convergence is dictated by three tolerances: ptol, vtol, and nrtol. Convergence is reported
if one of three things happens. (1) If the largest relative change in parameters (i.e., (β h −
β h−1 )/β h for iteration h) is smaller than ptol ; (2) If the change in the objective function value
between two iterations is smaller than vtol ; (3) If the scaled gradient vector (i.e., gH −1 g 0 ,
where H is the Hessian) is smaller than nrtol. We use Stata’s default tolerances for ptol
(1e-6), vtol (1e-7), nrtol (1e-5), but have found that tightening these tolerances does not
appreciably change our estimates.
     For our initial investigation of whether starting values and/or the non-linear search al-
gorithm yield different results, we used three of Stata’s non-linear search algorithms and a
fourth which is a hybrid of two. Specifically, we use the Nelder-Mead (Simplex) algorithm,
the Newton-Raphson, and the Davidson-Fletcher-Powell (Quasi-Newton) algorithms. Our
hybrid approach uses the Nelder-Mead algorithm until convergence is met, and then shifts
to the Newton-Raphson algorithm. For each of these four algorithms, and each of the two
dynamic parameters, we used nine different starting values (representing millions of dollars):
-1100, -600, -100, 400, 900, 1400, 1900, 2400, and 2900. The intersection of these two sets
yields 81 starting-value combinations for each algorithm.
    17
         See man Optimize within Stata for more information.
   Figures 13 and 14 summarize our results from this exercise, when we pool the classes
of vehicles and estimate one redesign cost and one scrap value across all vehicles classes.
Separating things by classes yields similar results in terms of stability of the non-linear
search. We find that provided we do not use the Nelder-Mead algorithm alone, we converge
to the same place for both parameters, down to the third decimal point. Furthermore, when
we allow the Nelder-Mead routine to converge and then start the Newton-Raphson routine
at these parameter values, the Newton-Raphson routine leaves the space where the Simplex
routine converged and goes to the lone extrema found by the Newton-Raphson and quasi-
Newton algorithms. We take this as evidence that the Nelder-Mead routine terminates at
points that are not minima.
   Among the non-Nelder-Mead-only exercises, we analyzed the first-order conditions as-
sociated with those searches where Stata reports convergence. The mean Hessian-weighted
gradient (in absolute value) is 1.66e-06, while the maximum is 1.3e-04. We therefore con-
clude that the first-order conditions are met. The Hessian is positive definite for all points,
implying the second-order conditions are also met. In addition, the condition number never
exceeds 13.5.18 Figure 11 shows the density of weighted-gradient, while Figure 12 shows the
objective function across all non-linear search algorithms.
   Given this exercise and using the “Smoke and Fire” analogy discussed in Knittel and
Metaxoglou (Forthcoming), we see no smoke and therefore have no reason to suspect any
fire. Our results for the class-specific estimates are similar. For the final set of parameters
used in the analysis, we still iterate over 9 different sets of starting values (500, 1000, and,
1500 for both parameters) and use the hybrid algorithm. We choose the set of parameter
values corresponding to the lowest GMM objective value, but these do not differ at least for
the first 11 significant digits.




  18
     Judd (1998) argues that a condition number is small if its base 10 logarithm is about 2 or 3 for a
computer that carries about 16 significant decimal digits. A condition number of 13.5 is well below this
criterion.
B      Tables and Figures


                                Table 1: Summary Statistics of Key Variables

Body      Class       Redesign      Rival       Age    Design    Rivals      Price     Sales    MPG    Wheel   HP    Weight   Exiting
                                  Redesigns             Age                ($1000s)   (1000s)          Base           (lbs)   Models
          SMALL         0.106        5.16      3.73     6.02     39.54      10.664     82.180   33.0    99.4   118    2570     0.094
Car       FULL          0.098        2.82      4.47     6.98     18.46      21.228     61.568   26.7   110.6   198    3567     0.077
          MID           0.108        4.39      3.59     6.25     30.77      18.200    100.834   28.4   107.0   176    3267     0.054
          CUV           0.077        7.88      3.10     5.89     72.63      25.447    51.415    23.7   107.7   221    3899     0.021
          PU            0.098        2.56      4.63     8.40     15.66      15.521    165.257   20.8   127.1   190    4066     0.051
Truck
          SUV           0.085        5.20      4.19     7.61     49.87      25.021     56.101   19.4   109.8   218    4402     0.057
          VAN           0.073        2.79      5.73     9.18     24.23      17.768     56.671   21.4   121.1   180    4318     0.067
          LUX           0.121        7.18      3.65     6.21     55.61      30.138    27.806    26.1   106.8   223    3432     0.068
Luxury
          SPORT         0.091        6.62      4.11     7.21     51.53      40.934    12.550    24.3   101.5   265    3462     0.066
Note: Values are averages across all years of the sample within vehicle classes.
                      Table 2: Market Share Regressions
Characteristics                               ln(sjt ) − ln(s0 )
                                  OLS                                    IV
                  0         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
P rice ($1000in 85)   −0.021    −0.021    −0.021    −0.095   −0.094∗∗∗ −0.099∗∗∗
                      (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.035)   (0.035)   (0.034)
log(sj/g )             0.827∗∗∗ 0.821∗∗∗ 0.820∗∗∗ 0.045        0.050     0.046
                      (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.022)   (0.105)   (0.103)   (0.105)
M iles/$               0.008∗∗   0.006     0.006     0.050∗∗∗ 0.046∗∗∗ 0.047∗∗∗
                      (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.015)
log(hp)               −0.544∗∗∗ −0.591∗∗∗ −0.582∗∗∗ 1.961      1.856     2.048
                      (0.163)   (0.161)   (0.160)   (1.356)   (1.340)   (1.337)
log(wheelbase)         2.400∗∗∗ 2.537∗∗∗ 2.510∗∗∗ 2.371        2.546∗    2.400
                      (0.481)   (0.474)   (0.470)   (1.521)   (1.509)   (1.521)
log(interiorsize)      4.556∗∗∗ 4.205∗∗∗ 4.212∗∗∗ 1.765        1.233     0.882
                      (0.631)   (0.640)   (0.640)   (2.280)   (2.204)   (2.217)
Redesign                        −0.003     0.067               0.197∗∗∗ 0.602∗∗∗
                                (0.024)   (0.047)             (0.059)   (0.104)
Age                             −0.034∗∗∗                    −0.049∗∗∗
                                (0.006)                       (0.013)
Age = 1                                    0.417∗∗∗                      0.443∗∗
                                          (0.088)                       (0.186)
Age = 2                                    0.441∗∗∗                      0.797∗∗∗
                                          (0.083)                       (0.192)
Age = 3                                    0.402∗∗∗                      0.760∗∗∗
                                          (0.083)                       (0.190)
Age = 4                                    0.401∗∗∗                      0.766∗∗∗
                                          (0.082)                       (0.189)
Age = 5                                    0.386∗∗∗                      0.770∗∗∗
                                          (0.081)                       (0.191)
Age = 6                                    0.355∗∗∗                      0.723∗∗∗
                                          (0.080)                       (0.183)
Age = 7                                    0.339∗∗∗                      0.642∗∗∗
                                          (0.078)                       (0.181)
Age = 8                                    0.266∗∗∗                      0.555∗∗∗
                                          (0.067)                       (0.160)
Age = 9                                    0.186∗∗                       0.236
                                          (0.075)                       (0.162)
R2                     0.806      0.811       0.811       0.277          0.297   0.284
N                      4820       4820        4820        4820           4820    4820
Note: Standard errors clustered by model are in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01
                                   Table 3: Redesign Policy
Controls                                    Logit Estimates of Pr[Redesign=1]
Age                     0.132∗∗∗    0.164∗∗∗    0.144∗∗∗                           0.193∗∗∗     1.055∗∗∗
                       (0.034)     (0.033)     (0.033)                            (0.035)      (0.123)
Age2                                                                                          −0.055∗∗∗
                                                                                              (0.009)
Age = 2                                                    −3.332∗∗∗    −3.357∗∗∗
                                                           (0.453)      (0.462)
Age = 3                                                    −1.683∗∗∗    −1.715∗∗∗
                                                            (0.343)      (0.347)
Age = 4                                                    −0.812∗∗∗    −0.843∗∗∗
                                                            (0.250)      (0.252)
Age = 5                                                    −0.006       −0.037
                                                            (0.242)      (0.246)
Age = 6                                                      0.359        0.338
                                                            (0.239)      (0.241)
Age = 7                                                      0.270        0.250
                                                            (0.265)      (0.266)
Age = 8                                                    −0.032       −0.059
                                                            (0.274)      (0.275)
Age = 9                                                      0.201        0.177
                                                            (0.302)      (0.305)
T otRedesign                         0.035∗∗   0.034∗        0.047∗∗∗     0.044∗∗  0.035∗      0.036∗
                                    (0.017)   (0.017)       (0.017)     (0.020)   (0.020)     (0.020)
AgeComp                            −0.256∗∗∗ −0.213∗∗      −0.145∗      −0.014    −0.020       0.091
                                    (0.085)   (0.083)       (0.075)     (0.080)   (0.097)     (0.535)
             2
AgeComp                                                                                       −0.017
                                                                                              (0.073)
Stock                                           0.058∗∗∗    0.023∗       0.030∗    0.217∗∗∗    0.611∗∗∗
                                               (0.019)     (0.013)      (0.016)   (0.044)     (0.124)
Stock × Age                                                                       −0.017∗∗∗   −0.070∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.005)     (0.019)
Stock × Age2                                                                                   0.004∗∗∗
                                                                                              (0.001)
Stock × AgeComp                                                                   −0.005      −0.179∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.016)     (0.060)
Stock × AgeComp   2
                                                                                               0.026∗∗∗
                                                                                              (0.009)
log(sj/g )              0.153∗∗∗ 0.203∗∗∗ 0.105∗∗    0.186∗∗∗ 0.184∗∗∗ 0.063                   0.149∗∗∗
                       (0.045)   (0.049)   (0.047)  (0.055)   (0.055)  (0.042)                (0.056)
Constant              −2.102∗∗∗ −1.404∗∗∗ −1.966∗∗∗ −0.464   −0.732   −3.006∗∗∗               −5.383∗∗∗
                       (0.229)   (0.384)   (0.367)  (0.469)   (0.515)  (0.418)                (1.054)
Group FEs                No          No         No           No          Yes       Yes         Yes
R2                      0.037       0.049      0.057        0.134        0.140     0.074       0.126
N                       4514        4514       4514         4514         4514      4514        4514
Note: Standard errors clustered by model are in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                                     Table 4: Exit Policy
Controls                                       Logit Estimates of Pr[Exit=1]
                             ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
Age                     0.152       0.169       0.147∗∗∗                            0.157∗∗∗     0.427∗∗∗
                       (0.028)     (0.024)     (0.023)                             (0.026)      (0.056)
Age2                                                                                           −0.016∗∗∗
                                                                                               (0.004)
Age = 1                                                    −3.560∗∗∗   −3.553∗∗∗
                                                           (0.486)     (0.485)
Age = 2                                                    −1.834∗∗∗   −1.798∗∗∗
                                                            (0.304)     (0.296)
Age = 3                                                    −1.001∗∗∗   −0.977∗∗∗
                                                            (0.252)     (0.249)
Age = 4                                                    −0.717∗∗∗   −0.691∗∗∗
                                                            (0.241)     (0.239)
Age = 5                                                    −0.394∗     −0.378
                                                            (0.238)     (0.237)
Age = 6                                                    −0.143      −0.137
                                                            (0.231)     (0.233)
Age = 7                                                    −0.272      −0.276
                                                            (0.261)     (0.259)
Age = 8                                                    −0.788∗∗    −0.816∗∗
                                                            (0.327)     (0.337)
Age = 9                                                    −0.254      −0.293
                                                            (0.311)     (0.317)
T otRedesign                       −0.101∗∗∗ −0.101∗∗∗     −0.099∗∗∗   −0.060∗   −0.060∗∗      −0.035
                                    (0.027)   (0.027)       (0.028)    (0.032)   (0.031)       (0.031)
AgeComp                            −0.314∗∗∗ −0.279∗∗∗     −0.196∗∗    −0.122    −0.187         0.803
                                    (0.091)   (0.092)       (0.084)    (0.109)   (0.121)       (0.574)
             2
AgeComp                                                                                        −0.118
                                                                                               (0.078)
Stock                                           0.090∗∗∗    0.084∗∗∗    0.100∗∗∗    0.130∗∗∗    0.162
                                               (0.022)     (0.020)     (0.023)     (0.048)     (0.165)
Stock × Age                                                                        −0.007∗     −0.048∗∗∗
                                                                                   (0.004)     (0.011)
Stock × Age2                                                                                    0.002∗∗∗
                                                                                               (0.000)
Stock × AgeComp                                                                     0.012       0.103
                                                                                   (0.011)     (0.113)
                  2
Stock × AgeComp                                                                                −0.016
                                                                                               (0.018)
log(sj/g )            −0.751∗∗∗ −0.778∗∗∗ −0.858∗∗∗ −0.881∗∗∗ −0.930∗∗∗ −0.920∗∗∗              −0.934∗∗∗
                       (0.062)   (0.062)   (0.071)  (0.078)   (0.083)   (0.075)                (0.081)
Constant              −0.751∗∗∗ −5.731∗∗∗ −6.267∗∗∗ −5.055∗∗∗ −5.311∗∗∗ −6.694∗∗∗              −9.492∗∗∗
                       (0.062)   (0.431)   (0.456)  (0.561)   (0.679)   (0.589)                (1.176)
Group FEs             −6.844∗∗∗      No          No          No         Yes         Yes         Yes
R2                     (0.326)      0.203       0.213       0.246       0.262       0.231       0.249
N                       5443        5443        5443        5443        5443        5443        5443
Note: Standard errors clustered by model are in parentheses, * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01
                     Table 5: Performance of Policy Functions

                                           Logit Policy Threshold (R̄ or X̄)
                      Sample     0.10   0.20      0.25   0.275      0.30   0.40    0.50
% Correct if
  Redesign = 1         100%     82.2%   46.2%    30.0%   22.0%   15.8%      4.9%    1.7%
  Redesign = 0         100%     66.4%   86.7%    92.3%   94.5%   96.0%     99.2%   99.8%
  Exit = 1             100%     12.4%   11.9%    11.9%   11.9%   11.9%     10.3%    9.8%
  Exit = 0             100%     99.2%   99.4%    99.4%   99.4%   99.4%     99.5%   99.5%
Fraction of Sample
  Redesigned           9.8%     38.3%   16.5%     9.9%   7.1%       5.2%   1.2%    0.3%
  Exited               6.9%      1.5%    1.3%     1.3%   1.3%       1.3%   1.1%    1.0%




                     Table 6: Estimates of Dynamic Parameters

                     Type      Class       Redesign      Scrap
                                           Cost ($M)     Value ($M)
                               COMPACT         748.189    670.437
                     Car       FULL            610.789    339.629
                               MID             865.390    913.242
                               PU          1320.444      1754.849
                     Truck     SUV          700.290       607.463
                               VAN          795.492       266.583
                               LUX             614.002    117.170
                     Luxury
                               SPORT           505.648     20.170
                                                                                            Figure 1: Market Structure Within Automobile Class




               .15
                                                                                                                           .14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .08




                                                                                                                                      .12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .06




                      .1
                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .04




                                                                                                                        .08




       .05
                                                                                                                .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .02




    Market Share Within Class
                                                                                                                Market Share Within Class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Market Share Within Class




                                                                                                                           .04




               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                1985   1988   1991     1994     1997   2000       2003        2006   2009                                   1985   1988   1991       1994     1997   2000        2003       2006   2009                                   1985   1988    1991       1994       1997   2000     2003       2006   2009
                                                                Year                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                             Year

                                                     Honda Civic              VW Jetta                                                                            Honda Accord              Nissan Altima                                                                       Audi A4                Acura TL
                                                     Nissan Sentra            Kia Spectra                                                                         Buick Century             Toyota Camry                                                                        Infiniti Q45           Mercedes E Class
                                                     Redesign                                                                                                     Redesign                                                                                                      Redesign



                                              (a) Compact Cars                                                                                             (b) Midsize Cars                                                                                               (c) Luxury Cars
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                       .3




           .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .15




                                                                                                                             .2




                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                .1




   .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .05




Market Share Within Class
                                                                                                            Market Share Within Class
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Market Share Within Class




           0
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                            1985       1988   1991    1994     1997    2000      2003       2006     2009                               1985       1988   1991       1994    1997    2000       2003        2006   2009                               1985       1988   1991       1994        1997   2000    2003        2006   2009
                                                               Year                                                                                                          Year                                                                                                              Year

                                                 Chevy C/K Pickup             Ford F Series                                                                      Toyota 4Runner             Ford Explorer                                                               Chrysler Town & Country              Dodge Caravan
                                                 Dodge Ram                    Toyota Tundra                                                                      Jeep Wrangler              Chevy Blazer                                                                Honda Odyssey                        Nissan Quest
                                                 Redesign                                                                                                        Redesign                                                                                               Redesign



                                                     (d) Pickups                                                                                                    (e) SUVs                                                                                                       (f) Vans
                                                                                        Figure 2: Age Distribution




                                                                                                                         .25
                             .2




                                                                                                                         .2
                             .15




                                                                                                                        .15
                         Proportion




                                                                                                               Proportion
                             .1




                                                                                                              .1
                             .05




                                                                                                                         .05
                             0




                                                                                                                         0
                                      0                5             10            15           20       25                                                 0       5              10                15         20
                                                                           Age                                                                                                     Age



                         (a) Models Not Redesigning (Redesign = 0)                                                      (b) Models Redesigning (Redesign = 1)




                                                                                        Figure 3: Design Lifecycle
         .6




                                                                                                                 −.3 −.2 −.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                                                                                                                        Percentage Change in Market Share
         .5
 .1 .2 .3 .4
Percentage Change
         0
         −.2 −.1




                    −4       −3            −2              −1        0         1        2            3   4                                                      0   2          4              6           8            10
                                                            Years Since Redesign                                                                                                     Age of Design

                                                Cars                  Trucks                Luxury                                                                      Cars               Trucks             Luxury




                                          (a) Redesign and Share                                                                                                    (b) Design Age and Share
                                                              Figure 4: Predicted Probability of Redesign




                                                                                      .4
             .3




                                                                                                                                                                 .2
Logit Probability of Redesign




                                                                         Logit Probability of Redesign




                                                                                                                                                   Logit Probability of Redesign
                                                                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                                                      .15
                    .2




                                                                                     .2
    .1




                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                          .1




                                                                                                                                                                 .05
             0




                                                                                      0




                                0       5            10             15                                   0        5             10            15                                       2    3              4             5       6      7
                                            Age                                                                       Stock                                                                           Average Competitor Age

                                      Car    Truck        Luxury                                                Car     Truck        Luxury                                                     Car              Truck         Luxury




                                    (a) Age Effects                                                          (b) Stock Effects                                                       (c) Competitor Age Effects




                                                                   Figure 5: Predicted Probability of Exit
                                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                 .09
             .3




                                                                                                                                                                               .08
                                                                                                  .08
Logit Probability of Exit




                                                                           Logit Probability of Exit




                                                                                                                                                      Logit Probability of Exit
                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                     .07
                                                                                     .06




                                                                                                                                                            .06
 .1




                                                                         .04




                                                                                                                                                   .05           .04
                                                                                      .02
             0




                                0       5            10             15                                   0        5             10            15                                       2    3              4             5      6       7
                                            Age                                                                       Stock                                                                           Average Competitor Age

                                      Car    Truck        Luxury                                                Car     Truck        Luxury                                                     Car              Truck         Luxury




                                    (a) Age Effects                                                          (b) Stock Effects                                                       (c) Competitor Age Effects
                             4                                                                     Figure 6: Welfare Baseline




                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                          1.5
                             3
                    $US (Trillions)




                                                                                                                                 $US (Trillions)
                             2




                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                          .5
                             1
                             0




                                                                                                                                          0
                                           1990              1995            2000                         2005      2010                                         1990         1995                                         2000            2005              2010
                                                                           Year                                                                                                                                       Year
                                                   Total Surplus              Utility                        Firm Value                                                Total Surplus                                        Utility               Firm Value


                                                        (a) Entire Market                                                                                                                              (b) Cars




                                                                                                                                        0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25
                           2
                           1.5
                  $US (Trillions)




                                                                                                                               $US (Trillions)
                           1
                           .5
                           0




                                           1990              1995           2000                          2005      2010                                        1990          1995                                         2000            2005              2010
                                                                           Year                                                                                                                                      Year
                                               Total Surplus                  Utility                        Firm Value                                              Total Surplus                                          Utility               Firm Value


                                                              (c) Trucks                                                                                                             (d) Luxury




                                                                                  Figure 7: Decomposing Firm Value
                                                                                                                                                                                         0 .005 .01 .015 .02 .025
                                                                                                   .5
           3




                                                                                                   .4
$US (Trillions)




                                                                                        $US (Trillions)




                                                                                                                                                                              $US (Trillions)
           2




                                                                                                   .3
                                                                                                   .2
           1




                                                                                                   .1
           0




                                                                                                   0




                                    1990    1995       2000         2005      2010                           1990   1995       2000                           2005     2010                                         1990       1995        2000       2005      2010
                                                      Year                                                                 Year                                                                                                        Year
                                              Market           Cars                                                   Market                            Cars                                                                      Market            Cars
                                              Trucks           Luxury                                                 Trucks                            Luxury                                                                    Trucks            Luxury


                  (a) Profits from Sales (W1 )                                                             (b) Redesign Expenditure                                                                        (c) Scrap Value (W3 ∗ θX )
                                                                                                                  (W2 ∗ θR )
Figure 8: Mapping of the Welfare Differences Between Optimized Policy Functions Relative
to Baseline Policy Functions
                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.5




                                                                                                           Total Surplus: % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Total Surplus: % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base
                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                 −2.5                                                                                                                                                            −2.5
                                                                                 −5                                                                                                                                                              −5
                              1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                 −10                                                                                                                                                             −10
      Competition Perturbation




                                                                                                                                                                      Competition Perturbation
                                                                                 −20                                                                                                                                                             −20
                 1




                                                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −30
                                                                                 −30
                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −40
                                                                                 −40


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −50
                                                                                 −50
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                     0



                                    0   .5              1              1.5   2                                                                                                                      0   .5              1              1.5   2
                                             Obsolescence Perturbation                                                                                                                                       Obsolescence Perturbation


                                                (a) Entire Market                                                                                                                                                        (b) Cars
                2




                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                        Total Surplus: % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Total Surplus: % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base
                                                                                 2.5
                                                                                 0                                                                                                                                                               2.5
                                                                                 −2.5                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                 −5                                                                                                                                                              −2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −5
                          1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5




                                                                                 −10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −10
  Competition Perturbation




                                                                                                                                                                  Competition Perturbation




                                                                                 −20                                                                                                                                                             −20
             1




                                                                                                                                                                             1




                                                                                 −30                                                                                                                                                             −30


                                                                                 −40                                                                                                                                                             −40
                .5




                                                                                                                                                                                .5




                                                                                 −50                                                                                                                                                             −50
                0




                                                                                                                                                                                0




                                    0   .5              1              1.5   2                                                                                                                      0   .5              1              1.5   2
                                             Obsolescence Perturbation                                                                                                                                       Obsolescence Perturbation


                                                      (c) Trucks                                                                                                                                                     (d) Luxury

Note:  denotes the combination of perturbations that lead to the maximum total surpluses.
Figure 9: Welfare Components: Welfare Differences Between Optimized Policy Functions
Relative to Baseline Policy Functions
                                                                                                  4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                          % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base
                                                                                                  2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                  −6 −4 −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −10
                                                                                                             1990             1995            2000                                                  2005         2010                                                                    1990          1995                                              2000            2005              2010
                                                                                                                                            Year                                                                                                                                                                                                    Year
                                                                                                                    Total Surplus              Utility                                                    Firm Value                                                                           Total Surplus                                              Utility               Firm Value


                                                                                                                         (a) Entire Market                                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) Cars




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                              % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base
                                                                                      4
                                                                                      2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                      0
                                                                                      −6 −4 −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −5




                                                                                                             1990             1995           2000                                                  2005         2010                                                                    1990           1995                                              2000            2005             2010
                                                                                                                                            Year                                                                                                                                                                                                    Year
                                                                                                                 Total Surplus                 Utility                                                   Firm Value                                                                           Total Surplus                                               Utility               Firm Value


                                                                                                                                (c) Trucks                                                                                                                                                                                   (d) Luxury




Figure 10: Decomposing Firm Value Components: Welfare Differences Between Optimized
Policy Functions Relative to Baseline Policy Functions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400
 % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base




                                                                                                                                                          % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        % Difference Optimal Perturb vs. Base
                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                         4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   300
                                         2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                  −20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   100
                                         −2




                                                                                                                                                                                                  −40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                         −4




                                                                                           1990               1995       2000        2005          2010                                                  1990   1995        2000                                                       2005     2010                                              1990       1995        2000       2005      2010
                                                                                                                       Year                                                                                             Year                                                                                                                                         Year
                                                                                                                Market          Cars                                                                               Market                                                          Cars                                                                         Market           Cars
                                                                                                                Trucks          Luxury                                                                             Trucks                                                          Luxury                                                                       Trucks           Luxury


                                          (a) Profits from Sales (W1 )                                                                                                                                  (b) Redesign Expenditure                                                                                                                (c) Scrap Value (W3 ∗ θX )
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (W2 ∗ θR )
Figure 11: Gradient-weighted gradient of converged sets of parameters
                                                                                                            Hessian-Weighted Gradient




                                                                          600000
                                                                             400000
                                                                      Density
                                                                200000    0
                                                                              -.00002                   -.00001              0              .00001                         .00002
                                                                                                                  Hessian-Weighted Gradient
                                                                                      kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.802e-07




Figure 12: Objective function across all converged sets of parameters


                                                          Newton-Raphson                                                                                                       DFP
                      80




                                                                                                                                               60
                      60




                                                                                                                                               40
   Density




                                                                                                                                     Density
     40




                                                                                                                                               20
                      20
                      0




                                                                                                                                               0




                   1.265e+11                                                                                         1.265e+11                 1.265e+11                                        1.265e+11
                                                              Objective Function                                                                                        Objective Function
                                          kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0021                                                                 kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0023



                                                              Nelder-Mead                                                                               Nelder-Mead + Newton-Raphson
   5.000e-121.000e-111.500e-112.000e-11




                                                                                                                                               80
                                                                                                                                               60
               Density




                                                                                                                                     Density
                                                                                                                                       40      20
                      0




                                                                                                                                               0




                   1.000e+11                            2.000e+11      3.000e+11                                    4.000e+11                  1.265e+11                                        1.265e+11
                                                            Objective Function                                                                                          Objective Function
                                          kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 9.5e+09                                                                kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0017
Figure 13: Estimated parameters across starting values and algorithms


                                        Newton-Raphson                                                                                             DFP
            3000000




                                                                                   2000004000006000008000001000000
              2000000
         Density




                                                                                             Density
   1000000  0




                                                                                                     0




           813.39797                  813.39797      813.39797         813.39797                  813.39797                          813.39797     813.39797           813.39797
                                      Estimated Redesigned Cost                                                                       Estimated Redesigned Cost
                        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 4.740e-08                                                    kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 1.352e-07



                                            Nelder-Mead                                                                     Nelder-Mead + Newton-Raphson
                                                                                   5000001000000150000020000002500000
            .05
            .04
          .03
      Density




                                                                                              Density
   .02      .01
            0




                                                                                                     0




                        700         750       800       850            900                        813.39796                                                              813.39798
                                     Estimated Redesigned Cost                                                                        Estimated Redesigned Cost
                        kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 2.6073                                                       kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 5.446e-08
Figure 14: Estimated parameters across starting values and algorithms


                                                      Newton-Raphson                                                                        DFP
   10000 20000 30000 40000 50000




                                                                                                         40000
                                                                                               20000 30000
            Density




                                                                                                Density
                                                                                                         10000
                  0




                                                                                                         0




                408.83488                         408.8349      408.83492          408.83494         408.83488                  408.8349      408.83492         408.83494
                                                   Estimated Scrap Value                                                         Estimated Scrap Value
                                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 2.968e-06                                  kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 3.851e-06



                                                       Nelder-Mead                                                   Nelder-Mead + Newton-Raphson
                                                                                                         60000
                  .0005
                  .0004




                                                                                                         40000
   .0002 .0003
       Density




                                                                                               Density
                                                                                                         20000
                  .0001
                  0




                                                                                                         0




                                    -1000         0        1000     2000    3000     4000                 408.83488              408.8349      408.83492        408.83494
                                                      Estimated Scrap Value                                                       Estimated Scrap Value
                                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 298.8334                                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 2.995e-06
