                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  WHAT DRIVES AGGREGATE INVESTMENT? EVIDENCE FROM GERMAN SURVEY
                              DATA

                                       Rüdiger Bachmann
                                          Peter Zorn

                                       Working Paper 18990
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w18990


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                           April 2013, Revised February 2018




We are grateful to John Haltiwanger and conference/seminar participants at the 2012 Ifo
Conference on "Macroeconomics and Survey Data" and at the Ifo Macro Seminar for useful
comments and suggestions. We also thank Annette Weichselberger for helping us with the data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Rüdiger Bachmann and Peter Zorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
What Drives Aggregate Investment? Evidence from German Survey Data
Rüdiger Bachmann and Peter Zorn
NBER Working Paper No. 18990
April 2013, Revised February 2018
JEL No. E20,E22,E30,E32,O47

                                         ABSTRACT

The ifo Investment Survey asks firms in the German manufacturing sector about the importance
of sales, technological factors, finance, return expectations, and macroeconomic policy for their
investment activity in a given year. We show that these subjective investment determinants 1)
capture economically what their labels suggest, and 2) have strong explanatory power for
aggregate manufacturing investment growth fluctuations. In a second step, we use these
determinants to identify aggregate demand and aggregate technology shocks and argue that the
bulk of the variance of both aggregate manufacturing investment and output growth fluctuations
(as much as approximately two thirds in both cases) is explained by aggregate demand shocks.
Consistent with neoclassical views, however, technological factors are the most important
investment determinant on average.


Rüdiger Bachmann
3026 Jenkins Nanovic Hall
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
Notre Dame, IN 46556
rbachman@nd.edu

Peter Zorn
Ludwigstraße 28/RG, Room 014
Department of Economics
University of Munich
80539 Munich
Germany
zorn@econ.lmu.de
1         Introduction

What drives aggregate fluctuations? This is a seminal question in macroeconomics (see
Kocherlakota, 2009), to which a number of approaches have been brought to bear: struc-
tural vector autoregressions (to cite only a few seminal papers: Blanchard and Quah, 1989;
Christiano et al., 1996; Blanchard and Perotti, 2002); dynamic factor models (e.g., Stock
and Watson (2012)); estimated DSGE models (e.g., Smets and Wouters (2007)); business
cycle accounting (e.g., Chari et al. (2007)); and narrative approaches to identifying macroe-
conomic policy shocks, possibly in conjunction with structural vector autoregressions (see,
for example, Romer and Romer, 2004, 2010; Mertens and Ravn, 2013).1
        This paper pursues a novel and complementary approach, using unique firm-level data
from the Munich-based ifo Investment Survey (IS). The IS asks decision makers in German
manufacturing firms about the importance of sales, technological factors, finance, return
expectations, and macroeconomic policy as determinants for their investment activity in
a given year. We propose a survey-based, narrative approach that estimates shocks from
this subjective reasons data, including shocks potentially unrelated to macroeconomic policy.
The approach in the literature closest in spirit to ours is Bewley (1999), who interviews
managers in firms to investigate the sources of downward nominal wage rigidity. Using the
firm-level survey responses, we first construct index measures of the importance of each
investment determinant in the manufacturing sector (henceforth called aggregate investment
determinant indices). In a second step, we recover orthogonal aggregate shocks from these
index series. We finally compute the contributions of the identified aggregate shocks to the
fluctuations of aggregate manufacturing investment growth (henceforth aggregate investment
growth).
        We argue that, in Germany, aggregate demand shocks and aggregate technology shocks
shocks are the only plausible candidates for explaining aggregate investment fluctuations,2
    1
    Ramey (2016) provides an excellent overview.
    2
    In this sense, our findings are related to Blanchard and Quah (1989)’s seminal contribution, although we
show this bipartition as a result rather than imposing it as an assumption.


                                                     1
and make them therefore the main focus of our strategy to identify orthogonal aggregate
shocks from the narrative determinant series. To disentangle these two shocks in the data,
we impose correlation restrictions that rely on the informational content of the narrative series
and simple economic theory.3 Specifically, we require that the identified aggregate demand
shocks are highly correlated with the sales investment determinant, and likewise for the
identified aggregate technology shocks and the technological factors investment determinant.
In addition, in many standard models aggregate demand shocks and aggregate technology
shocks have different implications for prices. In particular, producer price inflation should
be positively correlated with aggregate demand shocks while its correlation with technology
shocks should be negative, and we impose these implications for identification.
       We find that, consistent with neoclassical views, on average over time technological fac-
tors are the most important investment determinant. This is not the case for the fluctuations
of aggregate investment growth (and also of aggregate output growth). First, a considerable
portion, 81 percent, of the total variance of aggregate investment growth can be explained by
our survey-based subjective investment determinants and the orthogonal shocks extracted
from them. This result shows the high quality of these survey data, and, more generally,
lends credence to our survey-based narrative approach. Second, in our baseline identification
scheme, we find that approximately two thirds of the total variance of aggregate investment
growth can be explained through aggregate demand shocks. Aggregate technology shocks
play only a minor role.4 This finding is also confirmed in a counterfactual simulation of the
post-reunification German aggregate investment rate: almost none of the officially declared
recession years for Germany would have experienced negative investment growth without the
aggregate demand shocks, in contrast to the data. The reunification boom would not exist,
neither would the prolonged slump in the early 2000s. There would have been no invest-
   3
      See also Ludvigson et al. (2017a,b) who advocate for new identification techniques for structural vector
autoregressions by imposing correlation restrictions.
    4
      In contrast to a large part of the literature, our approach allows us to jointly identify aggregate demand
and aggregate technology shocks. In other identification schemes, where we disregard the correlation re-
strictions with producer price inflation, technology shocks contribute no more than 30 percent to the total
variance of aggregate investment growth.


                                                       2
ment boom nor a rebound around the Great Recession. In other words, without aggregate
demand shocks, the aggregate investment growth rate series would not align with the Ger-
man post-reunification business cycle. Aggregate demand shocks are thus essential for our
understanding of this business cycle.
   What are these aggregate demand shocks that we identify as determining the bulk of
aggregate investment fluctuations? In this paper, we provide a negative and a positive
answer to this question.
   First, using industry-specific capital expenditure and subjective investment determinant
data and input-output matrices for the German manufacturing sector, we argue that our iden-
tified aggregate demand shocks are unlikely to be the result of misclassification of industry-
specific technology shocks that spill over to other industries where they are merely perceived
as demand shocks: for instance, one small manufacturing industry which procures large
amounts of input goods from other upstream manufacturing industries could have a positive
technology shock followed by increased input demand for other manufacturing industries,
which would lead to higher demand-related investment there. Alternatively, consider a large
manufacturing industry that makes an invention that is sold to downstream industries. It
might classify a technological shock as increased demand for its products. We investigate both
channels and conclude that none appears quantitatively relevant. Moreover, an industry-level
analysis shows that in most manufacturing industries the aggregate pattern – demand shocks
explain the bulk of investment growth volatility – replicates itself at the more disaggregate
level, that is, our aggregate results are not a mere composition effect.
   Second, we use manufacturing business sentiment and consumer sentiment data to argue
that our identified aggregate demand shocks, which correlate well with these standard senti-
ment measures, are good candidates for sentiment or animal spirit shocks. By contrast, with
the one and clear exception of the post-reunification monetary tightening in Germany by the
Bundesbank and the immediate subsequent recovery, no obvious demand stabilization policy
instrument has any association with our identified aggregate demand shocks.


                                               3
       Traditionally, there has been a branch of economics methodology that viewed subjective
survey approaches, that is, asking economic agents what they did, what they expect and why
they did something, with some scepticism. Nevertheless, a growing number of economists
has now made use of subjective survey data, mainly to study expectation formation and
their rationality: Nerlove (1983), using business surveys from various countries, is a very
early example, Bachmann and Elstner (2015) and Gennaioli et al. (2015) are more recent
ones. Guiso and Parigi (1999), Bachmann et al. (2013) and Bachmann et al. (2017) have
used expectation data from business surveys to study the impact of business uncertainty
on economic activity. On the household side, Carroll and Dunn (1997), Souleles (2004),
Bachmann et al. (2015) and Malmendier and Nagel (2016) are important examples, each
with different research questions.
       We view our approach as pushing one step further: if we can ask economic agents about
their subjective expectations and gain useful economic insights, why not ask them about
their subjective reasons for carrying out a particular economic action and use the answers
for economic analysis?5 The advantage of our survey-based approach towards identifying
shocks lies in this putative directness: the survey respondents report whether their investment
activity in a given year was influenced by, for instance, technological factors, and, if so, how
strongly. As a result, the narrative series constructed from the survey responses and used
in shock identification are less prone to be confounded by other factors. In this regard,
our approach is similar to other narrative methodologies that have been used in empirical
macroeconomics to study the effects of macroeconomic policies (see Romer and Romer, 2004,
   5
     For example, some of the disagreement in the literature about the importance of technology shocks
results from measurement issues: because of their unobserved nature, macroeconomists have to resort to
various empirical approaches to measure them, each with its underlying assumptions that can be the target
of critique. For example, the “purified” technology measure by Basu et al. (2006) – basically the Solow
residual accounting for non-technological effects such as varying capacity utilization, non-constant returns to
scale, and aggregation effects – might be prone to “incomplete cleansing”; see Alexopoulos (2011, p.1146).
The other often-used technology measure, obtained from long-run restrictions in vector autoregressions, can
be contaminated by other, possibly also unobserved, exogenous shocks, for example tax shocks or preference
shocks, or made invalid by heterogeneous factor inputs into the aggregate production function; see, respec-
tively, Uhlig (2004) and Bocola et al. (2014). We do not claim to have found a silver bullet in this paper,
but at least the narrative directness of our approach in conjunction with it passing many plausibility checks
in the micro and the macro data provides a new perspective on the problem.


                                                      4
2010). Indeed, before we use the reasons data for shock extraction, one of the contributions of
this paper is to show extensively that the investment determinants that we base our narrative
approach on have highly plausible economic content: the sales investment determinant is
highly correlated with new manufacturing orders; the technological investment determinant
is correlated with the prevalence of restructuring and rationalization investment as well as
process innovations carried out at the firm level; and the finance investment determinant is
related to independent measures of external finance dependence at the firm level, and, in the
time series, to credit spreads and proxies of idiosyncratic business uncertainty. Finally, we
show that firms for which the sales determinant is important for their investment behavior,
are more likely to increase prices and less likely to decrease them; and vice versa for the
technological determinant.
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the survey data
and presents the aggregate investment determinant indices. We also validate in great detail
the survey data against proxy variables for aggregate demand, technology, etc. Section 3
lays out the empirical model for estimating the contribution of the aggregate investment
determinants to aggregate investment growth fluctuations, and motivates the identifying
assumptions. Section 4 presents the results, both for the manufacturing sector and disaggre-
gated at the two-digit industry level and by German states. Section 5 summarizes the main
findings and concludes.



2         The Survey Data

2.1         The ifo Investment Survey (IS)

The IS is a semi-annual survey for the German manufacturing sector,6 carried out in the
spring and fall by the ifo Institute since 1955. Its main purpose is to provide firm-level quan-
titative capital expenditure data and future investment plans for a panel of firms. In addition,
    6
        The mining sector is also included, though it is very small relative to manufacturing proper.



                                                         5
since 1989 the fall survey questionnaire asks firms about the qualitative and subjective effects
of several investment determinants on their capital expenditures in the current year, a rather
unique feature of this survey. We have access to the micro data to perform our analysis until
2013.7 We only use the West German part of the data, because the survey questionnaire for
East German firms is different and much less consistent over the years compared to that for
West German firms.
       The main advantages of the IS are its high number of respondents, counting on average
roughly 1,600 firms per year in our sample; that it provides quantitative firm-specific capital
expenditure data; and the information about qualitative and subjective investment determi-
nants, along with a host of other information about firm-level investment activities that we
use to cross-validate the content of the subjective investment determinants. In addition, we
can merge a subset of firms from the IS with another prominent ifo Institute firm survey, the
ifo Business Cycle Survey, which we will also use for cross-validation. Moreover, aggregate
investment growth based on the survey micro data is highly correlated (0.89) with manu-
facturing investment growth data from the Federal Statistical Office (see Figure 1), which
means that our sample is representative of the business cycle behavior of the universe of
firms in the German manufacturing sector.8 The low annual frequency of the data and the
relatively small number of observations, thus available in the time dimension, a time series of
25, is admittedly a disadvantage.9 Nevertheless, we note that the planning horizon of firms
for investment typically spans a (fiscal) year, so the annual frequency of the data is not per
se restrictive.
       Specifically, we make use of the following two questions from the survey questionnaire:




   7
      Confidentiality agreements with the firms cause a certain delay as to when the micro data are available
to researchers.
    8
      We note that this high correlation is not a mechanical result, as the IS data is not an input into the
official investment numbers. National accounting investment data are based on a separate and administrative
investment survey run by the Federal Statistical Office, which does not ask about investment determinants.
    9
      Our robustness checks using semi-aggregate data at the two-digit industry level and by German Laender
mitigate this problem somewhat.


                                                     6
Q1. Gross Fixed Capital Formation in Fiscal Year [Last Year]
[Last Year]
                     (in 1000 Euro)


Q2. Investment Determinants [This Year]
Our investment activity in the Old Laender in [This Year] was positively/negatively affected
by:

                                                                     [This Year]

  Investment Determinant                  strongly        weakly          no        weakly      strongly
                                          positive        positive    influence    negative    negative
                                         influence       influence                 influence   influence

                                             ◻
                                             ◻             ◻
                                                           ◻             ◻
                                                                         ◻           ◻
                                                                                     ◻            ◻
                                                                                                  ◻
                                             ◻             ◻             ◻           ◻            ◻
  Sales Situation and Expectation

                                             ◻             ◻             ◻           ◻            ◻
  Finance

                                             ◻             ◻             ◻           ◻            ◻
  Return Expectation

                                             ◻             ◻             ◻           ◻            ◻
  Technological Factors
  Macro Policy Environment
  Other
  [Codification]                            [+2]           [+1]          [0]         [-1]         [-2]


       In Q1 firms report their realized capital expenditures for the preceding year, which is
asked in the spring and the fall surveys (except for the falls of 2002 and 2003). In Q2,
which is asked only in the fall survey, firms give information about how several investment
determinants have affected their investment activity in the current year. Specifically, the
survey questionnaire asks firms about the effects of their sales situation and expectations,
finance, return expectations, technological factors, the macro policy environment, and other
investment determinants on their capital expenditures.10 The possible answers are: “strongly
negative”, “weakly negative”, “no influence”, “weakly positive”, or “strongly positive”. The
respondent is asked to check one box for each investment determinant. We code the answers
in the variables Tech, Finance, Sales, Return, Macro, and Other that can take on the values
-2 (strongly negative influence), -1 (weakly negative influence), 0 (no influence), +1 (weakly
positive influence), or +2 (strongly positive influence).11
       We only consider firm-year observations where the investment growth rate and at least
  10
   The survey guidelines for the investment determinants are available in the appendix.
  11
   The main results are quantitatively very similar if we use a concave (square root) or convex (quadratic)
quantification scheme instead.


                                                     7
one investment determinant are observable. Of course, we sync the answers to Q1 and Q2 in
such a way that the investment determinants of a given year are paired with the investment
activity of that same year. Our sample is based on 40,905 firm-year observations in total.


2.2       Aggregation

Recall that our research question is about the sources of fluctuations in aggregate (manu-
facturing) investment growth. To quantify these sources, we first aggregate, separately for
each investment determinant, the survey responses through weighted averaging to compute
what we call aggregate investment determinants, which are thus meant to capture the ag-
gregate importance of a particular reason to invest in a given year. From these investment
determinants we later recover orthogonal aggregate shocks.12 The fundamental identification
assumption of our survey-based narrative approach is that the firm-level survey responses
contain information about the shocks that affect firms’ investment decisions. The putative
advantage of the survey-based approach is that the macroeconomic shocks are ultimately
extracted from variables which are meant to directly measure the effect of, say, technology
on capital expenditures.
       In extensions, we also study semi-aggregate specifications at the two-digit industry level,
and at the German Laender (German states) level, allowing us to gauge whether our aggregate
results are driven by particular groups of firms or whether they capture aggregate phenomena.
We find the latter.
       Formally, let ∆ItIF O denote aggregate investment growth based on Q1 of the IS, invit
is firm i’s investment in year t,13 and Nt is the number of observations for which firm-level
  12
     Our approach is thus related to structural factor-analytic methods; see Stock and Watson (2016) for
a recent survey. In particular, the aggregate investment determinant indices can be interpreted as what
Stock and Watson (2016) call named factors, i.e., they are linked to a specific reason to invest, estimated by
cross-sectional averaging, which is a simple example of nonparametric estimation of factor models. We then
identify orthogonal structural shocks from these factors.
  13
     We average the fall and the spring capital expenditure data, whenever they are both available, because in a
few circumstances they may slightly deviate from each other, and averaging thus helps mitigate measurement
and reporting error. Otherwise we use whichever investment number, spring or fall, is available. The results
are robust to using only the fall data. See for a detailed discussion of both data treatment procedures
Bachmann et al. (2017).


                                                       8
data is observable in years t and t − 1. Define firm i’s share in total investment at time t by
        invit
ωit = Nt        . Then the aggregate investment growth rate, ∆ItIF O , is given by:
     ∑i=1 invit

                                         Nt
                                                     invit − invit−1
                                ∆ItIF O = ∑ ωit−1                                           (1)
                                         i=1            invit−1

Similarly, let xit denote any of the six firm-level investment determinants defined above,
ranging from -2 to +2. Then, for every investment determinant, we aggregate up to an
investment determinant index, Xt , as follows:

                                               Nt
                                         Xt = ∑ ωit xit                                     (2)
                                               i=1



With a slight abuse of notation, Tech, Finance, Sales, Return, Macro, and Other may
henceforth refer also to these aggregate investment determinant indices.


2.3    The Raw Data

In Figure 1, we compare the aggregate investment growth rate obtained from the Ifo Invest-
ment Survey data, ∆ItIF O , with that obtained from data for the West German manufacturing
sector provided by the Federal Statistical Office, ∆ItF SO . The correlation coefficient between
both series is 0.89.
   Figure 2 plots the aggregate investment determinant indices over time. Two observa-
tions in Figure 2 stand out. First, in contrast to the other investment determinant indices
which often fluctuate around zero, the effect of technology on capital expenditures is positive
throughout. In fact, as panel C of Table 1 shows, technological factors are on average the
most important subjective investment determinant. This observation is consistent with the
neoclassical view that technological factors determine investment on average and in the long-
run: the average value of Tech is 0.92, followed by Sales, which averages 0.60. By contrast,
Finance and Macro are essentially zero on average.



                                                9
   Second, the aggregate investment determinant indices are (imperfectly) correlated with
each other and the business cycle. Panel A of Table 1 shows the pairwise correlation coef-
ficients of the investment determinants in the sample. For statistical inference, we generate
10,000 bootstrap estimates for the correlation coefficients by resampling overlapping moving
blocks of a three-year length from the data. Next, to gauge statistical significance, we com-
pute the fraction of bootstrap samples for which the correlation coefficient has the opposite
sign of the point estimate. The correlation between Sales, Tech, Finance, Return and Macro
is always significant, positive, and in one case substantial: Sales and Return have a correla-
tion coefficient of approximately 0.95, which suggests that both variables capture essentially
the same economic concept, and that Return, that is, a firm’s return on investment, is viewed
by the firms as mostly Sales-determined. The investment determinant index Other is not
significantly correlated with any of the other variables.
   The fact that some of these aggregated investment determinants are correlated is not
surprising: for example, a shock to financial intermediation in the economy may impact
investment directly through standard finance effects, but also simultaneously through an
aggregate demand effect from other firms and the households in this economy. It means,
however, that we cannot interpret the investment determinants directly as shocks (hence
the use of “investment determinants”). Nevertheless, we will argue below that given the
investment determinant’s economic content, which we will explicate in the next subsection,
and because of, in many standard models, differential implications of demand and technology
shocks for prices, we can extract from these investment determinants orthogonal shocks that
can be interpreted as aggregate demand and aggregate technology shocks.
   Panel B of Table 1 reports the correlations of the investment determinant indices with
the aggregate investment growth rate, ∆ItF SO . The correlation with Sales, Finance, Return
and Macro, is significant and strong in general. For example, the correlation coefficient
between Sales and ∆ItF SO is 0.84. The correlation coefficient between Tech and ∆ItF SO is
also significant, but clearly lower at 0.55. The category Other is not significantly correlated


                                              10
with the aggregate investment growth rate.14
       From this simple correlational analysis we may already expect that technology shocks
might be not the main source of time series variation in aggregate investment growth. This
hypothesis is also supported by the volatilities of these investment determinants: Sales and
Return are very volatile, unlike Tech, Finance and Macro. As we have seen, the latter two
also have little importance as investment determinants on average, which together means that
we can expect them to play only a minor role in explaining aggregate investment fluctuations
in Germany.
       To sum up, this simple statistical analysis already reveals many results that we later
find confirmed in our econometric analysis: Sales and Return are very volatile and highly
correlated with investment growth (and with each other, which means they capture the same
economic concept); given its mean, Tech is important for investment on average, but given its
relatively low volatility and milder correlation with aggregate investment growth unlikely its
major driver; Finance and Macro with their low means and low volatilities are not likely to be
important for aggregate investment in Germany; and Other with its lack of correlation with
either aggregate investment or any other investment determinant is an orthogonal catch-all
category, again unlikely to be important for aggregate investment. These findings suggest
we can treat Sales and Tech as the core of our analysis, and they justify our focus later on
aggregate demand versus aggregate technology shocks.
       We conclude this section by separately investigating the behavior of the fraction of survey
responses for each of the five answer categories – “strongly negative”, “weakly negative”,
“no influence”, “weakly positive”, or “strongly positive” – and each of the six investment
determinants: Sales, Tech, Finance, Return, Macro, and Other (here referring to the firm-
  14
    All these results are very similar with ∆ItIF O . Also, to provide some perspective on the business cycle
properties of aggregate investment growth in our sample, 1989-2013, vis-à-vis a larger sample from 1965-2013:
volatility is somewhat smaller in our baseline sample (0.0943) versus the larger sample (0.1076); the first-order
autocorrelation is 0.26 for the 1989-2013 sample, and 0.32 for the 1965-2013 sample; the correlation with
manufacturing industrial production growth is 0.70 (1989-2013 sample) versus 0.59 (1965-2013 sample); and
the relative volatility to manufacturing industrial production growth is 1.66 (1989-2013 sample) versus 2.13
(1965-2013 sample). Overall, the German business cycle is reasonably stable even across the reunification so
that our analysis is not specific to the post-reunification era.


                                                       11
level survey responses), as shown in Figure 3. The modal responses for Sales and Return
fluctuate widely in the expected cyclical direction between “weakly positive” and “strongly
negative,” which is consistent with business cycle asymmetries: recessions are brisk and
severe, expansions smoother (see McKay and Reis (2008)). The center-top panel shows, by
contrast, that there are essentially no firms that report a negative effect of technology on
capital expenditures, consistent with the notion that technology shocks are rarely negative,
even at the idiosyncratic level. Furthermore, the panels for Finance and Macro confirm the
“relatively unimportant”-diagnosis for these two investment determinants from above: almost
always, even in severe recessions, more than half of the respondents attributed no role to them;
even, by and large, for Finance in the Great Recession. Despite the importance of finance in
the United States during that time, the Great Recession in Germany was not predominantly
a financial crisis.15 Finally, the panel for Other shows that again more than half of the
respondents attributed no role to this determinant most of the time, which we interpret
as evidence that the IS is fairly exhaustive when it asks for investment determinants: the
residual category is mostly unused, which means that no other major investment determinant
appears to have been omitted from the questionnaire.


2.4     Economic Content

This subsection discusses the economic content of the aggregated investment determinant
indices and and validates them against proxies for aggregate demand, technology, etc. The
results in this subsection will be an important prerequisite for the narrative element in our
identification strategy below. We start with Sales.
  15
     We stress that this part of our results is unlikely to be generalizable to the US context, nor do we mean
to say that finance or financial frictions are not important for investment decisions in general. Rather, the
fact that most German firms rely on internal funds for investment financing (see Sections 2.4 for more on
this issue) indicates the presence of major financial frictions in Germany. But these financial frictions appear
to be a broader permanent institutional feature of the German economy that German firms just perceive as
normal, rather than a contributor to the German business cycle.




                                                      12
Sales Figure 4 compares Sales with various time series of general economic activity in the
German manufacturing sector (revenues and industrial production), and, more specifically,
a proxy for aggregate demand for this sector, that is, new orders. The upper-left panel of
Figure 4 plots Sales and the cyclical component of the volume index of revenues in the
German manufacturing sector, obtained from the Federal Statistical Office. The cyclical
component is extracted by means of the HP-filter with a smoothing parameter of λ = 6.25
for annual data, following Ravn and Uhlig (2002). The correlation between both time series
is positive and high: 0.67. The lower-left panel of Figure 4 displays real production in the
German manufacturing sector, obtained from the Bundesbank, at business cycle frequencies
(λ = 6.25). Again, the correlation with Sales is positive and high: 0.62. Finally, in the
upper-right panel of Figure 4, we plot the HP-filtered (λ = 6.25) index of new orders in the
German manufacturing sector from the Bundesbank. The correlation with the investment
determinant index Sales is 0.72. Especially this last piece of evidence is consistent with the
view that the aggregate investment determinant index Sales captures the effect of aggregate
demand on capital expenditures in the manufacturing sector.


Tech: In addition to capital expenditure data and investment determinants, the IS also asks,
again in the fall questionnaire, about the fraction of total investment expenditures which in
that year went into increases in capacity, restructuring, rationalization, maintenance, and
other types of capital expenditures. First, we want to guard against the following possibility,
which would be an alternative – to the neoclassical view – interpretation for Tech being
consistently and on average above zero: whenever firms have to replace and maintain their
capital stock due to continual wear and tear they answer that technological factors played
an important role in their investment decisions. To this end, we use the fraction of total
investment in a given year that was undertaken for maintenance reasons, pool all these
observations across years and firms, sort them and compute for each tercile the investment-
weighted average of Tech. Table 2 displays the results: if anything, for firm-year observations
that have a high-maintenance content in their investment activity, Tech plays a relatively

                                              13
lower role than for those with a low-maintenance content. The differences in conditional
means across terciles are statistically significant at the 1% level. We therefore find no evidence
that Tech merely captures the maintenance and replacement of existing capital.
       Next, we perform the flip side to the test in Table 2, namely, whether Tech is positively
correlated with other forms of investment, especially those that are plausibly related to
technological innovations: restructuring and rationalization investment. We thus sum the
shares for restructuring and rationalization investment and repeat the analysis that led to
Table 2. Table 3 shows the results: the investment-weighted average of Tech increases
monotonically with the share of investment that went into restructuring and rationalization.
The differences in conditional means across terciles are statistically significant at the 1%
level. Therefore, for those firm-year observations that have a high innovation-content in
their investment activity, Tech plays a relatively higher role, which makes it a plausible
variable to identify technological innovations and their impact on investment decisions.
       This interpretation is confirmed in our next test where we use another feature of the
IS, which asked until 2001 (in the spring questionnaire) whether capital expenditures in
the preceding year were targeted towards process innovations. The possible answers were
“Yes” and “No”. As before, we pool all firm-year observations, compute the investment-
weighted averages of Tech conditional on these two answers, and compare them. Table 4
shows the results: Tech plays a relatively larger role for the investment activity of those firms
that had capital expenditures targeted towards process innovations. Again, the difference in
conditional means is statistically significant at the 1% level.
       Finally, Eurostat provides a classification of three-digit manufacturing industries accord-
ing to their technological intensity, defined as the ratio of industry R&D spending to value
added. Table 5 shows investment-weighted conditional means of the absolute value of Tech,
conditional on three different R&D intensity classes.16 While the results are less clearly dis-
  16
    For this exercise, we use the absolute value of Tech because the classification variable here is an impor-
tance variable at the industry-level, so we would expect both large positive and large negative values of Tech
to be found in high technology industries with a higher frequency. In practice, since large negative values of
Tech are rare, the results hold up had we used just plain Tech.


                                                     14
positive than in the tests with firm-level characteristics17 – here we essentially assign to a firm
the R&D intensity of its industry, which creates statistical noise –, they nevertheless confirm
the results using the IS firm-level data: the more technology-intensive a firm’s industry is,
the more important the role Tech plays in its investment activity on average.
       In sum, the evidence in Tables 2 to 5 taken together, at least suggests that Tech captures
indeed the effect of technological innovation factors on firms’ capital expenditures.


Finance We next turn to Finance. From 1989 through 2001, the spring questionnaire of the
IS featured a question about the share of capital expenditures funded by external finance in
the preceding year. Finance should be more important as an investment determinant in firms
that rely more on external finance. To investigate this hypothesis, we use the fraction of total
investment in a given year that was funded by external finance, pool all these observations
across years and firms, sort them and compute for each tercile the investment-weighted
average of the absolute value of Finance. As Table 6 shows, two results from this exercise
stand out. First, the cutoff value for the first tercile is exactly zero, and more than a third of
all firm-year observations lie at this cutoff. That is, the majority of observations in the IS does
not use any external funds for their capital expenditures. This finding is consistent with the
fact that external finance in Germany plays a very limited role for investment financing. The
Bundesbank (2012), for instance, reports that on average about two thirds of total corporate
financing in Germany between 1991 and 2010 were raised through internal funds. Moreover,
it corroborates the results in the previous section that Finance with its low mean is unlikely
to be important for aggregate investment fluctuations in Germany.
       Second, as Table 6 shows, the weighted mean of the absolute value of Finance indeed
increases monotonically the more firms rely on external finance for their capital expenditures.
For example, firms in the first tercile respond that financial factors had a 0.23 influence on
capital expenditures (given the absolute value, on a scale between zero and two). On the
  17
    The difference between firms in low and medium technology-intensive firms is statistically not significant,
whereas the differences between any other pair of technological intensity bins are statistically significant at
the 1% level.


                                                      15
other hand, firms in the third tercile with more than 20% of investment financed through
external funds state that financial factors had a 0.51 influence on their investment activity.
The differences in conditional means between any two terciles are statistically significant at
the 1% level.
       In Figure 5 we compare, now in the time series dimension, Finance and two other covariate
candidates. The top panel shows the yearly average of the monthly series of credit spreads
for non-financial corporations from Gilchrist and Mojon (2016). Since this data is only
available from 1999 onwards, we approximate, for the time before 1999, credit spreads as
the difference between corporate bond yields, obtained from the Bundesbank, and 10-year
German treasuries.18 Although corporate bonds are only a minor source of external finance
in Germany, their yields are a good proxy for bank loans of different sizes and maturities,
which are the major source of external finance for German firms.19 The correlation between
Finance and credit spreads has the expected negative sign: -0.3.
       Similarly, in the lower panel of Figure 5, we compare Finance with a measure of id-
iosyncratic uncertainty in the West German manufacturing sector, the yearly average of the
cross-sectional standard deviation of ex-post forecast errors from Bachmann et al. (2013). As
Gilchrist et al. (2014) argue, uncertainty shocks can interact with financial frictions so as to
cause an increase in the cost of capital followed by a decline in capital expenditures.20 The
correlation between the uncertainty measure and Finance, -0.3, is consistent with this view:
  18
      The maturity of the corporate bonds yield data does not match exactly with that of 10-year treasuries, as
they include all “bonds with agreed maximum maturities of over four years if their mean residual maturities
exceed three years”, according to the Bundesbank. Nevertheless, the monthly and yearly correlation between
our proxy and the credit spreads data by Gilchrist and Mojon (2016) is about 0.90 from 1999 onwards, when
we can compare both time series. We thank Gilchrist and Mojon (2016) for providing us with their data.
   19
      There does not appear to exist a good longitudinally consistent time series of bank loan interest rates
for Germany. The interest rate statistics about euro-denominated loans to non-financial corporations which
are resident in the euro area are available from the Bundesbank since 2003. These include loan rates for
outstanding amounts and new business, up to 1 million Euro and over 1 million Euro, of German banks
with maturity up to one year, between one and five years, or over five years. For the time before 2003, the
European Central Bank provides data on national retail interest rates of German banks, broken down by
short-term loans to enterprises and medium and long-term loans to enterprises. The correlation between
corporate bond yields and the different lending rates is almost always above 0.80 for those periods where we
have an overlap in the data.
   20
      Other examples in the literature that study the link between investment activity and uncertainty through
financial frictions are Christiano et al. (2014); Arellano et al. (2016); Dorofeenko et al. (2008).


                                                      16
both panels together show that when idiosyncratic business uncertainty is up, for instance
in all three identified recessions during our sample period, so are the credit spreads (and the
average influence of Finance on investment tends to be negative then).
       Taken together, the evidence presented in Table 6 and Figure 5 suggests that the effect
of finance on capital expenditures is correctly captured by Finance, even though the cyclical
fluctuations in Finance and at least credit spreads appear to be mild and thus make it
unlikely that Finance is an independent driver of aggregate investment fluctuations.


Macro Figure 6 shows the time series of Macro, the investment determinant intended to
capture macroeconomic policy, and potential fiscal policy covariate candidates. The relation
between Macro and corporate tax policy is shown in the top panel. Since the firms in
the IS are predominantly incorporated entities, which are under corporate tax law, we use
the corporate tax rate. Its correlation with Macro is small: -0.10. The lower panel plots
Macro and a measure of real government purchases at business-cycle frequencies, that is,
HP(6.25)-filtered. Government purchases are defined as the sum of intermediate inputs,
wage costs, benefits in kind, and gross investment, obtained from German national accounting
(Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung, VGR) data on expenditures in the government sector.
The correlation between the two series is also rather small: -0.18.
       Figure 7 shows the time series of Macro and two additional covariate candidates. The top
panel displays the monetary policy rate. Until 1998 the discount rate set by the Bundesbank
was the principal monetary policy instrument, followed by the main refinancing operations
rate set by the European Central Bank. The correlation coefficient between both series,
0.16, is small and has an unexpected sign.21 Increases in the monetary policy rate should
depress economic activity through higher refinancing costs, and thus if Macro captured the
monetary policy environment, we should expect a negative correlation with the monetary
  21
    Perhaps the more precise statement is that there seems to be an unstable connection between the mone-
tary policy rate and Macro: the post-reunification recession features the expected behavior, that is, monetary
policy is tight and Macro has a negative influence on manufacturing investment, but afterwards Macro and
the monetary policy rate mildly comove positively.



                                                     17
policy rate. Also, the correlation between the monetary policy rate and the investment
growth rate, ∆ItF SO , is essentially zero: -0.01. Taken together, this evidence suggests that,
with the exception of the post-reunification recession, monetary policy is unlikely to be a
major driver of aggregate investment fluctuations in Germany.
   By contrast, the lower panel shows that Macro follows closely the cyclical component of
real GDP, obtained from German VGR data and extracted by an HP-filter with smoothing
parameter λ = 6.25. The correlation between the two series is 0.46. Taken together, the
evidence in Figure 6 and Figure 7 suggests that the aggregate investment determinant index
Macro does not capture fiscal or monetary policy per se, but rather appears to express the
manufacturing firms’ assessment of the general macroeconomic environment.


2.5    Relation to Price-Setting Behavior

This subsection, relying on the evidence from the previous subsection, focuses on Sales and
Tech and uses a simple demand and supply framework to establish further the validity of
both investment determinants by linking them, at the firm level, to price changes. In doing
so, we hope to lend further credence to our survey-based approach. We show that what
firms say in the survey corresponds to their actions. In addition, we lay the groundwork
for the second part of the identification in our empirical strategy where we use correlation
restrictions on manufacturing price inflation responses.
   Relying on the usual predictions for prices following shifts in demand and supply, of
which shifts in technology are a particular case, we investigate whether extensive-margin price
changes are consistent with the reasons for investing given by the firms. More specifically,
we test whether firms tend to raise prices when Sales stimulates investment, and conversely,
whether they tend to lower prices when they say that Tech had a positive impact on their
investment activity.
   To do so, we match our sample with the ifo Business Cycle Survey, a different firm-
level survey at the ifo Institute. The ifo Business Cycle Survey is a monthly survey at the


                                              18
product level which, among other things, asks managers in manufacturing firms whether they
increased or decreased the prices for their product or let them stay the same relative to the
preceding month.22 We create dummy variables to flag price increases and price decreases.
Using a correspondence table that links products in the Business Cycle Survey to firms in
the IS, we first aggregate these variables at the firm level using the number of production
workers for each product as weights, and then compute their yearly average. This procedure
yields the frequency of monthly price increases/decreases at the firm level in any given year.
We are able to match about 30% of firm-year observations in the IS.
       We then estimate linear firm-level regressions of the frequency of price increases/decreases
on Sales, Tech, and a constant.23 Table 7 reports the results. Concentrating on the quali-
tative implications, Columns (1) and (5) show that firms raise prices more often and lower
prices less frequently whenever they report that Sales has a positive influence as an invest-
ment determinant. The reverse holds true when Tech has a positive investment influence.
Both findings are statistically significant. As Columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(8) of Table 7 show,
these estimates are robust to including year fixed effects, year and industry fixed effects, and
year and firm fixed effects. That is, the results are not driven by any particular years or
industries and hold up to using only within-firm variation.
       These findings provide evidence in support of the assumption that the firm-level survey
responses contain information about the macroeconomic shocks that affect firms’ investment
decisions, and reinforce our interpretations of Sales and Tech in the previous subsection.
More generally, they lend credence to the idea that subjective survey approaches can be
informative because what survey respondents say in their answers corresponds, from an
economic perspective, well to their actions.
  22
     See Becker and Wohlrabe (2008) for a detailed description of the ifo Business Cyle Survey. It does not
contain intensive-margin information on price changes.
  23
     Here Sales and Tech refer to the firm-level survey responses from Section 2.1, before aggregation.




                                                    19
3        Empirical Setup

The analysis in the previous section suggests a focus on the effects of aggregate demand and
aggregate technology to understand aggregate investment fluctuations. However, as Table 1
showed, the associated narrative indicators, the investment determinants Sales and Tech,
exhibit some correlation, and, as a result, they cannot yet be interpreted as independent
shocks so that we cannot yet determine their contributions to aggregate investment fluctu-
ations.24 To quantify the roles of aggregate demand and aggregate technology, we extract
putatively exogenous and uncorrelated aggregate demand shocks and aggregate technology
shocks, which requires imposing identifying assumptions. Given an estimate for these shocks,
we then calculate their contribution to aggregate investment growth fluctuations.


3.1       Identification

Our identification strategy rests on two ideas, the groundwork for which we have laid in
Sections 2.4 and 2.5. First, Sales is a narrative about demand conditions, and so we want
aggregate demand shocks to be a key driver of this variable. By the same token, aggregate
technology shocks should account for the bulk of variation in Tech, which measures the effects
of technological factors on the investment activity of firms. This is the narrative part of our
identification strategy.
       Second, in many standard models aggregate demand shocks and aggregate technology
shocks have different implications for prices. In particular, producer price inflation should
be positively correlated with aggregate demand shocks while its correlation with technology
shocks should be negative. This is the simple economic theory part of our identification
strategy.25
  24
     This is nothing unusual or uncommon when narrative evidence is brought to bear on macroeconomic
questions. For instance, the narrative series for personal and corporate income tax changes by Mertens and
Ravn (2013) are also correlated and are then orthogonalized to extract shocks to the corresponding taxes.
  25
     In earlier versions of the paper, we followed a recursive identification strategy assuming that only tech-
nology shocks affect Tech within a given year. By construction, this approach interprets all comovement
between Sales and Tech as the result of technology shocks driving both variables. However, we found that
technology shocks thus identified had a positive correlation with producer price inflation. We prefer iden-


                                                      20
   We implement these assumptions as follows. Let ut denote the vector stacking the
reduced-form innovations to the investment determinant indices Sales, Tech, Finance,
Return, Macro, and Other, in that order. We stress that these innovations have the in-
terpretation of unexpected changes in the investment determinant indices, possibly after
controlling for own lags and those of other variables. Our identifying assumptions then pro-
vide a mapping of structural shocks, e.g., aggregate demand shocks and aggregate technology
shocks, into these surprise movements.
   Consider the following characterization of ut in terms of a vector of orthogonal shocks ηt :


                                               ut = P ηt ,                                             (3)

where P is the lower-diagonal Cholesky factor of the variance-covariance matrix of the
reduced-form residuals, Σu . Of course, these orthogonal shocks are not necessarily the struc-
tural shocks we seek to isolate, for there is no reason that these shocks satisfy all identifying
assumptions outlined above and described in more detail below. Using some orthogonal ma-
trix Q, the relationship between ut and a candidate solution ε∗t for the structural shocks εt
can be written as


                                              ut = P Qε∗t ,                                            (4)

where QQT = I, ε∗t = QT ηt , and the product P Q defines the mapping between ε∗t and ut .
We stipulate that a candidate solution ε∗t is admissible for εt if (i) the resulting aggregate
demand shocks and aggregate technology shocks display a strong, positive, unconditional
correlation with, respectively, Sales and Tech; (ii) the unconditional correlation between
aggregate demand shocks and PPI inflation is positive; and (iii) the unconditional correlation
between technology shocks and PPI inflation is negative. In the baseline specification we set
the minimum correlation of structural shocks with our narrative investment determinants,
tification via correlation and sign restrictions combining a narrative approach with simple economic theory
because it relaxes the exclusion restrictions a researcher has to make under recursive identification.



                                                    21
Sales and Tech, in (i) equal to 0.5; and the correlations with PPI inflation in (ii) and (iii)
must be at least 0.005 in absolute value. We discard all candidate solutions that violate
any of these correlation restrictions. Note that our empirical strategy is set-identified since
in principle multiple candidate solutions may be admissible. Repeating this procedure for
many different Q characterizes the set of all structural shocks that are consistent with the
maintained correlation restrictions.
       The matrix Q has the following block-diagonal form:

                                                  ⎡    ⎤
                                                  ⎢G 0 ⎥
                                                  ⎢   4⎥
                                             Q = ⎢⎢    ⎥
                                                       ⎥                                                   (5)
                                                  ⎢0 I ⎥
                                                  ⎢ 4 4⎥
                                                  ⎣    ⎦

where 04 is a 4×4 matrix of zeros, I4 is the 4×4 identity matrix, and G is a 2×2 rotation matrix
that provides all possible combinations of aggregate demand shocks and aggregate technology
shocks while preserving orthogonality.26 Moreover, because the matrix Q is block-diagonal,
the product P Q has a block-recursive form. In other words, multiplication of P by Q only
affects the upper-left 2 × 2 block and leaves the remaining elements of P unchanged. Hence,
the final four elements of εt are orthogonal, Choleski-identified shocks to Finance, Return,
Macro, and Other, after controlling for the effects of aggregate demand shocks and aggregate
technology shocks as well as any variable ordered before in the Choleski-identification. This
Choleski ordering essentially allows financial shocks to have their largest impact, once aggre-
gate demand shocks and aggregate technology shocks are controlled for. Below we quantify
the relevance of Finance, Return, Macro, and Other for aggregate investment fluctuations
on which they indeed do not appear to have any relevant impact.
                                                     cos φ    − sin φ
  26
    We use Givens rotation matrices of the form G = [                 ], where φ ∈ [0, 2π] on a linearly-spaced
                                                      sin φ    cos φ
grid with 1,000 points.




                                                   22
3.2     Baseline Specification

Our benchmark estimates are based on a parsimonious specification excluding lags. In the
robustness checks below we also estimate a dynamic specification that allows for lags.
   Specifically, we start from a model in which the aggregate investment determinant indices
fluctuate around their means:


                                                  Yt = µ + ut ,                                          (6)

where Yt = [Sales, Tech, Finance, Return, Macro, Other], µ is a vector of constants, and
ut are the reduced-form innovations defined above. We estimate equation (6) by ordinary
least squares (OLS). Given an estimate of ut and its variance-covariance matrix Σu , we
follow the identification strategy outlined in the previous subsection to obtain the set of
orthogonal shocks admissible under our correlation restrictions. For each of these shocks, we
then estimate the following equation by ordinary least squares:


                   ̂t + β2 T
 ∆ItF SO = c + β1 Sales    ̂             ̂ t + β4 Return
                             echt + β3 Finance     ̂ t + β5 Macro
                                                             ̂t + β6 Other
                                                                      ̂t + et (7)


where   ∆ItF SO        denotes     aggregate      investment       growth,      c   is   a   constant,   and
                                                               T
  ̂t , T̂
[Sales  echt , Finance
                 ̂ t , Return
                        ̂ t , Macro  ̂t ] = εt is the vector of aggregate demand
                               ̂t , Other

shocks, aggregate technology shocks, and other aggregate shocks for a given admissible solu-
tion, which we henceforth simply refer to as “orthogonal shocks”. Given estimates of β1 to
β6 in equation (7), we can compute the contribution of each orthogonal shock to the fluctu-
ations in aggregate investment growth. To this end, we exploit the fact that the regressors
are mutually orthogonal with unit variance, and therefore the total variance of ∆ItF SO can
be written as:


                        Var (∆ItF SO ) = β12 + β22 + β32 + β42 + β52 + β62 + Var (et )                   (8)

We can then compute the contribution of the i-th orthogonal shock to the total variance of
                 βi2
∆ItF SO as   Var(∆ItF SO )
                           .
                                                        23
4        Results

4.1       Aggregate Results

4.1.1      The Core Result

Aggregate demand shocks cause the bulk of the fluctuations in aggregate manufacturing
investment growth, as Table 8 shows. First, the R2 for regression equation (7) is 0.81,
which means that more than eighty percent of the total variation in aggregate investment
growth is explained jointly by the orthogonalized investment determinants from the IS.27
This result is important in its own right: the six orthogonal aggregate shocks identified from
the survey explain a very sizable fraction of aggregate manufacturing investment growth
variability documented in administrative statistics. Subjective survey information is thus
highly informative of macroeconomic fluctuations, justifying our narrative approach also ex
post.28
       Second, using the variance decomposition in equation 8, the first column of panel A in
Table 8 reports the range of the contributions over all admissible orthogonal shocks to the
total variance of ∆ItF SO .29 The bulk of the fluctuations in aggregate investment growth can
                 ̂ that is, in our interpretation, to aggregate demand shocks, which
be attributed to Sales,
account for between 65.92% and 74.81% of the total variance of ∆ItF SO . Aggregate technology
shocks at most account for 8.89%. However, within the set of admissible shocks we also find
estimates in which the contribution of aggregate technology shocks is essentially zero. The
                  ̂ Return,
contributions of Finance, ̂ Macro,
                            ̂ and Other
                                   ̂ are small.

       Panel B of Table 8, still first column, checks our identification assumptions and reports
  27
     By construction, the total R2 in equation (7) is the same for all admissible orthogonal shocks because
                          ̂ and T̂
admissible solutions for Sales        ech correspond to different linear combinations of Sales and Tech but
leave the overall informational content of the explanatory variables unchanged.
  28                           ̂ and T̂
     Only the coefficients on Sales        ech, β1 and β2 , are ever statistically significant at the 5 percent
level in the set of admissible orthogonalizations. None of the other orthogonal shocks are significant in any
admissible rotation, justifying our focus on aggregate demand and aggregate technology shocks.
  29
     Because of the block-recursive structure described in the previous section, the contributions to aggregate
                        ̂ Return,
investment growth of Finance,     ̂ Macro,̂ and Other ̂ are point-identified.




                                                      24
the range of the identifying correlations spanned by the admissible set. We start with the
two narrative conditions. For example, the correlation coefficient between aggregate demand
shocks and our survey-based indicator of aggregate demand conditions is almost always close
to 1, ranging from 0.95 to 1, while the correlation coefficient between technology shocks and
our survey-based indicator of technological factors ranges from 0.5 to 0.81. Turning next
to our simple economic theory identification conditions, the correlation coefficient between
̂ and PPI inflation is positive, ranging between 0.47 and 0.52. The correlation coefficient
Sales
between admissible estimates of T̂
                                 ech and PPI inflation is negative and ranges from -0.01 to
-0.22.
       It is useful to compare our set-identified results with two polar, point-identified estimates
obtained through recursive identification. In the second column of Table 8, we report the
Choleski-identified results with Sales ordered first, that is, from equation (3). In the third
column of Table 8, we report the Choleski-identified results with Tech ordered first. The
Choleski-identified results with Sales ordered first are useful because they provide us with a
simple special, but representative case of the set-identified results, with which we can conduct
a number of additional exercises below for semi-aggregate data, for which reporting a set of
solutions would be intractable. Indeed, this identification scheme satisfies all four of our cor-
relation restrictions, all of them in the interior.30 The resulting narrative correlation between
̂ and Sales is 0.75, comfortably above the assumed threshold of 0.5. Corr (Sales,
Sales                                                                      ̂ PPI)

is 0.51, and Corr (T̂
                    ech, PPI) -0.06, that is both have the posited sign. Roughly 75 percent of
aggregate investment growth fluctuations is explained by demand shocks in this specification,
which is almost all of the total 81 percent that the orthogonalized investment determinants
are able to explain.
       The Choleski-identified results with Tech ordered first are interesting for two reasons:
in this identification positive technology shocks are positively correlated with PPI inflation,
which is why this recursive identification scheme is not contained in our set identification;
  30
    Of course, in a Choleski-Sales-first identification one of the narrative correlations, that is, the correlation
         ̂ and Sales is 1 by construction.
between Sales


                                                        25
all other correlation criteria are satisfied. A researcher adhering to simple aggregate de-
mand and aggregate supply reasoning would dismiss this identification scheme on theoretical
grounds. However, panel A of Table 8, third column, makes also another point: even if
a researcher does not adhere to such reasoning, only sticks to the narrative identification
scheme, and wants to give aggregate technology shocks “the first shot” to explain aggregate
investment growth fluctuations, aggregate demand shocks, now a residual after conditioning
out aggregate technology shocks, would still explain the majority of these fluctuations: 44
percent, which is more than half of the total 81 percent that the orthogonalized investment
determinants can explain.31
       Next, we investigate the extent to which our results change if we loosen / strengthen
the correlation thresholds for our two narrative identification assumptions to, respectively,
0.25 / 0.75. The first and second columns of Table 9 show the results. Our main result is
unchanged: aggregate demand shocks still explain the majority of the volatility of aggregate
investment growth fluctuations. The possible contribution of aggregate technology shocks
increases a bit with a looser threshold, it declines to nil with a higher threshold.
       Finally, our core results is also robust to using real aggregate investment growth on the
left-hand side of equation (7).32 We use the deflator for gross fixed capital formation in the
manufacturing sector, obtained from German national accounting data, to calculate growth
rates of real investment, and then re-estimate the empirical model. The third column of
Table 9 shows that the R2 of equation (7) even increases slightly to 0.84. All other results
remain, by and large, the same.33
  31
     Theories that do not rely on nominal rigidities to make aggregate demand shocks work, such as those
in Angeletos et al. (2017) and Angeletos and La’O (2013), would not necessarily have the prediction that
aggregate technology shocks are negatively correlated with PPI inflation. But, given this result, even they
would be justified in highlighting the importance of aggregate demand shocks. We thank George-Marios
Angeletos for this point.
  32
     Given that the survey asks about nominal investment expenditures at the firm-level, we used, as a first
pass, nominal investment expenditures also for the aggregate. It is reassuring, however, that our results
are essentially unchanged when using real aggregate investment growth. If anything, the IS orthogonalized
investment determinants explain a higher fraction of the variance of real aggregate investment growth.
  33
     In addition to their instantaneous effect on investment, technology shocks might have dynamic effects on
capital expenditures. In the presence of adjustment costs, lagged values of technology might affect aggregate
capital expenditures in the current period. Similarly, with news about its future level, technology one


                                                     26
4.1.2    A Counterfactual Simulation

A slightly different perspective on our core result can be obtained from computing a coun-
terfactual aggregate investment growth rate series sans aggregate demand shocks: this coun-
terfactual series loses its essential cyclical properties. To be specific, we subtract, for each of
                                                                                     ̂t ,
the admissible orthogonalizations, the contributions of aggregate demand shocks, β1 Sales
from the fitted investment growth rate series estimated in equation (7), and depict these
counterfactual series as pointwise minima and maxima along with the fitted series and the
data ∆ItF SO in Figure 8.
    Figure 8 shows that almost none of the officially declared recession years would have
experienced negative investment growth without the aggregate demand shocks, in contrast
to the data. The reunification boom would not exist, neither would the prolonged slump
in the early 2000s even beyond the official recession. There would have been no investment
boom nor a rebound around the Great Recession. In other words, without aggregate demand
shocks, the counterfactual aggregate investment growth rate series does not resemble the
narrative history of the German post-reunification business cycle. Aggregate demand shocks
are thus essential for our understanding of this business cycle.


4.1.3    Potential Misclassification of Shocks: Inter-Industry Effects

Thus far, we have implicitly assumed that the shocks we identify are manufacturing-aggregate
shocks, and that industry-specific shocks “average out”. However, because of input-output
linkages between firms of different industries, survey respondents from different industries
may have different perceptions of such industry-specific shocks. Industry-specific shocks of
one kind may spill over and lead to aggregate fluctuations perceived as another kind. To
be concrete, suppose there is a technology shock that is specific to industry i, the firms
year ahead might have an impact on investment in the current period. However, when we re-estimate the
regression equation (7) with the Choleski-Sales-first-identified shocks and include a lead and a lag of the
aggregate technology shock, these coefficients are insignificant, nor do they increase the R2 of the regression
meaningfully. We conclude that we do not miss contributions of technology shocks from the mentioned
dynamic effects. For a more comprehensive treatment of dynamics, see Section 4.1.6.



                                                      27
of which might now want to invest and produce more and thus need more inputs from
other, upstream industries j, so that these industries would experience an increase in their
demand-related investment determinant: in particular, if industry i had a small investment
share in aggregate manufacturing investment but bought large amounts of inputs from other
manufacturing industries, we might erroneously classify an industry-specific technology shock
as an aggregate demand shock. Because sector-specific technology shocks induce additional
demand for intermediate goods in this case, we label this channel the upstream channel.
       There might also be another effect, a downstream channel: suppose firms from industry i
make an invention that is sold to other, downstream industries j, which would show up
for industry i as a demand-related investment determinant, while it would be a technology-
related one for industries j. In particular, if industry i had a large investment share in
aggregate manufacturing investment, we might erroneously classify an industry-specific (and
investment-specific) technology shock as an aggregate demand shock.34
       Using input-output tables from the Federal Statistical Office, we can gauge whether these
inter-industry effects are likely to be quantitatively important.35 To evaluate the upstream
channel, we compute the shares of goods which 2-digit manufacturing industry i buys from
every other 2-digit manufacturing industry j, λji , normalize them to sum to unity, and define
an upstream index for industry i, USIit , as the input-share-weighted demand shocks of every
other industry j:
                                                          ̂jt ,
                                           USIit = ∑ λji Sales                                              (9)
                                                    j≠i

       ̂jt , for reasons of simplicity and pragmatism, are the industry-specific demand
where Sales
shocks for industry j, using the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme on data from each
2-digit manufacturing industry individually.
  34
     Such spill over and thus potential misclassification effects could also come from outside of manufacturing.
Our data do not allow us to deal with this issue, so that our shocks are always identified as “as perceived by
the manufacturing sector.”
  35
     We have these input-output linkage data for the years 1995, 2000, and 2005. Since the variation of these
shares over time is small, we take the average intermediate output shares over the three years. We drop
‘Mining’ for this exercise because the number of observations per cross-section in the IS is small for this
sector. See Footnote 6.


                                                      28
       Similarly, to evaluate the downstream channel, we define the following downstream index
for industry i, DSIit :
                                                         ̂jt ,
                                           DSIit = ∑ µji Tech                                            (10)
                                                   j≠i


where µji are the shares of goods which 2-digit manufacturing industry i sells to every other
                                                                  ̂jt are the technology
2-digit manufacturing industry j, normalized to sum to unity, and Tech
shocks for industry j, again obtained by a Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme applied
to 2-digit manufacturing industry data.
                                                                                   ̂it (in panel
       Table 10 reports the coefficients of regressions of, respectively, USIit on Tech
                  ̂it (in panel B), their standard errors, and the corresponding R2 . If
A), and DSIit on Sales
shock misclassification was a major issue, we would expect at least some of these regressions
to have significant coefficients and large R2 , which is, however, not the case.
       The estimated coefficients are generally insignificant and the R2 of these regressions are
low: for the upstream channel, the slope coefficient is only significant in the ‘Food, Tobacco’-
industry, and the R2 for that industry is about 12 percent. For the downstream channel, it
is again only in the ‘Food, Tobacco’-industry where the slope estimate is significant and the
R2 is 13 percent.36 In particular, we find no evidence of inter-industry effects for the largest
manufacturing subsector ‘Machines, Cars, and Other Heavy Manufacturing’, which has an
investment share of about 55 percent.37
       In sum, there is little evidence that original technology shocks in one small industry with a
high manufacturing input share get misclassified as (essentially aggregate) demand shocks in
the rest of the manufacturing industries; there is also little evidence that original technology
shocks in one large industry get misclassified as aggregate demand shocks.
  36
     For the upstream channel to be important through ‘Food, Tobacco’, this industry would have to have an
important contribution of technology shocks to its investment fluctuations, which is not the case: approxi-
mately 5 percent. To be important through the downstream channel, this industry would have to be large,
but its fraction in manufacturing investment is less than 7 percent (see Table 10).
  37
     The lack of a downstream channel for this particular machine-producing industry also suggests that, more
specifically, investment-specific technology shocks may not play an important role for investment fluctuations
in Germany.




                                                     29
4.1.4      Suggestive Evidence on the Nature of the Aggregate Demand Shocks

Since aggregate demand shocks seem to play a substantial role for fluctuations in aggregate
investment growth, we next examine somewhat more closely where they might come from: do
they capture confidence/sentiment, or rather macroeconomic policy? Figure 9 plots, in three
                                                     ̂ over all admissible orthogonal-
different panels, the pointwise minima and maxima of Sales
izations, together with proxy series for confidence: the GfK Consumer Confidence Index,38
the aggregate business situation index for the West German manufacturing sector from the
ifo Business Cycle Survey, which captures the current business situation of respondents, and
the aggregate business expectations index for the West German manufacturing sector, which
summarizes forward-looking questions in the ifo Business Cycle Survey. We use the yearly
                                                                                    ̂
averages of the monthly confidence series. The set of pairwise correlations between Sales
in all admissible orthogonalizations and each of the sentiment indices reveals a fairly strong
association between our identified aggregate demand shocks and these proxies for confidence:
                                                         ̂ is 0.56 ([0.48, 0.60] being
the median39 correlation between consumer confidence and Sales
                                           ̂ it is 0.80 ([0.72, 0.84] being the range), and
the range), between business situation and Sales
                                  ̂ it is 0.42 ([0.32, 0.49] being the range). That is,
between business expectations and Sales
especially the index capturing current business situations is highly correlated with our identi-
fied aggregate demand shock series, consistent with the work by Angeletos et al. (2017), who
also find that shocks to sentiment can account for a sizable fraction of aggregate investment
and output fluctuations.40
                                                             ̂ Figure 10 therefore plots
       Macro policy shocks are another conceivable driver of Sales.
̂ again as the pointwise minima and maxima of Sales
Sales,                                        ̂ over all admissible orthogo-

nalizations, together with those policy variables for fiscal and monetary policy with which
we compared the Macro index (see the discussion in Section 2.4 above, and, in particular,
Figures 6 and 7). If our aggregate demand shocks were mostly driven by policy shocks, we
  38
     GfK: Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (Society for Consumption Research).
  39
     Results for the average correlation are nearly identical.
  40
     We find no evidence of news about future technology à la Barsky and Sims (2012) driving these confidence
variables.

                                                     30
would expect that they are strongly negatively (positively) correlated with the corporate
tax rate or the monetary policy rate (government purchases). However, Figure 10 shows
                                                                ̂ and the policy variables
that two of the three pairwise correlation coefficients between Sales
have the “wrong” sign. The correlation between the corporate tax rate and demand shocks
is mildly positive,41 while the correlation with government purchases is mildly negative,42
pointing to mildly countercyclical expenditure policy rather than fiscal policy being a driver
of the business cycle. Only the correlation with the monetary policy rate is weakly neg-
ative, as expected.43 This sign, however, is mostly driven by one particular episode, the
post-reunification recession (and its immediate subsequent recovery) caused by a large con-
                                                                                    ̂
tractionary monetary policy shock, which is picked up by a large negative effect of Sales,
which, in turn, lets aggregate investment and sentiment collapse.44 Overall, however, while
simple correlations are not dispositive, and the absence of evidence – such as is the case for
                                            ̂ and macro policy variables – is not as
the most part with the correlations between Sales
                                                        ̂ and a number of confidence
strong as direct evidence, the available information on Sales
                                       ̂ and thus, by extension, fluctuations in aggregate
indicators is at least consistent with Sales,
investment, being driven mostly by sentiment movements.


4.1.5      Effects on Industrial Production

In this section, we investigate whether our set-identified aggregate shocks, estimated from
investment-related data, can also explain output (growth) fluctuations. To this end, we
regress industrial production growth in the manufacturing sector on the set of admissible
orthogonal shocks identified in Section 3.2, and compute their contributions to the overall
variance of industrial production growth, as described for investment growth in equation (8).
       Table 11 shows the results of this analysis. The R2 of the estimating regression is approx-
  41
     The median correlation is 0.32 ranging between 0.28 and 0.34.
  42
     The median correlation is -0.16 ranging between -0.16 and -0.15.
  43
     The median correlation is -0.22 ranging between -0.24 and -0.19.
  44
     The median correlation is 0.04 ranging between 0.02 and 0.06, when we compute the correlations between
                                              ̂ on the sample starting in 1998.
the monetary policy rate and the admissible Sales



                                                    31
imately 0.73, which means that also a sizable fraction of output growth fluctuations can be
explained by our aggregate shocks that were identified from investment reasons. This finding
lends additional external validity to our procedure. And again, the bulk of the fluctuations
in industrial production growth can be attributed to aggregate demand shocks, with a contri-
bution range between 50 percent and 63 percent to the total variance, while the contribution
of technology shocks to output growth fluctuations is small, ranging from 0 to 13 percent.


4.1.6      An Alternative Empirical Strategy: a VAR

In the baseline specification, equations (6) and (7), we omitted, in the interest of parsimony,
both lags of the left-hand side variable, ∆ItF SO , and lags of the investment determinants.
The obvious alternative would be to estimate a vector autoregression (VAR) to obtain an
estimate of the reduced-form residuals ut and then apply the same identification strategy as in
Section 3.1. For example, Romer and Romer (2004), also include narratively identified shocks
in VARs. VARs are designed to model dynamic interactions between variables and serial
correlation in them. One of the disadvantages of VARs, however, is their highly parameterized
nature: if we wanted to estimate a first-order VAR that included aggregate investment growth
and all six investment determinants, we would have to estimate 84 parameters.
       However, with the results from the previous subsections in mind that aggregate invest-
ment growth is mostly determined by two factors, Tech, Sales, we can employ a lower-
parameterized VAR in these two determinants plus ∆ItF SO and PPI inflation to check the
robustness of our baseline results.45
       Formally, let Ft = (Salest , Techt ) . Also, let the joint dynamics of Ft , ∆ItF SO , and PPI
                                           T


inflation be governed by the following VAR(1):
  45
     We also note that a VAR is an alternative to address the concern we have discussed in footnote 33 in the
context of technology shocks, namely, that lagged shocks may influence current investment growth because
of, e.g., capital or investment adjustment costs.




                                                     32
                                   ⎡        ⎤     ⎡         ⎤
                                   ⎢ Ft ⎥         ⎢ Ft−1 ⎥
                                   ⎢        ⎥     ⎢         ⎥
                                   ⎢        ⎥     ⎢         ⎥
                                   ⎢ F SO ⎥       ⎢         ⎥
                                   ⎢∆It ⎥ = ν + Φ ⎢ ∆It−1 ⎥ + ut ,
                                   ⎢        ⎥     ⎢         ⎥
                                                                                                         (11)
                                   ⎢        ⎥     ⎢         ⎥
                                   ⎢        ⎥     ⎢         ⎥
                                   ⎢ P P It ⎥     ⎢P P It−1 ⎥
                                   ⎣        ⎦     ⎣         ⎦
where P P It denotes PPI inflation, ν is a 4×1 vector of constants and Φ is a coefficient matrix.
Given an estimate of the reduced-form innovations and their variance-covariance matrix, we
follow the same steps outlined in Section 3.1 to identify orthogonal shocks. This procedure
effectively extends our baseline specification to a dynamic context by controlling for the past
behavior of all variables in the VAR.
    Figure 11 plots the impulse response functions of each variable in the system in response
to aggregate demand shocks (left panels) and aggregate technology shocks (right panels), with
a size of one standard deviation for each. The solid blue lines show the impulse responses
based on the pointwise median across all admissible solutions, while the dashed black lines
show the corresponding pointwise minima and maxima. The third row of Figure 11 depicts
the IRFs of interest: a negative but mild and delayed one-off effect of technology shocks
on aggregate investment growth, and a strongly positive and persistent effect of aggregate
demand shocks on aggregate investment growth.
    Table 12, in panel A, displays the (range of the) forecast error variance contributions at
the five-year horizon46 for each variable of interest, ∆ItF SO and P P It , and for the aggregate
demand and aggregate technology shocks. We do so for the set-identified correlation re-
strictions approach as well as for two polar Cholesky identification schemes: Sales first and
Tech first. The first result from this table is that, just as in the baseline empirical approach
without lags, our identified aggregate demand and aggregate technology shocks derived from
survey-based narratives explain the largest share of aggregate investment growth fluctua-
tions. Put differently, the residual third and fourth shocks on ∆ItF SO and P P It are of minor
  46
     Given the yearly frequency and the small serial correlation present in the impulse response functions,
the five-year horizon forecast error variance decomposition corresponds essentially to the long-run, i.e., the
unconditional variance of each variable.




                                                     33
importance. And even for PPI fluctuations, both interpretable shocks together still explain
approximately a third of the total variance.
       Secondly, independently of the identification scheme, our other result from the baseline
empirical approach, that is, that aggregate demand shocks explain the majority of aggregate
investment growth fluctuations is also confirmed here.47
       To sum up, our results are by and large robust to modelling dynamics explicitly. Aggregate
demand shocks still account for much more than half of aggregate investment fluctuations,
while aggregate technology shocks gain somewhat in importance, but still explain maximally
about 22 percent of the aggregate investment growth variance.48


4.2       Semi-Aggregate Results

In this subsection we show that our core result that demand shocks explain the bulk of
aggregate investment fluctuations is not a mere composition effect and is largely replicated
in most manufacturing industries and at a regionally more disaggregate level.
       Thus far, and with one exception in Section 4.1.3, our analysis has focused on the West-
German manufacturing aggregate and common shocks that affect all manufacturing indus-
tries. Next, we use semi-aggregate specifications at the two-digit industry level, and at the
German state, the Laender level, to investigate whether there are quantitatively important
heterogeneities in the driving forces of investment fluctuations. Using the weights defined in
Section 2.2, we first compute investment determinant indices by two-digit industry and by
  47
     We note that unlike in the baseline empirical approach, neither Cholesky identification is inside the set
of admissible orthogonalizations, including the Sales-first one, as panel B of Table 12 shows. Nevertheless,
the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme “misses just barely”, with the resulting identified aggregate
technology shock exhibiting the very small positive correlation of 0.04 with PPI. By contrast, the Choleski-
Tech-first identification scheme misses by more, with the resulting identified aggregate technology shock
exhibiting a PPI correlation of 0.23. In this sense, we corroborate the practice in some places in the paper
to use, for practicality reasons, the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme as a stand-in for our baseline
correlation-based identification scheme.
  48
     Indeed, the pairwise correlations between all the admissible orthogonal shocks from the VAR and all
the admissible orthogonal shocks from the baseline specification ranges from 0.73 to 0.81 for aggregate
demand shocks (0.79 being the median), and from 0.82 and 0.87 for aggregate technology shocks (0.85 being
the median). These correlation numbers also suggests that both procedures uncover essentially the same
economic shocks.



                                                      34
Land. We have eight industries:49 Chemical Industry, Oil; Plastics, Rubber; Glass, Ceram-
ics; Metals; Machinery; Wood, Paper, Printing; Textiles, Leather; Food, Tobacco. For the
Laender split we use eight out of the eleven West German Laender: Baden-Württemberg,
Bavaria, Hamburg, Hesse, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Rhineland-Palatinate,
and Schleswig-Holstein.50
       Throughout this subsection, we use the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme sepa-
rately for each industry/Land to quantify the contribution of each orthogonal shock to the
corresponding investment growth rates. The left-hand-side official investment growth rates
by industry are for West Germany until 1991, but from 1992 they are for Germany as a whole
(a finer split is not available at the 2-digit level); the Laender investment growth rates are
only available since 1992 and only as total industrial (not just manufacturing) investment
growth rates, which means we have a slightly shorter sample period in the Laender exercise.
       Figure 12 displays box-plots of the estimates for the contributions of orthogonal shocks
to the total variance of investment growth at the two-digit industry level. The rightmost
box-plot shows the R2 of the industry-level regressions. While the explanatory power of our
survey-based investment determinant indices slightly decreases at the semi-aggregate level,
the R2 still remains above two third in most of the industries. The median of the R2 across
all industries is 0.73.
                                                                    ̂ i to variations in the
       The first box-plot of Figure 12 displays the contribution of Sales
                                                                   ̂ explains the bulk of
two-digit industry-level investment growth rates. The finding that Sales
short-run fluctuations in investment largely carries over to this level of aggregation. The two-
digit industry-level median estimate is approximately 65.2%, and the range goes from 40% in
‘Coal, Chemicals, and Petroleum’ to 76% in ‘Rubber, Plastics’. The variance contributions of
the other orthogonal shocks are small. Altogether, the result that most two-digit industries
  49
      The IS records the four-digit WZ03 and WZ08 industrial classification codes from 2003 and 2008, respec-
tively, used in the German national accounting system. From these we map the firm-level observations into
two-digit industries. We drop data for the ‘Mining’ sector for this exercise because the number of observations
in the cross-section of this industry is small in the IS. See Footnote 6.
   50
      We drop data from Bremen, Saarland and West Berlin for this exercise because cross-sections from these
Laender in the IS are small, just as the Laender themselves.


                                                      35
behave like the aggregate combined with the lack of evidence for strong inter-industry shock
effects (see Section 4.1.3) suggests that our aggregate baseline specification is a good empirical
approach and that aggregate shocks account for the bulk of aggregate investment fluctuations.
    The Laender results are shown in Figure 13. The median overall R2 across all Laender
                              ̂ i to regional investment growth is qualitatively and,
is 0.54. The contributions of Sales
to a large extent, quantitatively similar to the results for the aggregate and the two-digit
industry-level.
    In sum, the semi-aggregate evidence presented in this subsection lends support to the
finding from aggregate data that the majority of investment fluctuations is explained by
demand shocks, while other shocks seem to play only a minor role, if any, in the German
investment cycle. Tables 13 summarizes these findings by displaying the investment-weighted
variance contributions across, respectively, all eight manufacturing 2-digit industries and
eight West German Laender. Our disaggregate results, which, to a large extent, replicate
the aggregate findings on many time series, also alleviate somewhat the concern that these
aggregate results might be spurious because they are estimated from a relatively short time
series.



5     Conclusion

This paper proposes and uses a novel empirical strategy to address a seminal question in
macroeconomics: the sources of aggregate fluctuations, here investment fluctuations. We
use survey data from the ifo Investment Survey about subjective investment determinants
combined with a narrative approach to uncover what drives the dynamics of investment in
the West German manufacturing sector. Consistent with neoclassical views of the economy,
we find that, on average, technology is the most important investment determinant. Regular
year-to-year fluctuations in both investment and output, however, are best explained by
aggregate demand shocks that appear to be related to business and consumer sentiment.



                                               36
   More generally, this paper also makes a methodological contribution. We show that
survey-based subjective reasons for a particular economic action taken can be high in eco-
nomic content and measure what they are designed to measure. Based on these insights,
we then show that such data can be leveraged to explain a significant portion of aggregate
fluctuations. Our results thus call for the inclusion of subjective reason data in the economics
toolbox and for a heightened effort to collect such data.




                                              37
References

Alexopoulos, M. (2011): “Read All about It!! What Happens Following a Technology
  Shock?” American Economic Review, 101, 1144–1179.

Angeletos, G.-M., F. Collard, and H. Dellas (2017): “Quantifying Confidence,”
  Mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Angeletos, G.-M. and J. La’O (2013): “Sentiments,” Econometrica, 81, 739–779.

Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. J. Kehoe (2016): “Financial Frictions and Fluctuations
  in Volatility,” NBER Working Paper 22990.

Bachmann, R., T. O. Berg, and E. R. Sims (2015): “Inflation Expectations and Readi-
  ness to Spend: Cross-Sectional Evidence,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  7, 1–35.

Bachmann, R. and S. Elstner (2015): “Firm Optimism and Firm Pessimism,” European
  Economic Review, 79, 297–325.

Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and A. Hristov (2017): “Surprise, Surprise - Measuring
  Firm-level Investment Innovations,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 83, 107–
  148.

Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. Sims (2013): “Uncertainty and Economic Activity:
  Evidence from Business Survey Data,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5,
  217–249.

Barsky, R. and E. Sims (2012): “Information, Animal Spirits, and the Meaning of Inno-
  vations in Consumer Confidence,” American Economic Review, 102, 1343–1377.

Basu, S., J. G. Fernald, and M. S. Kimball (2006): “Are Technology Improvements
  Contractionary?” American Economic Review, 96, 1418–1448.


                                          38
Becker, S. O. and K. Wohlrabe (2008): “Micro Data at the Ifo Institute for Economic
  Research – The “Ifo Business Survey”, Usage and Access,” Schmollers Jahrbuch, 128,
  307–319.

Bewley, T. (1999): Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession, Harvard University Press.

Blanchard, O. and R. Perotti (2002): “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
  Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 117, 1329–1368.

Blanchard, O. and D. Quah (1989): “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
  Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review, 79, 655–673.

Bocola, L., M. Hagedorn, and I. Manovskii (2014): “Identifying Neutral Technology
  Shocks,” Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Bundesbank (2012): “Monthly Report January 2012,” Deutsche Bundesbank.

Carroll, C. and W. Dunn (1997): “Unemployment Expectations, Jumping (S,s) Trig-
  gers, and Household Balance Sheets,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 12, 165–229.

Chari, V. V., P. J. Kehoe, and E. R. McGrattan (2007): “Business Cycle Account-
  ing,” Econometrica, 75, 781–836.

Christiano, L., M. Eichenbaum, and C. Evans (1996): “The Effects of Monetary
  Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow of Funds,” The Review of Economics and Statistics,
  78, 16–34.

Christiano, L. J., R. Motto, and M. Rostagno (2014): “Risk Shocks,” American
  Economic Review, 104, 27–65.

Dorofeenko, V., G. S. Lee, and K. D. Salyer (2008): “Time-Varying Uncertainty
  And The Credit Channel,” Bulletin of Economic Research, 60, 375–403.


                                           39
Gennaioli, N., Y. Ma, and A. Shleifer (2015): “Expectations and Investment,” NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual, 30, 379–431.

Gilchrist, S. and B. Mojon (2016): “Credit Risk in the Euro Area,” The Economic
  Journal, forthcoming.

Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2014): “Uncertainty, Financial Frictions, and
  Investment Dynamics,” Mimeo, Boston University.

Guiso, L. and G. Parigi (1999): “Investment and Demand Uncertainty,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 114, 185–227.

Kocherlakota, N. (2009): “Modern Macroeconomic Models as Tools for Economic Pol-
  icy,” Annual Report Essay, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2017a): “Shock Restricted Structural Vector-
  Autoregressions,” NBER Working Paper 23225.

——— (2017b): “Uncertainty and Business Cycles: Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Re-
  sponse?” Mimeo, New York University.

Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2016): “Learning from Inflation Experiences,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 131, 53–87.

McKay, A. and R. Reis (2008): “The Brevity and Violence of Contractions and Expan-
  sions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 55, 738–751.

Mertens, K. and M. O. Ravn (2013): “The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate
  Income Tax Changes in the United States,” The American Economic Review, 103, 1212–
  1247.

Nerlove, M. (1983): “Expectations, Plans, and Realizations in Theory and Practice,”
  Econometrica, 51, 1251–1279.


                                          40
Ramey, V. (2016): “Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation,” in Handbook of
  Macroeconomics, ed. by J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, vol. 2A, chap. 2, 71–162.

Ravn, M. O. and H. Uhlig (2002): “On Adjusting the Hodrick-Prescott Filter for the
  Frequency of Observations,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 84, 371–376.

Romer, C. D. and D. H. Romer (2004): “A New Measure of Monetary Shocks: Derivation
  and Implications,” The American Economic Review, 94, pp. 1055–1084.

——— (2010): “The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based on a New
  Measure of Fiscal Shocks,” The American Economic Review, 100, pp. 763–801.

Sachverständigenrat (2017):          “Für eine zukunftsorientierte Wirtschaftspolitik –
  Jahresgutachten 2017/18,” Tech. rep.

Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2007): “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
  Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97, 586–606.

Souleles, N. S. (2004): “Expectations, Heterogeneous Forecast Errors, and Consumption:
  Micro Evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys,” Journal of Money,
  Credit and Banking, 28, 39–72.

Stock, J. and M. Watson (2012): “Disentangling the Channels of the 2007-09 Recession,”
  Brookings Papers of Economic Activity, 81–156, Spring.

——— (2016): “Dynamic Factor Models, Factor-Augmented Vector Autoregressions, and
  Structural Vector Autoregressions in Macroeconomics,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics,
  ed. by J. Taylor and H. Uhlig, Elsevier, vol. 2A, chap. 8, 415–525.

Uhlig, H. (2004): “Do Technology Shocks Lead to a Fall in Total Hours Worked?” Journal
  of the European Economic Association, 2, 361–371.




                                             41
Figure 1 – Comparison of Aggregate Investment Growth from ifo and the Federal Statistical
Office (ρ = 0.89)
                                                         0.3



                                                         0.2



                                                         0.1



                                           growth rate     0



                                                         -0.1



                                                         -0.2
                                                                                                            ∆ IFSO
                                                                                                               t

                                                                                                            ∆ IIFO
                                                                                                               t
                                                         -0.3
                                                            '89         '93                     '97         '01         '05                       '09         '13
Notes: This figure plots two time series of the aggregate investment growth rate in the West German manufacturing and
mining sector. ∆ItF SO is administrative data provided by the Federal Statistical Office. Up to and including 2011, it
comprises the West German manufacturing and mining sector. From 2012 onwards, ∆ItF SO is available only for unified
Germany. ∆ItIF O is the growth rate implied by the ifo Investment Survey, obtained from aggregating the firm-level
responses to Q1 with weights as described in the text. The correlation coefficient between ∆ItF SO and ∆ItIF O , ρ, is 0.89.
The gray-shaded regions show recessions as dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134):
1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                Figure 2 – Aggregate Investment Determinant Indices

                                                            Sales                                     Tech                                              Finance
                                      2                                                        2                                             2

                                      1                                                        1                                             1
                       index points




                                                                                index points




                                                                                                                              index points




                                      0                                                        0                                             0

                                      -1                                                       -1                                            -1

                                      -2                                                       -2                                            -2
                                       '89                 '97    '05     '13                   '89   '97         '05   '13                   '89       '97   '05   '13

                                                           Return                                     Macro                                             Other
                                      2                                                        2                                             2

                                      1                                                        1                                             1
                       index points




                                                                                index points




                                                                                                                              index points




                                      0                                                        0                                             0

                                      -1                                                       -1                                            -1

                          -2                        -2                       -2
                           '89 '97 '05 '13           '89 '97 '05 '13          '89 '97 '05 '13
Notes: The panels show the aggregate investment determinant indices Sales, Tech, Finance, Return, Macro, and Other
for the West German manufacturing sector, constructed from aggregating the firm-level responses to Q2 with weights
as described in the text. Index values above zero represent a positive and index values below zero a negative average
effect on aggregate investment activity. The gray-shaded regions show recessions as dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see
Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                                                                                      42
               Figure 3 – Fraction of Survey Respondents in Each Answer Category
                                     Sales                                      Tech                                   Finance
                    1                                           1                                         1




                   0.5                                       0.5                                        0.5




                    0                                           0                                         0
                    '89        '97           '05    '13         '89       '97          '05    '13         '89        '97           '05         '13

                          strongly negative [-2]   weakly negative [-1]    no influence [0]   weakly positive [+1]    strongly positive [+2]
                                  Return                                    Macro                                          Other
                    1                                           1                                         1




                   0.5                                       0.5                                        0.5




                    0                                           0                                         0
                    '89        '97           '05    '13         '89       '97          '05    '13         '89        '97           '05         '13
Notes: Each panel of this graph shows the fraction of survey respondents per answer category – “strongly negative”,
“weakly negative”, “no influence”, “weakly positive”, or “strongly positive” – for each of the six investment determinants:
Tech, Sales, Finance, Return, Macro, and Other, referring to the firm-level survey responses in this case. The gray-shaded
regions show recessions as dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07,
2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                                                                43
Figure 4 – Investment Determinant Index Sales, Aggregate Revenues, New Orders and In-
dustrial Production

                                             Revenues (ρ = 0.67)                                      New Orders (ρ = 0.72)
                                        2                          0.15                          2                            0.2
                   Sales Index Points




                                                                            Sales Index Points
                                        1                          0.075                         1                            0.1


                                                                                Revenues




                                                                                                                                     Orders
                                        0                          0                             0                            0

                                        -1         SALES           -0.075                        -1           SALES           -0.1
                                                   REVENUES                                                   ORDERS
                                        -2                         -0.15                         -2                         -0.2
                                         '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13                              '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13


                                Industrial Production (ρ = 0.62)
                                        2                          0.15
                   Sales Index Points




                                        1                          0.075
                                                                            IP




                                        0                          0

                                        -1     SALES               -0.075
                                               IP
                       -2                             -0.15
                        '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13
Notes: The top-left panel displays the aggregate investment determinant index Sales, based on Q2, and revenues. REV-
ENUES is the cyclical component of the volume index of revenues in the German manufacturing and mining sector,
obtained from the Federal Statistical Office and extracted via the HP-filter (λ = 6.25) after taking the natural logarithm.
REVENUES is only available since 1991. The top-right panel compares Sales and new orders. ORDERS is the HP-filtered
(λ = 6.25) series of the natural log of real new orders in the German manufacturing sector, taken from the Bundesbank.
The bottom-left panel depicts Sales and industrial production. IP is the volume index of industrial production in the
German manufacturing and mining sector at business cycle frequencies, obtained from the Bundesbank and extracted via
the HP-filter (λ = 6.25) after taking the natural logarithm. Values of ORDERS and IP prior to 1991 are based on West
German data. The panel titles report the correlation coefficient between the two time series shown, ρ. The gray-shaded
regions show recessions as dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07,
2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                                                            44
Figure 5 – Investment Determinant Index Finance, Credit Spreads and Idiosyncratic Firm
Uncertainty

                                                        Credit Spreads (ρ = -0.30)
                                         1                                                     0.03
                  Finance Index Points




                                                FINANCE




                                                                                                                   Credit Spreads
                                                CREDIT SPREADS
                                                                                               0.01
                                         0
                                                                                               -0.01


                                         -1                                                    -0.03
                                          '89   '93      '97       '01         '05   '09     '13

                                                         Uncertainty (ρ = -0.30)




                                                                                                      Uncertainty Index Points
                                         1                                                     0.1
                  Finance Index Points




                                         0                                                     0

                                                                 FINANCE
                                                                 UNCERTAINTY
                       -1                                                                        -0.1
                        '89          '93        '97         '01         '05       '09          '13
Notes: This figure compares the aggregate investment determinant index Finance, based on Q2, and two covariate can-
didates. The top panel plots Finance and credit spreads for non-financial corporations. Until 1998, CREDIT SPREADS
is the difference between corporate bond yields, obtained from the Bundesbank, and interest rates on 10-year Treasuries,
followed by the yearly average of monthly credit spreads for non-financial corporations from Gilchrist and Mojon (2016)
since 1999, jointly adjusted for a linear trend. The bottom-panel compares Finance and a measure of idiosyncratic un-
certainty in the West German manufacturing sector. UNCERTAINTY is the linearly detrended yearly average of the
standard deviation of ex-post forecast errors from Bachmann et al. (2013), which is only available through 2010. The panel
titles report the correlation coefficient between the two time series shown, ρ. The gray-shaded regions show recessions as
dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06,
2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                                                    45
  Figure 6 – Investment Determinant Index Macro and Fiscal Policy Covariate Candidates
                                                                Corporate Tax Rate (ρ = -0.10)
                                                    1                                                            0.14




                             Macro Index Points
                                                  0.5                                                            0.07




                                                                                                                            Tax Rate
                                                    0                                                            0

                                                  -0.5                                                  MACRO    -0.07
                                                                                                        TAX
                                                   -1                                                          -0.14
                                                    '89   '93       '97         '01        '05    '09        '13

                                                                   Gvt. Purchases (ρ = -0.18)
                                                    1                                                            0.1
                             Macro Index Points




                                                  0.5                                                            0.05




                                                                                                                            Purchases
                                                    0                                                            0

                                                  -0.5                                            MACRO          -0.05
                                                                                                  PURCHASES
                                                   -1                                                          -0.1
                                                    '89   '93       '97         '01        '05    '09        '13
Notes: The top panel compares the aggregate investment determinant index Macro, based on Q2, and TAX, which is the
linearly detrended statutory corporate tax rate less deductions obtained from the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development. The lower panel depicts Macro and government purchases. PURCHASES is the cyclical component of
real government purchases (intermediate inputs, wage costs, benefits in kind, and gross investment) from German VGR
(Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung) data and filtered by means of the HP-filter (λ = 6.25) after taking the natural
logarithm. The panel titles report the correlation coefficient between the two time series shown, ρ. Values of TAX and
PURCHASES prior to 1991 are based on West German data. The gray-shaded regions show recessions as dated by the
Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 -
2009:M04.




       Figure 7 – Investment Determinant Index Macro and Other Covariate Candidates
                                                                Monetary Policy Rate (ρ = 0.16)
                                                    1                                                           0.04
                             Macro Index Points




                                                                 MACRO
                                                  0.5            MROR                                           0.02
                                                                                                                        MRO Rate




                                                    0                                                           0

                                                  -0.5                                                          -0.02

                                                   -1                                                         -0.04
                                                    '89   '93      '97         '01         '05    '09       '13

                                                                          GDP (ρ = 0.46)
                                                    1                                                           0.05
                             Macro Index Points




                                                  0.5                                                           0.025
                                                                                                                            Output Gap




                                                    0                                                           0

                                                  -0.5                         MACRO                            -0.025
                                                                               GDP
                                                   -1                                                         -0.05
                                                    '89   '93      '97         '01         '05    '09       '13
Notes: The top panel compares the aggregate investment determinant index Macro, based on Q2, and the monetary policy
rate. MROR (Main Refinancing Operations Rate) is the discount rate set by the Bundesbank until 1998, followed by
the main refinancing operations rate set by the European Central Bank since 1999, jointly adjusted for a linear trend.
The bottom panel compares Macro and the cyclical component of real gross domestic product, taken from German VGR
(Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung) data and extracted via the HP-filter (λ = 6.25) after taking the natural logarithm.
Values of GDP prior to 1991 are based on West German data. The panel titles report the correlation coefficient be-
tween the two time series shown, ρ. The gray-shaded regions show recessions as dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see
Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                                                                46
                                                  Figure 8 – Fit and Counterfactual
                                       0.25

                                         0.2

                                       0.15

                                         0.1

                                       0.05
                         growth rate




                                           0

                                       -0.05

                                        -0.1

                                       -0.15
                                                                       ACTUAL
                                                                       FITTED
                                        -0.2
                                                                       COUNTERF

                                       -0.25
                                            '89             '97                   '05        '13

Notes: This figure plots the West German manufacturing investment growth rate obtained from the Federal Statistical Office
∆ItF SO , ACT U AL, the fitted series of the aggregate investment growth rate estimated from equation (7), F IT T ED, and
the pointwise minima and maxima of the counterfactual fitted series of the aggregate investment growth rate COU N T ERF ,
where the contributions of the set of admissible Ŝ ales to the overall fitted series has been subtracted. The gray-shaded
regions show recessions as dated by the Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07,
2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 - 2009:M04.




                                                                  47
                                                  ̂ and Sentiment Indicators
                                       Figure 9 – Sales
                                             GFK-CC                                                   IFO-BS
                                   4                            100                         4                                100
                                                        d
                                                       Sales                                                         d
                                                                                                                    Sales

                                                       GFK-CC                                                       IFO-BS
                                   2                                                        2




                                                                        GFK-CC




                                                                                                                                     IFO-BS
                          Sales




                                                                                   Sales
                           d




                                                                                    d
                                   0                            0                           0                                0

                                  -2                                                       -2

                                  -4                         -100                          -4                         -100
                                   '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13                              '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13


                                             IFO-BE
                                   4                            100
                                                        d
                                                       Sales

                                                       IFO-BE
                                   2




                                                                        IFO-BE
                          Sales
                           d




                                   0                            0

                                  -2

                                  -4                         -100
                                   '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13


Notes: The figure plots the pointwise minima and maxima of the set of admissible Ŝ ales using the baseline identifica-
tion scheme (left y-axis), along with (right y-axis) the GfK Consumer Confidence Index (GFK-CC), top-left panel, the
ifo business situation index for the West German manufacturing sector (IFO-BS), top-right-panel, and the ifo business
expectation index (IFO-BE) for the West German manufacturing sector, bottom panel , the latter two from the ifo Busi-
ness Cycle Survey. The GfK index is only available from 1992. The gray-shaded regions show recessions as dated by the
Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01 -
2009:M04.




                                                     ̂ and Policy Variables
                                         Figure 10 – Sales
                                       Corporate Tax Rate                                        Gvt. Purchases
                                  4                             0.14                       4                                 0.1
                                                         d
                                                        Sales                                            d
                                                                                                        Sales

                                                        TAX                                             PURCHASES
                                  2                             0.07                       2                                 0.05
                                                                                                                                     Purchases
                                                                        Tax Rate
                         Sales




                                                                         Sales
                          d




                                                                          d




                                  0                             0                          0                                 0

                                  -2                            -0.07                      -2                                -0.05

                                  -4                         -0.14                         -4                         -0.1
                                   '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13                              '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13


                                       Monetary Policy Rate
                                  4                             0.04
                                                        d
                                                       Sales

                                                       MROR
                                  2                             0.02
                                                                        MRO Rate
                         Sales
                          d




                                  0                             0

                                  -2                            -0.02

                                  -4                         -0.04
                                   '89 '93 '97 '01 '05 '09 '13


Notes: The figure plots the pointwise minima and maxima of the set of admissible Ŝ    ales using the baseline identifica-
tion scheme (left y-axis) against a number of policy variables measuring fiscal and monetary policy (right y-axis). The
top-left panel shows the linearly detrended statutory corporate tax rate less deductions obtained from the Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development. The top-right panel depicts the cyclical component of real government pur-
chases (intermediate inputs, wage costs, benefits in kind, and gross investment) from German VGR (Volkswirtschaftliche
Gesamtrechnung) data and filtered with the HP-filter (λ = 6.25) after taking the natural logarithm. The bottom panel
shows the discount rate set by the Bundesbank until 1998, followed by the main refinancing operations rate set by the
European Central Bank since 1999, jointly adjusted for a linear trend. The gray-shaded regions show recessions as dated by
the Sachverständigenrat (see Sachverständigenrat, 2017, p. 134): 1992:M02 - 1993:M07, 2001:M02 - 2003:M06, 2008:M01
- 2009:M04.




                                                                             48
Figure 11 – Impulse Response Functions of a Vector Autoregression in Sales, Tech, ∆ItF SO ,
and P P It
                                                            Sales to Aggregate Demand Shock                                                                   Sales to Technology Shock
                                            0.5                                                                                               0.5
                   index points




                                                                                                                     index points
                                                   0                                                                                                 0
                                      -0.2                                                                                              -0.2
                                                        0      1       2        3           4           5                                                 0   1         2        3          4   5

                                                            Tech to Aggregate Demand Shock                                                                    Tech to Technology Shock
                                  0.15                                                                                              0.15
                index points




                                                                                                                  index points




                                                   0                                                                                                 0
                                                        0      1       2        3           4           5                                                 0   1         2        3          4   5
                                                            ∆ I FSO to Aggregate Demand Shock                                                                 ∆ I FSO to Technology Shock
                               percentage points




                                                                                                                                 percentage points




                                                                t                                                                                                 t
                                                   7                                                                                                 7


                                                   0                                                                                                 0


                                                   -7                                                                                                -7
                                                        0      1       2        3           4           5                                                 0   1         2        3          4   5

                                                             PPI to Aggregate Demand Shock                                                                        PPI to Technology Shock
                               percentage points




                                                                                                                                 percentage points




                                                   1                                                                                                 1


                                                   0                                                                                                 0


                                                   -1                                                                                                -1
                                                        0      1       2        3           4           5                                                 0   1         2        3          4   5
                                                                               Correlation Restrictions: median                           Correlation Restrictions: min/max



Notes: This figure shows the impulse response functions of a vector autoregression with one lag in the aggregate investment
determinant indices Sales, Tech, the aggregate investment growth rate (∆ItF SO ), and producer price inflation (P P It ).
Only the identified aggregate demand shocks (left panels) and the identified aggregate technology shocks are depicted
(right panels). Shock size is one standard deviation for each shock. The units for Sales and Tech are index points. The
units for ∆ItF SO and P P It are percentage points. The identification of orthogonal shocks using correlation restrictions
follows the procedure described in the text. The solid blue and dashed black lines show, respectively, the impulse response
function’s pointwise median, minimum, and maximum value from this identification strategy.




                                                                                                            49
Figure 12 – Contributions of Orthogonalized Shocks to the Variance of ∆ItF SO at the Two-
Digit Industry Level
                                             100

                                             90

                                             80

                                             70

                                             60




                                   percent
                                             50

                                             40

                                             30

                                             20

                                             10

                                              0


                                                   Sales   Tech   Finance Return   Macro   Other Total R²


Notes: This figure shows the box-plots of estimates for the variance contributions of shocks to investment fluctuations
at the two-digit manufacturing industry level. The estimates are obtained from a variance decomposition in regressions
of investment growth on the orthogonalized industry investment determinant indices, Ŝ               ̂
                                                                                             alesi , T         ̂ i , Return
                                                                                                       echi , Finance ̂ i,
M̂
 acroi , and Ô
              theri , estimated for eight two-digit industries. The industry-specific investment growth rates and investment
determinant indices are based on German VGR (Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung) data (for 1989 to 1991 we use West
German data, and data for all of Germany thereafter) and Q2, respectively. The orthogonal shocks are recovered using the
the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme. The first six box-plots show the contributions of orthogonal shocks to the
variance by industry. The final box-plot displays the overall R2 . The ends of the whiskers represent the lowest and highest
estimates from the lowest and highest quartile, respectively, within 1.5 times the interquartile range. Crosses represent
estimates outside of that range.




Figure 13 – Contributions of Orthogonalized Shocks to the Variance of ∆ItF SO at the Laender
Level
                                             100

                                             90

                                             80

                                             70

                                             60
                                   percent




                                             50

                                             40

                                             30

                                             20

                                             10

                                              0


                                                   Sales   Tech   Finance Return   Macro   Other Total R²


Notes: This figure shows the box-plots of estimates for the contributions of shocks to investment fluctuations at the
Laender level. The estimates are obtained from a decomposition of total variance in regressions of investment growth
on the orthogonalized Laender investment determinant indices, T      ̂echi , Ŝ        ̂ i , Return
                                                                              alesi , Finance   ̂ i , M̂  acroi , and Ô
                                                                                                                       theri ,
estimated for eight West German Laender. The sample period goes from 1992 to 2008. The Laender-specific investment
growth rates and investment determinant indices are based on German VGR (Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung) data
(only for aggregate, not for manufacturing investment available) and Q2, respectively. The orthogonal shocks are recovered
using the the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme. The first six box-plots show the contributions of orthogonal shocks
to the overall variance by Laender. The final box-plot displays the overall R2 . The ends of the whiskers represent the
lowest and highest estimates from the lowest and highest quartile, respectively, within 1.5 times the interquartile range.
Outliers are plotted as ‘+’.




                                                                        50
                                          Table 1 – Summary Statistics

                       Sales           Tech         Finance         Return          Macro        Other      ∆ItF SO
       Panel A:
       Sales         1
       Tech          0.6640∗∗∗      1
       Finance       0.6059∗∗∗      0.3183∗         1
       Return        0.9539∗∗∗      0.5802∗∗∗       0.6165∗∗∗     1
       Macro         0.6381∗∗∗      0.3733∗∗        0.4481∗∗∗     0.6987∗∗∗       1
       Other         0.2228         0.3416∗        -0.0796        0.1426          0.2538         1
       Panel B:
       ∆ItF SO       0.8645∗∗∗      0.5539∗∗∗      0.6191∗∗∗      0.8895∗∗∗       0.6148∗∗∗      0.0346     1
       Panel C:
       µ̂            0.6005         0.9193         -0.0245        0.4806         -0.1046         0.3347     0.0123
       σ̂            0.5155         0.1642          0.2243        0.4192          0.2630         0.4021     0.0943
Notes: Panel A reports the pairwise correlation coefficients between the aggregate investment determinant indices, obtained
from aggregating the firm-level responses to Q2 with weights as described in the text. Panel B shows the correlations of the
aggregate investment determinant indices with the aggregate investment growth rate in the West German manufacturing
and mining sector, ∆ItF SO . Up to and including 2011, ∆ItF SO is administrative data provided by the Federal Statistical
Office. From 2012 onwards, ∆ItF SO is administrative aggregate investment growth data in the manufacturing and mining
sector of unified Germany. Significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ , respectively. The
statistical significance levels are based on a moving-block bootstrap with overlapping blocks of 3 years length and 10,000
replications, where we compute the fraction of bootstrap samples for which the correlation coefficient equals zero or has
opposite sign of the point estimate. Panel C contains the sample means and the sample standard deviations of the aggregate
investment determinant indices and the aggregate investment growth rate.




                   Table 2 – Mean of Tech Conditional on Maintenance Investment

                    Tercile of Fraction of Maintenance Investment               Mean(Tech)           N
                    less or equal 24%                                              0.9901         12751
                    between 24% and 50%                                            0.8198         13855
                    more or equal 50%                                              0.6819         11520
Notes: This table displays the conditional mean of the investment determinant index Tech, which is based on Q2, across
firm-year observations. The mean uses the weights as described in the text and is conditional on the terciles of the shares of
maintenance investment as a fraction of total investment for a given firm-year, computed from the ifo Investment Survey.
Differences in conditional means between any two terciles are statistically significant at the 1% level, based on a one-sided
t test. The non-uniform distribution of observations across terciles is due to data bunching at the tercile boundaries.




                                                             51
  Table 3 – Mean of Tech Conditional on Investment in Restructuring and Rationalization

       Tercile of Fraction of Restructuring and Rationalization Investment                 Mean(Tech)          N
       less or equal 20%                                                                      0.7640        16403
       between 20% and 40%                                                                    0.9285         9069
       more or equal 40%                                                                      1.0657        12654
Notes: This table displays the conditional mean of the investment determinant index Tech, which is based on Q2, across
firm-year observations. The mean uses the weights as described in the text and is conditional on the terciles of the shares
of restructuring and rationalization investment as a fraction of total investment for a given firm-year, computed from the
ifo Investment Survey. Differences in conditional means between any two terciles are statistically significant at the 1%
level, based on a one-sided t test. The non-uniform distribution of observations across terciles is due to data bunching at
the tercile boundaries.




                      Table 4 – Mean of Tech Conditional on Process Innovation

                                    Process Innovation        Mean(Tech)          N
                                             No                  0.9482        13078
                                             Yes                 1.0825         5430
Notes: This table displays the conditional mean of the investment determinant index Tech, which is based on Q2, across
firm-year observations. The mean uses the weights as described in the text and is conditional on whether capital expendi-
tures also aimed at process innovation, computed from the ifo Investment Survey. The corresponding question was asked
in the spring questionnaire about capital expenditures from the previous year, from 1989 until the year 2001. Differences
in conditional means between Yes and No answers are statistically significant at the 1% level, based on a one-sided t test.




          Table 5 – Mean of |Tech| Conditional on Eurostat’s Technology Classification

                         Eurostat’s Technology Classification          Mean(|Tech|)          N
                         Low-technology                                    0.9057         14254
                         Medium-technology                                 0.9105         11485
                         High-technology                                   0.9335         11995
Notes: This table displays the conditional mean of the absolute value of the investment determinant index Tech, which
is based on Q2, across firm-year observations. The mean uses the weights as described in the text and is conditional
on Eurostat’s technology classifications, which groups together manufacturing industries according to their technological
intensity, defined as the ratio of industry R&D spending to value added. Because of the industry classifications available
at the ifo, we find it convenient to group Eurostat’s medium-high-technology and high-technology industries together into
one high-technology category, while Eurostat’s medium-low-technology industries are labeled here simply as the medium-
technology category. Differences in means between any two technology industries are statistically significant at the 1%
level, based on a one-sided t test, except for the difference between low-technology industries and medium-technology
industries, which is statistically insignificant.




                                                           52
             Table 6 – Mean of |Finance| Conditional on External Finance Dependence

                      Tercile of Fraction of External Finance                Mean(|Finance|)            N
                      exactly 0%                                                 0.2299             10597
                      between 0% and 20%                                         0.4193             1280
                      more or equal 20%                                          0.5080             5525
 Notes: This table displays the conditional mean of the absolute value of the investment determinant index Finance, which
 is based on Q2, across firm-year observations. The mean uses the weights as described in the text and is conditional on
 the share of external finance raised for capital expenditures, computed from the ifo Investment Survey. The corresponding
 question was asked in the spring questionnaire about capital expenditures from the previous year, from 1989 until the year
 2001. Differences in conditional means between any two external finance dependence terciles are statistically significant
 at the 1% level, based on a one-sided t test. The non-uniform distribution of observations across terciles is due to data
 bunching at the tercile boundaries.




  Table 7 – Investment Determinants and Their Relation to Price-Setting Behavior of Firms

                                                                    LHS Variable is...
                                   Frequency of Price Increases                             Frequency of Price Decreases
                          (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)
Sales                  0.015∗∗∗      0.0069∗∗∗     0.0073∗∗∗        0.0091∗∗∗    -0.023∗∗∗     -0.016∗∗∗    -0.015∗∗∗   -0.014∗∗∗
                      (0.0015)       (0.0015)     (0.0015)        (0.0014)       (0.0020)      (0.0021)     (0.0019)    (0.0016)

Tech                  -0.0086∗∗∗     -0.0076∗∗∗   -0.0088∗∗∗      -0.0085∗∗∗      0.0054∗∗      0.0069∗∗     0.0036      0.00041
                      (0.0030)       (0.0029)     (0.0028)        (0.0025)       (0.0027)      (0.0027)     (0.0026)    (0.0023)

Constant               0.096∗∗∗       0.14∗∗∗      0.13∗∗∗         0.14∗∗∗        0.076∗∗∗      0.025∗∗∗     0.032       0.025∗∗∗
                      (0.0039)       (0.0081)     (0.021)         (0.0074)       (0.0042)      (0.0042)     (0.030)     (0.0051)
Observations             11539          11539        11520           11539         11539         11539        11520       11539
R2                       0.013          0.061        0.079           0.072         0.028         0.051        0.082       0.073
Year Effects              No             Yes          Yes             Yes            No           Yes          Yes         Yes
Firm Fixed Effects        No             No           No              Yes            No            No           No         Yes
Industry Effects          No             No           Yes             No             No            No          Yes          No
 Notes: This table reports Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) estimates from linear regressions of the frequency of price change
 on Sales, Tech, and a constant. Here Sales and Tech are the firm-level survey responses to Q2. For each firm Price
 Increases is the frequency of price increases in a given year, defined as the yearly mean of the employment-weighted
 average of a monthly product-level price increase dummy variable constructed from the ifo Business Cycle Survey. The
 definition of Price Decreases is analogous. Industry Effects are at the two-digit industry level. The sample comprises a
 subset of firms in the ifo Investment Survey for which we can merge data from the ifo Business Cycle Survey. Significance
 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level is indicated by ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ , and ∗ , respectively. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at
 the firm level.




                                                               53
                    Table 8 – Contribution to the Variance of ∆ItF SO (in percent)

                                Correlation Restrictions          Recursive: Sales first       Recursive: Tech first
    Panel A:
     ̂
    Sales                              [65.92, 74.81]                      74.74                         44.13
    T̂
     ech                                [ 0.00, 8.89]                       0.07                         30.68
     ̂
    Finance                                 1.37                            1.37                          1.37
     ̂
    Return                                  4.08                            4.08                          4.08
    ̂
    Macro                                   0.00                            0.00                          0.00
    ̂
    Other                                   1.15                            1.15                          1.15
    R2 of equation (7)                      0.81                            0.81                          0.81
    Panel B:
           ̂ Sales)
    Corr (Sales,                        [0.95,   1.00]                       1.00                         0.75
    Corr (T̂
           ech, Tech)                   [0.50,   0.81]                      0.75                          1.00
           ̂ PPI)
    Corr (Sales,                        [0.47,   0.52]                      0.51                          0.42
    Corr (T̂
           ech, PPI)                   [-0.22,   -0.01]                     -0.06                         0.30
Notes: Panel A of this table reports the variance contributions of the orthogonal shocks to aggregate investment growth
fluctuations in the West German manufacturing and mining sector. The estimates are obtained from a variance decom-
position in a regression of investment growth, ∆ItF SO , on admissible orthogonal shocks (equation (7)). The aggregate
investment growth rate is obtained from the Federal Statistical Office. The identification of orthogonal shocks from the
investment determinant indices, based on Q2, follows the procedure described in the text. The first column shows (the
range of) results for the set of admissible solutions for the orthogonal shocks, resulting from our baseline correlation-based
identification scheme that combines a narrative approach with basic aggregate demand and supply theory on prices. The
second column shows results for one particular solution from this set which corresponds to a Cholesky decomposition with
Sales ordered first. The third column shows results for a Cholesky decomposition with Tech ordered first, which is not
contained in the set. Panel B shows the correlations between Ŝ  ales and Sales, and T̂ ech and Tech, the range of correlations
our narrative identification assumptions span. It also shows the resulting correlations between Ŝ   ales and T̂ ech with PPI
Inflation. PPI Inflation is the yearly rate of change in the producer price index of the German manufacturing sector.




                                                             54
       Table 9 – Contribution to the Variance of ∆ItF SO (in percent): Sensitivity Analysis

                           Low Narrative Correlations           High Narrative Correlations           Deflated Specification
Panel A:
̂
Sales                               [49.39, 74.81]                        [74.45, 74.81]                   [65.11, 74.88]
̂
Tech                                [ 0.00, 25.42]                         [ 0.00, 0.36]                    [ 0.00, 9.77]
 ̂
Finance                                   1.37                                 1.37                                1.37
 ̂
Return                                    4.08                                 4.08                                4.76
̂
Macro                                     0.00                                 0.00                                0.23
̂
Other                                     1.15                                 1.15                                2.63
R2 of equation (7)                        0.81                                 0.81                                0.84
Panel B:
       ̂ Sales)
Corr (Sales,                           [0.83, 1.00]                         [0.99, 1.00]                     [0.95,   1.00]
Corr (T̂
       ech, Tech)                      [0.25, 0.81]                         [0.75, 0.81]                     [0.50,   0.81]
       ̂
Corr (Sales, PPI)                     [ 0.39, 0.52]                        [ 0.51, 0.52]                     [0.47,   0.52]
Corr (T̂
       ech, PPI)                     [-0.33, -0.01]                       [-0.06, -0.01]                    [-0.22,   -0.01]
 Notes: This table investigates the sensitivity of the results reported in the first column of Table 8. The first column of this
 tables sets the threshold value for the narrative correlations of Ŝales with Sales and T ̂ech with Tech in the identification
 strategy to 0.25 instead of 0.5, while the second column sets the threshold value to 0.75. The third column deflates
 aggregate investment growth by the deflator for gross fixed capital formation in the manufacturing sector, obtained from
 German VGR (Volkswirtschaftliche Gesamtrechnung), where values prior to 1991 are based on West German data. The
 correlations in panel B, third column are, by construction, the same as in the first column of Table 8. See the notes to
 Table 8 for further information.




                                         Table 10 – Inter-Industry Effects

                    Coal,          Rubber,       Glass,        Metal         Machines,     Wood,          Textile,        Food,
                    Chemicals,     Plastics      Ceramics,     Production    Cars, Other Paper,           Leather         Tobacco
                    Petroleum                    Stone         and           Heavy         Printing
                                                               Processing    Manufacturing
Panel A: Upstream Channel
β                 0.0330           -0.0870       -0.0140       -0.2383       0.0570         0.1075        0.1700          0.3145
std. error        0.2123           0.1755        0.2236        0.3170        0.2242         0.2350        0.2977          0.1660
R2                0.0014           0.0085        0.0002        0.0697        0.0037         0.0135        0.0334          0.1195
Panel B: Downstream Channel
β                 -0.0734          0.0432        -0.0319       0.1255        -0.0560        0.0428        -0.2791         0.3600
std. error        0.1549           0.2253        0.1458        0.2146        0.2058         0.2018        0.2195          0.3128
R2                0.0165           0.0029        0.0025        0.0183        0.0091         0.0042        0.1020          0.1342
Share in Percent    16.0427        3.6413        3.1055        9.0785        54.7607        5.2995        1.3092          6.7626
 Notes: For each two-digit manufacturing industry in the ifo Investment Survey (we leave out ‘Mining’ for this exercise)
 panel A of the table reports ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates for regressions of an upstream index, USIit , on industry-
                            ̂
 level technology shocks, Tech  it . The upstream index is the input-weighted average of demand shocks in all other two-digit
 industries, as defined in equation (9). Panel B of the table reports OLS estimates for regressions of a downstream index,
                                             ̂it . The downstream index is the output-weighted average of technology shocks
 DSIit , on industry-level demand shocks, Sales
 in all other two-digit industries, as defined in equation (10). All orthogonal shocks here are identified through the Choleski-
 Sales-first identification scheme. The last row shows the time series average of the nominal investment expenditures per
 manufacturing subsector as a fraction of total nominal investment expenditures in German manufacturing.




                                                              55
                             Table 11 – Contribution to the Variance of ∆IPt

                                                                    ∆IPt
                                                 ̂
                                                Sales         [50.32, 62.91]
                                                T̂
                                                 ech          [ 0.12, 12.72]
                                                 ̂
                                                Finance            5.50
                                                 ̂
                                                Return             0.04
                                                 ̂
                                                Macro              4.25
                                                 ̂
                                                Other              0.31
                                                R2                  0.73
Notes: This table reports the range of variance contributions of the admissible orthogonal aggregate shocks from our
baseline identification scheme to aggregate industrial production growth fluctuations in the German manufacturing sector.
∆IPt is the growth rate of the yearly average of monthly industrial production data in levels for the German manufacturing
and mining sector obtained from the Bundesbank.




Table 12 – Five-year Forecast Error Variance Decomposition for a Vector Autoregression in
Tech, Sales, ∆ItF SO , and P P It

 Panel A:
                                                                   Contribution of...
                                  Aggregate Demand Shocks                                  Technology Shocks
                         Corr. Restrictions     Sales first    Tech first    Corr. Restrictions     Sales first    Tech first
 ∆ItF SO                    [56.48, 62.63]          66.26          62.36        [15.92, 22.07]         12.29          16.19
 P P It                     [15.55, 17.43]          18.96          23.36        [16.37, 18.25]         14.84          10.44
 Panel B:
                             Correlation Restrictions                Recursive: Sales first          Recursive: Tech first
       ̂
 Corr(Sales,PPI)                    [ 0.37, 0.37]                             0.37                             0.30
 Corr(T̂
       ech,PPI)                    [-0.06, -0.01]                             0.04                             0.23
       ̂
 Corr(Sales,Sales)                   [0.79, 0.81]                             0.81                             0.69
 Corr(T̂
       ech,Tech)                     [0.50, 0.57]                             0.62                             0.73
Notes: Panel A of this table reports the five-year forecast error variance decomposition of a vector autoregression with
one lag in the aggregate investment determinant indices Sales, Tech, the aggregate investment growth rate (∆ItF SO ), and
producer price inflation (P P It ). The identification of orthogonal shocks using correlation restrictions follows the procedure
described in the text (first and fourth column). The second and fifth columns show results using a the Choleski-Sales-first
identification scheme. The third and sixth columns show results using a the Choleski-Tech-first identification scheme. Panel
B shows results from the same vector autoregression as in panel A, specifically, the correlations between Ŝ    ales and Sales,
and T̂ech and Tech, the range of correlations our narrative identification assumptions span. It also shows the resulting
correlations between Ŝales and T   ̂
                                    ech with PPI Inflation.




                                                              56
Table 13 – Weighted Average of the Contribution to the Variance of ∆ItF SO (in percent) at
the Two-Digit Industry Level and at the Laender Level

                                      Level        2-digit Industry      Laender
                                       ̂
                                      Sales              61.46            41.01
                                      T̂
                                       ech                0.52             2.06
                                       ̂
                                      Finance             1.68             3.60
                                       ̂
                                      Return              3.36             2.57
                                       ̂
                                      Macro               1.24             4.48
                                       ̂
                                      Other               0.76             6.69
                                      R2                  0.69             0.60
Notes: This table reports the investment-weighted average of the variance contributions of orthogonal shocks to investment
fluctuations (and the total R2 ) at the two-digit manufacturing industry level and at the Laender level. All orthogonal
shocks here are identified through the Choleski-Sales-first identification scheme. See the notes to Figures 12 and 13 for
further information.




                                                           57
Appendix: Survey Guidelines (Translated)

The ifo Investment Survey gives the following guidelines (translated by us into English) on
the firm-level investment determinants to complete Q2 of the survey questionnaire:


Sales Situation and Expectation To be considered are aspects like the degree of capacity
utilization, the expected range of price movements and changes in sales figures, and an
assessment of the uncertainty surrounding these expectations.


Finance This counts factors like disposable financial resources, borrowing costs, and inter-
est rate expectations.


Return Expectation To be considered are factors like the return on investment and the
relative attractiveness of fixed assets and financial assets.


Technological Factors This comprises all incentives to invest which come from techno-
logical development.


Macro Policy Environment To be considered are aspects such as an assessment of the
effects of economic policy, the tax regulations applying to investment, as well as the possibility
to outsource production abroad.




                                               58
