                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE ROLE OF AUTOMATIC STABILIZERS IN THE U.S. BUSINESS CYCLE

                                           Alisdair McKay
                                            Ricardo Reis

                                        Working Paper 19000
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19000


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




We are grateful to Alan Auerbach, Susanto Basu, Mark Bils, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Narayana Kocherlakota,
Karen Kopecky, Toshihiko Mukoyama, and seminar participants at Arizona State University, Berkeley,
Board of Governors, Duke, Econometric Society Summer meetings, European Economic Association
Annual Meeting, FRB Boston, FRB Minneapolis, Green Line Macro Meeting, HEC montreal, the
Hydra Workshop on Dynamics Macroeconomics, Indiana University, LAEF - UC Santa Barbara, NBER
EFG meeting, Nordic Symposium on Macroeconomics, Royal Economic Society Annual Meetings,
Russell Sage Foundation, Sciences Po, the Society for Economic Dynamics annual meeting, Stanford,
and Yale for useful comments. Reis is grateful to the Russell Sage Foundation's visiting scholar program
for its financial support and hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19000.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alisdair McKay and Ricardo Reis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle
Alisdair McKay and Ricardo Reis
NBER Working Paper No. 19000
April 2013
JEL No. E32,E62,H30

                                              ABSTRACT

Most countries have automatic rules in their tax-and-transfer systems that are partly intended to stabilize
economic fluctuations. This paper measures how effective they are. We put forward a model that merges
the standard incomplete-markets model of consumption and inequality with the new Keynesian model
of nominal rigidities and business cycles, and that includes most of the main potential stabilizers in
the U.S. data, as well as the theoretical channels by which they may work. We find that the conventional
argument that stabilizing disposable income will stabilize aggregate demand plays a negligible role
on the effectiveness of the stabilizers, whereas tax-and-transfer programs that affect inequality and
social insurance can have a large effect on aggregate volatility. However, as currently designed, the
set of stabilizers in place in the United States has barely had any effect on volatility. According to
our model, expanding safety-net programs, like food stamps, has the largest potential to enhance the
effectiveness of the stabilizers.


Alisdair McKay
Boston University
Dept. of Economics
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
amckay@bu.edu

Ricardo Reis
Department of Economics, MC 3308
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street, Rm. 1022 IAB
New York NY 10027
and NBER
rreis@columbia.edu
1     Introduction
The ﬁscal stabilizers are the rules in the law that make ﬁscal revenues and outlays relative to
total income change with the business cycle. They are large, estimated by the Congressional
Budget Oﬃce (2013) to account for $386 of the $1089 billion U.S. deﬁcit in 2012, and much
research has been devoted to measuring them using either microsimulations (e.g., Auerbach,
2009) or time-series aggregate regressions (e.g., Fedelino et al., 2005). Unlike the controversial
topic of discretionary ﬁscal stimulus, these built-in responses of the tax-and-transfer system
have been praised over time by many economists as well as policy institutions.1 The IMF
(Baunsgaard and Symansky, 2009; Spilimbergo et al., 2010) recommends that countries
enhance the scope of these ﬁscal tools as a way to reduce macroeconomic volatility. In
spite of this enthusiasm. Blanchard (2006) noted that: “very little work has been done
on automatic stabilization [...] in the last 20 years” and Blanchard et al. (2010) argued
that designing better automatic stabilizers was one of the most promising routes for better
macroeconomic policy.
    This paper asks the question: are the automatic stabilizers eﬀective? More concretely,
we propose a business-cycle model that captures the most important channels through which
the automatic stabilizers may attenuate the business cycle, we calibrate it to U.S. data, and
we use it to measure their quantitative importance. Our ﬁrst and main contribution is a set
of estimates of how much higher would the volatility of aggregate activity be if some or all
of the ﬁscal stabilizers were removed.
    Our second contribution is to investigate the theoretical channels by which the stabilizers
may attenuate the business cycle and to quantify their relative importance. The literature
suggests four main channels. The dominant mechanism, present in almost all policy discus-
sions of the stabilizers, is the disposable income channel (Brown, 1955). If a ﬁscal instrument,
like an income tax, reduces the ﬂuctuations in disposable income, it will make consumption
and investment more stable, thereby stabilizing aggregate demand. In the presence of nomi-
nal rigidities, this will stabilize the business cycle. A second channel for potential stabilization
works through marginal incentives (Christiano, 1984). For example, with a progressive per-
sonal income tax, the tax rate facing workers rises in booms and falls in recessions, therefore
encouraging intertemporal substitution of work eﬀort away from booms and into recessions.
Third, automatic stabilizers have a redistribution channel. Blinder (1975) argued that if
   1
     See Auerbach (2009) and Feldstein (2009) in the context of the 2007-09 recession, and Auerbach (2003)
and Blinder (2006) more generally for contrasting views on the merit of countercyclical ﬁscal policy, but
agreement on the importance of automatic stabilizers.



                                                    2
those that receive funds have higher propensities to spend them than those who give the
funds, aggregate consumption and demand will rise with redistribution. Oh and Reis (2012)
argued that if the receivers are at a corner solution with respect to their choice of hours to
work, while the payers work more to oﬀset their fall in income, aggregate labor supply will
rise with redistribution. Related is the social insurance channel: these policies alter the risks
households face with consequences for precautionary savings and the distribution of wealth
(Floden, 2001; Alonso-Ortiz and Rogerson, 2010; Challe and Ragot, 2013). For instance, a
generous safety net will reduce precautionary savings making it more likely that agents face
liquidity constraints after an aggregate shock.
    Our third contribution is methodological. We believe our model is the ﬁrst to merge the
standard incomplete-markets model surveyed in Heathcote et al. (2009) with the standard
sticky-price model of business cycles in Woodford (2003). Building on work by Reiter (2010,
2009), we show how to numerically solve for the ergodic distribution of the endogenous
aggregate variables in a model where the distribution of wealth is a state variable and prices
are sticky. This allows us to compute second moments for the economy, and to investigate
counterfactuals in which some or all of the stabilizers are not present. We hope that future
work will build on this contribution to study the interaction between inequality, business
cycles and macroeconomic policy in the presence of nominal rigidities.
    We do not calculate optimal policy in our model, partly because this is computationally
infeasible at this point, and partly because that is not the spirit of our exercise. Our calcu-
lations are instead in the tradition of Summers (1981) and Auerbach and Kotlikoﬀ (1987).
Like them, we propose a model that ﬁts the US data and then change the tax-and-transfer
system within the model to make positive counterfactual predictions on the business cycle.
We also calculate the eﬀect on welfare using diﬀerent metrics, but acknowledging that many
of the stabilizers involve a great deal of redistribution, so any measure of social welfare will
rely on controversial assumptions about how to weigh diﬀerent individuals.

Literature Review
    This paper is part of a revival of interest in ﬁscal policy in macroeconomics.2 Most of this
literature has focussed on ﬁscal multipliers that measure the response of aggregate variables
to discretionary shocks to policy. Instead, we measure the eﬀect of ﬁscal rules on the ergodic
variance of aggregate variables. This leads us to also devote more attention to taxes and
government transfers, whereas the previous literature has tended to focus on government
  2
    For a survey, see the symposium in the Journal of Economic Literature, with contributions by Parker
(2011), Ramey (2011) and Taylor (2011).


                                                  3
purchases.3
    Focussing on stabilizers, there is an older literature discussing their eﬀectiveness (e.g.,
Musgrave and Miller, 1948), but little work using modern intertemporal models. Christiano
(1984) and Cohen and Follette (2000) use a consumption-smoothing model, Gali (1994)
uses a simple RBC model, Andrés and Doménech (2006) use a new Keynesian model, and
Hairault et al. (1997) use a few small-scale DSGEs. However, they typically consider the
eﬀect of a single automatic stabilizer, the income tax, whereas we comprehensively evaluate
several of them to provide a quantitative assessment of the stabilizers as a group. Christiano
and Harrison (1999), Guo and Lansing (1998) and Dromel and Pintus (2008) ask whether
progressive income taxes change the region of determinacy of equilibrium, whereas we use
a model with a unique equilibrium, and focus on the impact of a wider set of stabilizers on
the volatility of endogenous variables at this equilibrium. Jones (2002) calculates the eﬀect
of estimated ﬁscal rules on the business cycle using a representative-agent model, whereas
we focus on the rules that make up for automatic stabilization and ﬁnd that heterogeneity
is crucial to understand their eﬀects. Finally, some work (van den Noord, 2000; Barrell and
Pina, 2004; Veld et al., 2013) uses large macro simulation models to conduct exercises in
the same spirit as ours, but their models are often too complicated to isolate the diﬀerent
channels of stabilization and they typically assume representative agents, shutting oﬀ the
redistribution and social insurance channels that we will ﬁnd to be important.
    Huntley and Michelangeli (2011) and Kaplan and Violante (2012) are closer to us in
the use of optimizing models with heterogeneous agents to study ﬁscal policy. However,
they estimate multipliers to discretionary tax rebates, whereas we estimate the systematic
impact on the ergodic variance of the automatic features of the ﬁscal code. Heathcote
(2005) analyzes an economy that is hit by tax shocks and shows that aggregate consumption
responds more strongly when markets are incomplete due to the redistribution mechanism.
We study instead how the ﬁscal structure alters the response of the economy to non-ﬁscal
shocks. Floden (2001), Alonso-Ortiz and Rogerson (2010), Horvath and Nolan (2011), and
Berriel and Zilberman (2011) focus on the eﬀects of tax and transfer programs on average
output, employment, and welfare in a steady state without aggregate shocks. Instead, we
focus on business-cycle volatility, so we have aggregate shocks and measure variances.
    Methodologically, we are part of a recent literature using incomplete-market models with
   3
    In the United States in 2011, total government purchases were 2.7 trillion dollars. Government transfers
amounted to almost as much, at 2.5 trillion. Focussing on the cyclical components, during the 2007-09
recession, which saw the largest increase in total spending as a ratio of GDP since the Korean war, 3/4 of
that increase was in transfers spending (Oh and Reis, 2012), with the remaining 1/4 in government purchases.



                                                     4
nominal rigidities to study business-cycle questions. Oh and Reis (2012) and Guerrieri and
Lorenzoni (2011) were the ﬁrst to incorporate nominal rigidities into the standard model
of incomplete markets. Both of them solved only for the impact of a one-time unexpected
aggregate shock, whereas we are able to solve for recurring aggregate dynamics. Gornemann
et al. (2012) solve a conceptually similar problem to ours, but they focus on the distributional
consequences of monetary policy.
    Empirically, Auerbach and Feenberg (2000), Auerbach (2009), and Dolls et al. (2012)
use micro-simulations of tax systems to estimate the changes in taxes that follows a 1%
increase in aggregate income. A much larger literature (e.g, Fatas and Mihov, 2012) has
measured automatic stabilizers using macro data, estimating which components of revenue
and spending are strongly correlated with the business cycle. Whereas this work focusses on
measuring the presence of stabilizers, our goal is instead to judge their eﬀectiveness.


2    A business-cycle model with automatic stabilizers
To quantitatively evaluate the role of automatic stabilizers, we would like to have a model
that satisﬁes three requirements.
    First, the model must include the four channels of stabilization that we discussed. We
accomplish this by proposing a model that includes: (i) intertemporal substitution, so that
marginal incentives matter, (ii) nominal rigidities, so that aggregate demand plays a role
in ﬂuctuations, (iii) liquidity constraints and unemployment, so that Ricardian equivalence
does not hold and there is heterogeneity in marginal propensities to consume and willingness
to work, and (iv) incomplete insurance markets and precautionary savings, so that social
insurance aﬀects the response to aggregate shocks.
    Second, we would like to have a model that is close to existing frameworks that are
known to capture the main features of the U.S. business cycle. With complete insurance
markets, our model is similar to the neoclassical-synthesis DSGE models used for business
cycles, as in Christiano et al. (2005), but augmented with a series of taxes and transfers.
With incomplete insurance markets, our model is similar to the one in Krusell and Smith
(1998), but including nominal rigidities and many taxes and transfers.
    Third and ﬁnally, the model must include the main automatic stabilizers present in the
data. Table 1 provides an overview of the main components of spending and revenue in the
integrated U.S. government budget. Appendix A provides more details on how we deﬁne
each category.


                                               5
                Table 1: The automatic stabilizers in the U.S. government budget

       Revenues                                           Outlays

       Progressive income taxes                           Transfers
        Personal Income Taxes                10.98%        Unemployment benefits                 0.33%
                                                           Safety net programs                   1.02%
       Proportional taxes                                    Supplemental nutrition assistance   0.24%
        Corporate Income Taxes                2.57%          Family assistance programs          0.24%
        Property Taxes                        2.79%          Security income to the disabled     0.36%
        Sales and excise taxes                3.85%          Others                              0.19%

       Budget deficits                                    Budget deficits
        Public deficit                        1.87%        Government purchases                  15.60%
                                                           Net interest income                    2.76%

       Out of the model                                   Out of the model
        Payroll taxes                         6.26%        Retirement-related transfers          7.13%
        Customs taxes                         0.24%        Health benefits (non-retirement)      1.56%
        Licenses, fines, fees                 1.69%        Others (esp. rest of the world)       1.85%

       Sum                                  30.25%        Sum                                    30.25%

       Notes: Each cell shows the average of a component of the budget as a ratio of GDP, 1988-2007



    The ﬁrst category on the revenue side is the classic automatic stabilizer, the personal
income tax system. Because it is progressive in the United States, its revenue falls by more
than income during a recession. Moreover, it lowers the volatility of after-tax income, it
changes marginal returns from working over the cycle, it redistributes from high to low-
income households, and it provides insurance. Therefore, it works through all of the four
theoretical channels. We consider three more stabilizers on the revenue side: corporate
income taxes, property taxes and sales and excise taxes. All of them lower the volatility of
after tax income and so may potentially be stabilizing. Because they have, approximately,
a ﬁxed statutory rate, we will refer to them as a group as proportional taxes.4
    On the spending side, we consider two stabilizers working through transfers. Unem-
ployment beneﬁts greatly increase in every recession as the number of unemployed rises.
Safety-net programs include food stamps, cash assistance to the very poor, and transfers to
the disabled. During recessions, more households have incomes that qualify them for these
programs and the aggregate quantity of transfers increases.
    A seventh stabilizer is the budget deﬁcit, or the automatic constraint imposed by the
government budget constraint. We will consider diﬀerent rules for how deﬁcits are reduced
and how fast debt is paid down, especially with regards to how government purchases adjust.
   4
    Average eﬀective corporate income tax rates are in fact countercyclical in the data, mostly as result of
recurrent changes in investment tax credits during recessions that are not automatic.


                                                      6
The convention in the literature measuring automatic stabilizers is to exclude government
purchases because there is no automatic rule dictating their adjustment.5 That literature
distinguishes between the built-in stabilizers that respond automatically, by law, to current
economic conditions, and the feedback rule that captures the behavior of ﬁscal authori-
ties in response to current and past information. To give one example, receiving beneﬁts
when unemployed is an automatic feature of unemployment insurance, while the decision
by policymakers to extend the duration of unemployment beneﬁts in most recessions is not.
Measuring automatic stabilizers requires reading and interpreting the written laws and reg-
ulations, whereas estimating ﬁscal policy rules faces diﬃcult identiﬁcation challenges. We
will consider both the convention of excluding purchases, as well as an alternative where
government purchases serve as a stabilizer by responding to budget deﬁcits.
    The last rows of table 1 include the ﬁscal programs that we will exclude from our study
because they conﬂict with at least one of our desired model properties. Licenses and ﬁnes
have no obvious stabilization role. We leave out international ﬂows so that we stay within
the standard closed-economy business-cycle model. More important in their size in the
budget, we omit retirement, both in its expenses and in the payroll taxes that ﬁnance it,
and we omit health beneﬁts through Medicare and Medicaid. We exclude them for two
complementary reasons. First, so that we follow the convention, since the vast literature
on measuring automatic stabilizers to assess structural deﬁcits almost never includes health
and retirement spending.6 Second, because conventional business-cycle models typically
ignore the life-cycle considerations that dominate choices of retirement and health spending.
Exploring possible eﬀects of public spending on health and retirement on the business cycle
is a priority for future work.
    The model that follows is the simplest that we could write—and it is already quite
complicated—that satisﬁes these three requirements and includes all of these stabilizers. To
make the presentation easier, we will discuss several agents, so that we can introduce one
automatic stabilizer per type of agent, but most of them could be centralized into a single
household and a single ﬁrm without changing the equilibrium of the model.
   5
    See Perotti (2005) and Girouard and André (2005) for two of many examples.
   6
    Even the increase in medical assistance to the poor during recessions is questionable: for instance, in
2007-09 the proportional increase in spending with Medicaid was as high as that with Medicare.




                                                    7
2.1     Capitalists and the personal income tax
There is a ﬁxed unit measure of ex-ante identical consumers that have access to the stock
market and which we refer to as capitalists or capital owners.7 We assume they have access
to ﬁnancial markets where all idiosyncratic risks can be insured, but this is not a strong
assumption. These agents enjoy signiﬁcant wealth and would be close to self-insuring, even
without state-contingent ﬁnancial assets. We can then talk of a representative capitalist,
whose preferences are:                                        
                                 ∞
                                                     n 1+ψ2
                              E0     β t log ct − ψ1 t       ,                          (1)
                                 t=0
                                                    1 +  ψ 2

where ct is consumption and nt are hours worked, both non-negative. The parameters β, ψ1
and ψ2 measure the discount factor, the relative willingness to work, and the Frisch elasticity
of labor supply, respectively.
    The budget constraint is:

                              pˆt ct + bt+1 − bt = pt [xt − τ̄ x (xt ) + Tte ] .                     (2)

The left-hand side has the uses of funds: consumption at the after-tax price p̂t plus saving
in risk-less bonds bt in nominal units. The right-hand side has after-tax income, where xt is
the real pre-tax income and τ̄ x (xt ) are personal income taxes. The Tte refers to lump-sum
transfers, which we will calibrate to zero, but will be useful later to discuss counterfactuals.
    The real income of the stock owner is:

                                     xt = (it /pt )bt + dt + wt s̄nt .                               (3)

It equals the the sum of the returns on bonds at nominal rate it , dividends dt from owning
ﬁrms, and wage income. The wage rate is the product of the average wage in the economy,
wt , and the agent’s productivity s̄. This productivity could be an average of the individual-
speciﬁc productivities of all capitalists, since these idiosyncratic draws are perfectly insured.
     The ﬁrst automatic stabilizer in the model is the personal income tax system. It satisﬁes:
                                                          x
                                          x
                                        τ̄ (x) =               τ x (x )dx ,                        (4)
                                                       0


where τ x : + → [0, 1] is the marginal tax rate that varies with the tax base, which equals
   7
    Because we will assume balanced-growth preferences, it would be straightforward to include population
and economic growth.


                                                       8
real income. The system is progressive because τ x (·) is weakly increasing.


2.2    Households and transfers
There is a measure ν of impatient households indexed by i ∈ [0, ν], so that an individual
variable, say consumption, will be denoted by ct (i). They have the same period felicity
function as capitalists, but they are more impatient: β̂ ≤ β. Following Krusell and Smith
(1998), having heterogeneous discount factors allows us to match the very skewed wealth
distribution that we observe in the data. We link this wealth inequality to participation in
ﬁnancial markets to match the well-known fact that most U.S. households do not directly
own any equity (Mankiw and Zeldes, 1991). We assume that the impatient households do
not own shares in the ﬁrms or own the capital stock.
    Just like capitalists, individual households choose consumption, hours of work, and bond
holdings {ct (i), nt (i), bt+1 (i)} to maximize:

                                   
                                   ∞                                            
                                                                      nt (i)1+ψ2
                              E0         β̂   t
                                                      log ct (i) − ψ1              .        (5)
                                   t=0
                                                                       1 + ψ2

   Also like capitalists, households can borrow using government bonds, and pay personal
income taxes, so their budget constraint is:
                                                     
                        pˆt ct,i + bt+1,i − bt,i = pt xt,i − τ̄ x (xt,i ) + Tt,i
                                                                              s
                                                                                 ,          (6)

together with a borrowing constraint, bt+1 (i) ≥ 0. The lower bound equals the natural debt
limit if households cannot borrow against future government transfers.
     Unlike capital owners, households face two sources of uninsurable idiosyncratic risk: on
their labor-force status, et (i), and on their skill, st (i). If the household is employed, then
et (i) = 2, and she can choose how many hours to work. While working, her labor income
is st (i)wt nt (i). The shocks st (i) captures shocks to the worker’s skill, her productivity at
the job, or the wage oﬀer she receives. They generate a cross-sectional distribution of labor
income. With some probability, the worker loses her job, in which case et (i) = 1 and labor
income is zero. However, now the household collects unemployment beneﬁts Ttu (i), which
are taxable in the United States. Once unemployed, the household can either ﬁnd a job
with some probability, or exhaust her beneﬁts and qualify for poverty beneﬁts. This is the
last state, and for lack of better terms, we refer to their members as the needy, the poor,
or the long-term unemployed. If et (i) = 0, labor income is zero but the household collects

                                                             9
food stamps and other safety-net transfers, Tts (i), which are non-taxable. Households in this
labor market state are less likely than the unemployed to regain employment.
   Collecting all of these cases, the taxable real income of a household is:
                                  ⎧   it bt,i
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎨     pt
                                                + wt st,i nt,i if employed;
                                      it bt,i       u
                         xt,i =                 + Tt,i              if unemployed;        (7)
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎩
                                        pt
                                      it bt,i
                                        pt
                                                                    if needy.

For now, we model the transition across labor-force status as exogenous. Section 5.4 will
consider the case where search eﬀort aﬀects these probabilities.
   There are two new automatic stabilizers at play in the household problem. First, the
household can collect unemployment beneﬁts, Ttu (i) which equal:

                                        u
                                      Tt,i = T̄ u min {st,i , s̄u } .                     (8)

Making the beneﬁts depend on the current skill-level captures the link between unemploy-
ment beneﬁts and previous earnings, and relies on the persistence of st,i to achieve this. As
is approximately the case in the U.S. law, we keep this relation linear with slope T̄ u and a
maximum cap s̄u .
    The second stabilizer is the safety-net payment Tts (i), which equals:

                                                     s
                                                   Tt,i = T̄ s .                          (9)

We assume that these transfers are lump-sum, providing a minimum living standard. In the
data, transfers are means-tested, but in our model these families only receive interest income
from holding bonds and this is a small amount for most households. When we impose a
maximum income cap to be eligible for these beneﬁts, we ﬁnd that almost no household hits
this cap. For simplicity, we keep the transfer lump-sum.


2.3    Final goods’ producers and the sales tax
A competitive sector for ﬁnal goods combines intermediate goods according to the production
function:                                          μ t
                                                       1
                                      yt =                 yt (j)1/μt dj   ,             (10)
                                                   0




                                                            10
where yt (j) is the input of the j th intermediate input. There are shocks to the elasticity of
substitution across intermediates that generate exogenous movements in desired markups,
μt > 1.
   The representative ﬁrm in this sector takes as given the ﬁnal-goods pre-tax price pt , and
pays pt (j) for each of its inputs. Cost minimization together with zero proﬁts imply that:
                                               μ /(1−μt )
                                                 
                                        pt (j) t
                              yt (j) =                       yt ,                             (11)
                                         pt
                                        1                      1−μt
                                                    1/(1−μt )
                                  pt =       pt (j)           dj       .                      (12)
                                                        0


Goods purchased for consumption are taxed at the rate τ c , so the after-tax price of con-
sumption goods is:
                                  p̂t = (1 + τ c )pt .                                (13)

This consumption tax is our next automatic stabilizer, as it makes actual consumption of
goods a fraction 1/(1 + τ c ) of pre-tax spending on them.


2.4    Intermediate goods and corporate income taxes
There is a unit continuum of intermediate-goods monopolistic ﬁrms, each producing variety
j using a production function:

                                            yt (j) = at kt (j)α t (j)1−α ,                   (14)

where at is productivity, kt (j) is capital used, and t (j) is eﬀective labor.
  The labor market clearing condition is
                                      1                       ν
                                           t (j)dj =               st (i)nt (i)di + s̄nt .   (15)
                                   0                        0


The demand for labor on the left-hand side comes from the intermediate ﬁrms. The supply
on the right-hand side comes from employed households and capitalists, adjusted for their
productivity.
   The ﬁrm maximizes after-tax nominal proﬁts
                                                                      
                     pt (j)
      dt (j) ≡ 1 − τ k
                              yt (j) − wt t (j) − (υrt + δ) kt (j) − ξ − (1 − υ)rt kt (j),   (16)
                        pt


                                                                11
taking into account the demand function in equation (11). The ﬁrm’s costs are the wage
bill to workers, the rental of capital at rate rt plus depreciation of a share δ of the capital
used, and a ﬁxed cost ξ. The parameter υ measures the share of capital expenses that can
be deducted from the corporate income tax. In the U.S., dividends and capital gains pay
diﬀerent taxes. While this distinction is important to understand the capital structure of
ﬁrms and the choice of retaining earning, it is immaterial for the simple ﬁrms that we just
described.8
    Intermediate ﬁrms set prices subject to nominal rigidities a la Calvo (1983) with proba-
bility of price revision θ. Since they are owned by the capitalists, they use their stochastic
discount factor, λt,t+s , to choose price pt (j)∗ at a revision date with the aim of maximizing
expected future proﬁts:
                                                        
                        
                        ∞
                 Et θ         (1 − θ)s λt,t+s dt+s (j)             subject to: pt+s (j) = pt (j)∗ .   (17)
                        s=0


   The new automatic stabilizer is the corporate income tax, which is a ﬂat rate τ k over
corporate proﬁts.


2.5     Capital-goods ﬁrms and property income taxes
A representative ﬁrm owns the capital stock and rents it to the intermediate-goods ﬁrms,
taking rt as given. If kt denotes the capital held by this ﬁrm, then in the market for capital:
                                                             1
                                               kt =               kt (j)dj.                           (18)
                                                          0


    This ﬁrm invests in new capital Δkt+1 = kt+1 −kt subject to adjustment costs to maximize
after-tax proﬁts:                                      2
                                              ζ Δkt+1
                         dt = rt kt − Δkt+1 −
                          k
                                                           kt − τ p vt .                (19)
                                              2    kt
The value of this ﬁrm, which owns the capital stock, is then given by the recursion:
                                             
                                     vt = max dkt + Et (λt,t+1 vt+1 ) .
   8
     Another issue is the treatment of taxable losses (Devereux and Fuest, 2009). Because of carry-forward
and backward rules in the U.S. tax system, these should not have a large eﬀect on the eﬀective tax rate
faced by ﬁrms, although ﬁrms do not seem to claim most of these tax beneﬁts. We were unable to ﬁnd a
satisfactory way to include these considerations into our model without greatly complicating the analysis.



                                                          12
The new automatic stabilizer, the property tax, is a ﬁxed tax rate τ p that applies to the
value of the only property in the model, the capital stock. A few steps of algebra show the
conventional results from the q-theory of investment:

                                         v t = qt k t ,                                       (20)
                                                                             
                                                                      Δkt+1
                                          qt = 1 + ζ                              .           (21)
                                                                       kt

Because, from the second equation, the price of the capital stock is procyclical, so will
property values, making the property tax a potential automatic stabilizer.
   Finally, note that total dividends sent to capital owners, dt , come from every intermediate
ﬁrm and the capital-goods ﬁrm:
                                                         1
                                           dt =               dit (j)dj + dkt .               (22)
                                                      0


We do not include investment tax credits. They are small in the data and, when used to
attenuate the business cycle, they have been enacted as part of stimulus packages, not as
automatic rules.


2.6      The government budget and deﬁcits
The government budget constraint is:
                          ν                             ν
                    τc      0
                               ct (i)di + ct + τ p qt kt + 0 τ̄ x (xt (i))di + τ̄ x (xt ) +
                                                         
                                 1 ˆi                            ν
                         τ k
                                0
                                   d (j)dj + (1 − υ)rt kt − 0 [Ttu (i) + Tts (i)] di
                                = gt + (it /pt )Bt − (Bt+1 − Bt ) /pt + Tte .                 (23)

On the left-hand side are all of the automatic stabilizers discussed so far: sales taxes, property
taxes and personal income taxes in the ﬁrst line, and corporate income taxes and transfers
in the second line.9 On the right-hand side are government purchases, gt and government
bonds Bt . The market for bonds will clear when:
                                            ν
                                      Bt =     bt (i)di + bt .                                (24)
                                                      0


   In steady state, the stabilizers on the left-hand side imply a positive surplus, which is
  9 ˆi
   d (j) are taxable proﬁts, the term in brackets on the right-hand side of equation (16).


                                                               13
oﬀset by steady-state government purchases ḡ/ȳ. Since we set transfers to the entrepreneurs
in the steady state to zero, T̄ e = 0, the budget constraint then determines a steady state
amount of debt B̄, which is consistent with the government not being able to run a Ponzi
scheme.
    Outside of the steady state, as outlays rise and revenues fall during recessions, the left-
hand side of equation (23) decreases. This is the last stabilizer that we consider: the auto-
matic increase in the budget deﬁcit during recessions. We study the stabilizing properties of
deﬁcits in terms how fast and with what tool the debt is paid.
    We assume that the lump-sum tax on the stock-owners and government purchases adjust
to close deﬁcits because they are the ﬁscal tools that least interfere with the other stabilizers.
They do not aﬀect marginal returns like the distortionary tax rates, and they do not have
an important eﬀect on the wealth and income distribution like transfers to households. We
assume simple linear rules similar to the ones estimated by Leeper et al. (2010):
                                                                       
                                                               Bt /pt
                         log(gt /yt ) = log(ḡ/ȳ) − γ log
                                                        G
                                                                            ,                (25)
                                                                 B̄
                                                              
                                                        Bt /pt
                                 Tte = T̄ e + γ T log            .                           (26)
                                                         B̄

The parameters γ G , γ T > 0 measure the speed at which the deﬁcits from recessions are paid
over time. If they are close to inﬁnity, then the deﬁcits caused by recessions are paid right
away the following period; if they are close to zero, they take arbitrarily long to get paid.
Their relative size determines the relative weight that purchases and taxes have on ﬁscal
stabilizations.


2.7    Shocks and business cycles
In our baseline, monetary policy follows a simple Taylor rule:

                                    it = ī + φΔ log(pt ) − εt ,                             (27)

with φ > 1. We omitted the usual term in the output gap for two reasons. First, because
with incomplete markets, it is no longer clear how to deﬁne a constrained-welfare natural
level of output to which policy should respond. Second, because it is known that in this class
of models with complete markets, a Taylor rule with an output term is quantitatively close
to achieving the ﬁrst best. We preferred to err on the side of having an inferior monetary


                                                14
policy rule so as to raise the likelihood that ﬁscal policy may be eﬀective. We will consider
an alternative monetary policy rule that is plausibly closer to being optimal in section 5.2.
    Three aggregate shocks hit the economy: technology, log(at ), monetary policy, εt , and
markups, log(μt ). Therefore, both aggregate-demand and aggregate-supply shocks may drive
business cycles, and ﬂuctuations may be eﬃcient or ineﬃcient. We assume that all shocks
follow independent AR(1) processes for simplicity.
    The idiosyncratic shocks to households, et (i) and st (i) are ﬁrst-order Markov processes.
Moreover, the transition matrix of labor-force status, the three-by-three matrix Πt , depends
on a linear combination of the aggregate shocks. In this way, we let unemployment vary
with the business cycle to match Okun’s law. This approach to modeling unemployment
is clearly reduced-form and subject to the Lucas critique. Section 5.3 will endogenize the
extensive margin of labor supply, which turns out to be numerically challenging. For now,
note that workers choose how many hours to work, so the model already has an endogenous
intensive margin of labor supply, and that section 5.2 will study how important it is.


2.8     Equilibrium
An equilibrium in this economy is a collection of aggregate quantities (yt , kt , dt , vt , ct , nt , bt+1 , xt , dkt );
aggregate prices (pt , p̂t , wt , qt ); individual consumer decision rules (ct (b, s, e), nt (b, s, e)); a
distribution of households over assets, skill levels, and employment statuses; individual ﬁrm
variables (yt (j), pt (j), kt (j), lt (j), dt (j)); and government choices (Bt , it , gt ) such that:
(i) owners maximize expression (1) subject to the budget constraint in equations (2)-(3),
(ii) the household decision rules maximize expression (5) subject to their budget constraint
in equations (6)-(7),
(iii) the distribution of households over assets and skill and employment levels evolves in a
manner consistent with the decision rules and the exogenous idiosyncratic shocks,
(iv) ﬁnal-goods ﬁrms behave optimally according to equations (11)-(13),
(v) intermediate-goods ﬁrms maximize expression (17) subject to equations (11), (14), (16),
(vi) capital-goods ﬁrms maximize expression (19) so their value is in equations (20)-(21),
(vii) ﬁscal policy respects equation (23) and follows the rules in equations (25)-(26) while
monetary policy follows the rule in (27),
(viii) markets clear for labor in equation (15), for capital in equation (18), for dividends in
equation (22) and for bonds in equation (24).
     Appendix C derives the optimality conditions that we use to solve the model. We evaluate
the mean and variance of aggregate endogenous variables in the ergodic distribution at the

                                                       15
equilibrium in this economy.


3     The positive properties of the model
The model just laid out combines the uninsurable idiosyncratic risk familiar from the liter-
ature on incomplete markets with the nominal rigidities commonly used in the literature on
business cycles. Our ﬁrst contribution is to show how to solve this general class of models,
and to brieﬂy discuss some of their properties.


3.1    Solution algorithm
Our full model is challenging to analyze because the solution method must keep track not
only of aggregate state variables, but also of the distribution of wealth across agents. One
candidate algorithm is the Krusell and Smith (1998) algorithm, which summarizes the dis-
tribution of wealth with a few moments of the distribution. We opt instead for the solution
algorithm developed by Reiter (2009, 2010), because this method can be easily applied to
models with a rich structure at the aggregate level, including a large number of aggregate
state variables. Here we give an overview of the solution algorithm, while Appendix E
provides more details.
    The Reiter algorithm ﬁrst approximates the distribution of wealth with a histogram that
has a large number of bins. The mass of households in each bin becomes a state variable of
the model. The algorithm then approximates the household decision rules with a discrete
approximation, a spline. In this way, the model is converted from one that has inﬁnite-
dimensional objects to one that has a large, but ﬁnite, number of variables. In our case,
there are 10,236 variables.
    Using standard techniques, one can ﬁnd the stationary competitive equilibrium of this
economy in which there is idiosyncratic uncertainty, but no aggregate shocks. Reiter (2009)’s
method then calls for linearizing the model with respect to aggregate shocks, and solving for
the dynamics of the economy as a perturbation around the stationary equilibrium without
aggregate shocks using existing linear rational-expectations algorithms. The resulting solu-
tion is non-linear with respect to the idiosyncratic variables, but linear with respect to the
aggregate states and to the bins of the wealth distribution.
    This approach works well for small versions of the model, but linear rational-expectation
solution methods cannot handle 10,236 equations. To proceed, we follow Reiter (2010)
and compress the system using model-reduction techniques. This compression comes with

                                             16
virtually no loss of accuracy relative to the larger linearized system because many dimensions
of the state space are not needed. Intuitively, this is for two reasons: because the system
never varies along that dimension and/or because variation along it is not relevant for the
variables of interest.10 We veriﬁed this claim using simpler versions of our model for which
it was possible to both solve the reduced linear system as well as the full system, and found
negligible losses in accuracy. It should be noted that while the model reduction step greatly
speeds up the actual solution of the model, it has its own cost, which is that the full system
must be analyzed to determine how it can be reduced. As a result, the solution algorithm
still takes several hours of computing time.
     To verify the accuracy of the solution, we compute Euler-equation errors. They arise both
because the projection method to solve the Euler equation involves some approximation error
between grid points, and because of the linearization with respect to aggregate states. We
construct Euler equation errors on a ﬁne grid of idiosyncratic state variables. At the steady
state around which we linearize, the unit-free Euler equation errors are on the order of 0.0002.
Simulating the economy and randomly picking 50 aggregate state vectors, the absolute value
of the Euler equations errors were around 0.004. Therefore, an agent that spends $100, is
making a mistake of only $0.40 by using our approximate decision rules.


3.2     Calibrating the model
We calibrate as many parameters as possible to the properties of the automatic stabilizers
in the data. For the government spending and revenues our target data is in table 1, which
recall averaged over the period 1988-2007. For macroeconomic aggregates, we use quarterly
data over a longer period, 1960-2011, so that we can include more recessions in the sample
and periods outside the Great Moderation and do not underestimate the amplitude of the
business cycle.
    For the three proportional taxes, we use parameters related to preferences or technology
to match the tax base in the NIPA accounts, and choose the tax rate to match the average
revenue reported in table 1, following the strategy of Mendoza et al. (1994). The top panel
of table 2 shows the parameter values and the respective targets.
    For the personal income tax, we followed Auerbach and Feenberg (2000) and simulated
TAXSIM, including federal and state taxes, for a typical household. We averaged the tax
rates across states weighted by population, and across years between 1988 and 2007. We
  10
     See Antoulas (2005) for a discussion of model reduction in a general context and see Reiter (2010) for
their application to forward-looking economic systems.


                                                    17
                                 Table 2: Calibration of the parameters

Symbol       Parameter                            Value     Target (Source)
 Panel     A. Tax bases and rates
   τc        Tax rate on consumption              0.0535    Avg. revenue from sales taxes (Table 1)
    β        Discount factor of stock owners       0.989    Consumption-income ratio = 0.689 (NIPA)
   τp        Tax rate on property                 0.00258   Avg. revenue from property taxes (Table 1)
    α        Labor coeﬃcient in production         0.296    Capital income share = 0.36 (NIPA)
   τk        Tax rate on corporate income           0.35    Statutory rate
    υ        Deduction of capital costs             0.68    Avg. revenue from corporate income tax (Table 1)
    ξ        Fixed costs of production             0.575    Corporate proﬁts / GDP = 9.13% (NIPA)
 Panel     B. Government outlays and debt
   T̄ u      Unemployment beneﬁts                  0.144    Avg. outlays on unemp. beneﬁts (Table 1)
s̄ /T̄ u
  u          Max. UI beneﬁt / avg. income           0.66    Typical state law (BLS, 2008)
   T̄ s      Safety-net transfers                  0.151    Avg. outlays on safety-net beneﬁts (Table 1)
 G/Y         Steady-state purchases / output       0.145    Avg. outlays on purchases (Table 1)
   γT        Fiscal adjustment speed (tax)          -1.6    St. dev. of deﬁcit/GDP = 0.0093 (NIPA)
   γG        Fiscal adjustment speed (spending)    -1.28    Rel. response to debt (Leeper et al., 2010)
 B/Y         Steady-state debt / output             1.7     Avg. interest expenses (Table 1)
 Panel     C. Income and wealth distribution
    ν        Non-participants / stock owners         4
   βh        Discount factor of households         0.979    Wealth of top 20% by wealth
    s̄       Skill level of stock owners           3.72     Income of top 20% by wealth (SCF)
 Panel     D. Business-cycle parameters
    θ        Calvo price stickiness                0.286    Avg. price spell duration = 3.5
    μ        Steady-state desired markup             1.1    Avg. U.S. markup
   ψ1        Disutility of work                     21.6    Avg. hours worked = 0.31
   ψ2        Labor supply elasticity                  2     Frisch elasticity = 1/2 (Chetty, 2012)
    δ        Depreciation rate                    0.0114    Annual depreciation / GDP = 0.046 (NIPA)
    ζ        Adjustment costs for investment          6     Corr. of Y and C = 0.88 (NIPA)
   ρa        Autocorrelation productivity shock     0.75    Autocorrel. of log GDP = 0.864 (NIPA)
   σa        St. dev. of productivity shock       0.0034    St. dev. of log GDP = 1.539 (NIPA)
    ρε       Autocorrelation monetary shock         0.62    Largest AR for inﬂation = 0.85
   σε        St. dev. of monetary shock           0.00322   Share of output variance due to shock = 0.25
   ρμ        Autocorrelation markup shock           0.85
   σμ        St. dev. of markup shock               0.04    Share of output variance due to shock = 0.25
    φ        Interest-rate rule on inﬂation         1.55    St. dev. of inﬂation = 0.638 (NIPA)




                                                      18
                                     Figure 1: The personal income tax rate from TAXSIM



                                   0.4




                                   0.3
              marginal tax rate




                                   0.2




                                   0.1




                                    0
                                                                                            average statutory rate
                                                                                            smoothed


                                  −0.1
                                         0   2           4               6               8              10           12
                                                    income normalized by mean household income



then ﬁt a cubic function of income to the resulting schedule, and splined it with a ﬂat line
above a certain level of income so that the ﬁtted function would be non-decreasing. The
result is in ﬁgure 1. The cubic-linear schedule approximates the actual taxes well, and its
smoothness is useful for the numerical analysis. We then added an intercept to this schedule
to ﬁt the eﬀective average tax rate. This way, we made sure we ﬁtted both the progressivity
of the tax system (via TAXSIM) and the average tax rates (via the intercept).
    Panel B calibrates the parameters related to government spending. Both parameters
governing transfer payments are set to equate the average outlays from these programs, while
the cap on unemployment beneﬁts uses an approximation of existing law. The parameters of
the ﬁscal rule to pay deﬁcits ﬁt the standard deviation of budget deﬁcits and the estimate by
Leeper et al. (2010) of the relative weight of spending versus revenues in ﬁscal adjustments.
    Panel C contains parameters that relate to the distribution of income and wealth across
households. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, 83.4% of the wealth is held by
the top 20% in the United States (Dı́az-Giménez et al., 2011). We then picked the discount
factor of the households to match this target.
    Omitted from the table for brevity, but available in Appendix B, are the Markov tran-
sition matrices for skill level and employment. We used a 3-point grid for household skill


                                                                   19
levels, which we constructed from data on wages in the Panel Study for Income Dynamics.
The transition matrix across employment status varies linearly with a weighted average of
the three aggregate shocks to match the correlation between employment and output. We set
its parameters to match the ﬂows in and out of the two main government transfer programs,
food stamps and unemployment beneﬁts, both on average and over the business cycle.
    Finally, Panel D has all the remaining parameters. Most are standard, but two deserve
some explanation. First, the Frisch elasticity of labor supply plays an important role in
most intertemporal business-cycle models. Consistent with our focus on taxes and spending,
we use the value suggested in the recent survey by Chetty (2012) on the response of hours
worked to several tax and beneﬁt changes. We will examine the robustness to this number
in section 5.3. Second, we choose the variance of monetary shocks and markup shocks so
that a variance decomposition of output attributes them each 25% of aggregate ﬂuctuations.
There is great uncertainty on the empirical estimates of the sources of business cycles, but
this number is not out of line with some of the estimates in the literature. Our results turn
out to not be sensitive to this number.


3.3    Optimal behavior and equilibrium inequality
Figure 2 uses a simple diagram to describe the stationary equilibrium of the model without
aggregate shocks. For the sake of clarity, the ﬁgure depicts an environment in which there
are no taxes that distort saving decisions.
    The downward-sloping curve is the demand for capital, with slope determined by dimin-
ishing marginal returns. The demand for assets by capital owners is perfectly elastic at the
inverse of their time-preference rate just as in the neoclassical growth model. Because they
are the sole holders of capital, the equilibrium capital stock in the model is determined by
the intersection of these two curves. Introducing taxes on capital income, like the personal or
corporate income taxes, shifts the demand curve leftwards and lower the equilibrium capital
stock.
    If households were also fully insured, their demand for assets would be the horizontal
line at β̂ −1 . But, because of the idiosyncratic risk they face, they have a precautionary
demand for assets. Therefore, they are willing to hold bonds even at lower interest rates.
Their asset demand is given by the upward-sloping curve. Because in the steady state
without aggregate shocks, bonds and capital must yield the same return, equilibrium bond
holdings by households are given by the point to the left of the equilibrium capital stock.
The diﬀerence between the total amount of government bonds outstanding and those held

                                              20
                Figure 2: Steady-state capital and household bond holdings
                         i

              β̂ −1
                                                         Household
                                                          Savings


              β −1
                                                       Eq’m capital stock


                                    Eq’m
                                    household            Capital Demand
                                    savings




                                                                            Assets


by households gives the bond holdings of capital owners.
    Figure 3 shows the optimal savings decisions of households at each of their et states.
When households are employed, they save, so the policy function is above the 45o line.
When they do not have a job, they run down their assets. As wealth reaches zero, those out
of a job consume all of their safety-net earnings, leading to the horizontal segment along the
horizontal axis in their savings policies.
    Figure 4 shows the ergodic wealth distribution for households. Three features of these
distributions will play a role in our results. First, the needy households have essentially no
assets, so they live hand to mouth. Second, employed households are wealthier than the
unemployed so when a recession hits, households draw down their wealth to smooth out
higher unemployment. Third, the ﬁgure shows a counterfactual wealth distribution if the
two transfer programs are signiﬁcantly cut. Because not being employed now comes with
higher income risk, households save more, which raises their wealth in all states.


3.4    Business cycles and ﬁscal shocks in the model
Before we use this model to perform counterfactuals on the eﬀect of the automatic stabilizers
on the business cycle, we inspect whether it makes plausible predictions on more familiar
experiments.


                                                21
                             Figure 3: Optimal savings policies
           0.5

          0.45

           0.4

          0.35
                                          employed
           0.3
savings




          0.25

           0.2
                                                              needy
          0.15

           0.1
                                                              unemployed
          0.05

              0
                  0   0.05       0.1     0.15    0.2        0.25   0.3   0.35   0.4   0.45       0.5
                                                       assets



                      Figure 4: The ergodic wealth distribution
                                                     employed
    0.1

0.05

          0
              0              2                  4                  6            8                10
                                                    unemployed
    0.1

0.05

          0
              0              2                  4           6                   8                10
                                            long−term unemployed
    0.4
                                                                                 baseline
                                                                                 low transfers
    0.2

          0
              0              2                  4              6                8                10
                                       assets (1 = avg quarterly income)



                                                       22
                           Figure 5: Impulse responses to the aggregate shocks
                  x 10
                      −3          Output                                x 10
                                                                            −3        Consumption
              5                                                   3.5
                                           Technology
                                           Monetary                3
              4
                                           Mark−up                2.5
              3                                                    2

              2                                                   1.5

                                                                   1
              1
                                                                  0.5

              0                                                    0
                  0         10     20       30          40              0        10        20       30   40
                                 quarter                                               quarter
                  x 10
                      −3          Hours                                 x 10
                                                                            −3          Inflation
              8                                                    5

              6                                                    4

                                                                   3
              4
                                                                   2
              2
                                                                   1
              0                                                    0

             −2                                                   −1
                  0         10     20       30          40              0        10        20       30   40
                                 quarter                                               quarter


    Figure 5 shows the impulse responses to the three aggregate shocks, with impulses equal
to one standard deviation. The model captures the positive co-movement of output, hours
and consumption, as well as the hump-shaped responses of hours to a TFP shock. Inﬂation
rises with expansionary monetary shocks, but falls with productivity and markup shocks,
and as usual in the standard Calvo model, the responses are fairly short-lived. In spite of
all the heterogeneity, the aggregate responses to shocks are similar to those of the standard
new neoclassical-synthesis model in Woodford (2003) and Christiano et al. (2005) that has
been widely used to study business cycles in the past decade.
    Turning to the unconditional moments of the business cycle, we chose the moments of
our model so that it mimics the standard deviations of output, unemployment and inﬂation.
Therefore, the model already matches the unconditional second moments in these variables.
One variable that we did not target in the calibration, but which has received much attention
in the study of business cycle, is the labor wedge. We estimate it using simulated data from
our model following precisely the same steps as Shimer (2009). He ﬁnds in the U.S. data
that the standard deviation of the log wedge is 0.055; our model predicts it is 0.052. This
number is large, suggesting that our model leaves much room for policy to stabilize ineﬃcient


                                                             23
                                                       Figure 6: Impulse responses to three ﬁscal experiments
                                                     0.8
                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                       Tax
                                                     0.7                                               Redistribution


             Δ Y / {Δ G, Δ tax revenue, transfer}    0.6


                                                     0.5


                                                     0.4


                                                     0.3


                                                     0.2


                                                     0.1


                                                      0


                                                    −0.1
                                                           0     2        4          6       8        10                12
                                                                                 quarter


ﬂuctuations.
    Figure 6 shows the impulse responses of output to shocks to three ﬁscal variables: an
increase in government purchases, a cut in the personal income tax paid by households, and
a redistribution of wealth from capitalists to the needy. In the ﬁrst two cases we change
one parameter of the model unexpectedly and only at date 1, and trace out the aggregate
dynamics as the economy converges back to its old ergodic distribution. In the third case,
we redistribute wealth at date 1 and simulate the model starting from that new distribution
towards the ergodic case. In each case, we normalize the response of output by the size of
the policy change measured in terms of its impact on the government budget. The response
to redistribution is non-linear in the size of the transfer, which we set so that each needy
household receives one percent of average household income.
    Because these shocks have no persistence, their aggregate eﬀect will always be limited.
Yet, we ﬁnd that they induce relatively large changes in output. Calculating multipliers
as the ratio of the change in output to the change in the deﬁcit over the ﬁrst year of the
experiment, we ﬁnd reasonably-sized numbers: 0.93 for purchases, 0.20 for taxes, and 0.25
for redistribution. These are larger than the typical response in the neoclassical-synthesis
model. Our model is therefore able to generate signiﬁcant eﬀects of ﬁscal policy.
    The marginal propensity to consume (MPC) has received a great deal of attention in the

                                                                                24
                          Table 3: Marginal propensity to consume

                                                                  Wealth percentile
Skill group (s)            Employment (e)               10th             25th             50th
    Low                       Employed                  0.10             0.08             0.07
   Medium                     Employed                  0.04             0.03             0.03
    High                      Employed                  0.03             0.03             0.02
    Low                      Unemployed                 0.47             0.33             0.21
   Medium                    Unemployed                 0.10             0.06             0.05
    High                     Unemployed                 0.06             0.04             0.03
    Low                        Needy                    0.48             0.48             0.48
   Medium                      Needy                    0.49             0.49             0.10
    High                       Needy                    0.49             0.13             0.07


study of ﬁscal policy and it also plays an important role in our model. All else equal, a larger
MPC would raise the strength of the disposable-income channel as any ﬂuctuation in dispos-
able income would translate into a larger movement in aggregate demand. Moreover, with
more heterogeneous MPCs, the redistribution channel will be stronger as moving resources
from agents with higher to lower MPCs will have a larger impact on aggregate demand.
    Table 3 shows the distribution of MPCs in our economy according to employment status
and wealth percentile. Parker et al. (2011) use tax rebates to estimate an average MPC
between 0.12 and 0.3. Our model is able to generate MPCs that go from 0.02 to 0.49, so
that both in the spread and on average, it has the potential to give these two channels a
strong role. Among the poor and those without a job, the MPCs are quite large and this large
group of the population hits their borrowing constraint often, especially during recessions,
so many households are far from self-insuring themselves.


3.5    Two special cases
In the analysis that follows, we consider two special cases of our model as benchmarks that
help isolate diﬀerent stabilization channels. First, with complete markets, households can
diversify idiosyncratic risks to their income. The following assumption eliminates these risks:

Assumption 1. Households and capitalists trade a full set of Arrow securities, so they are
fully insured, and they are equally patient, β̂ = β.

   It will not come as a surprise that if this assumptions holds, there is a representative
agent in this economy. More interesting, the problem she solves is familiar:

                                              25
Proposition 1. Under assumption 1, there is a representative agent with preferences:
                                                                               
                                 
                                 ∞
                                                                       n1+ψ2
                       max E0          βt       log(ct ) − (1 + Et ) ψ1 t           ,
                                 t=0
                                                                       1 + ψ2

and with the following constraints:

                     p̂t ct + bt+1 − bt = pt [xt − τ̄ (xt ) + Ttn ] ,
                             it
                     xt = bt + wt st (1 + Et )nt + dt + Ttu ,
                             pt
                                                          ν             1+1/ψ
                                                                             1
                                 1     1+1/ψ2     Et           1+1/ψ2            2
                     st =            s̄t      +               si,t    di           ,
                              1 + Et            1 + Et 0

where 1 + Et is total employment, including capital-owners and households and Ttn is net
non-taxable transfers to the household.
    The proof is in Appendix D. With the exception of the exogenous shocks to employment,
the problem of this representative agent is fairly standard. Moreover, on the ﬁrm side,
optimal behavior by the goods-producing ﬁrms leads to a new Keynesian Phillips curve, while
optimal behavior by the capital-goods ﬁrm produces a familiar IS equation. Therefore, with
complete markets, our model is of the standard neoclassical synthesis variety (Woodford,
2003) that has been intensively used to study business cycles over the past decade.
    The complete-markets case is useful, not just because it is familiar, but also because it
allows us to study the eﬀectiveness of automatic stabilizers when distributional issues are
set aside. In this version of the model, the marginal incentives and the disposable income
channels are the only two mechanisms at work.
    A second special case that we will consider replaces the impatient household’s optimal
savings function with the assumption that people live hand-to-mouth. That is, they consume
all of their after-tax income at every date and hold zero bonds. This can be seen as a limit
when β̂ approaches zero. It is inspired in the savers-spenders model of Mankiw (2000).
In this case, a measure of 80% of all consumers behave as if they were at the borrowing
constraint, with an MPC of 1.
    This benchmark is useful for three reasons. First, because it is close to the ultra-
Keynesian model in Gali et al. (2007) that combines hand-to-mouth behavior with nominal
rigidities to be able to generate a positive multiplier of government purchases on private
consumption. For the study of ﬁscal policy, this is one of the closest optimizing models to
the IS-LM benchmark that is at the center of policy debates on ﬁscal policy. Second, the

                                                      26
assumption of hand-to-mouth behavior raises the marginal propensity to consume by brute
force.11 A large MPC, here literally equal to one for the households, maximizes the strength
of the disposable income channel. Third, in the hand-to-mouth model, there are no precau-
tionary savings so the social insurance channel is shut oﬀ. Compared to our full model, the
hand-to-mouth alternative is therefore useful to isolate the channels at work.


4      Inspecting the channels of stabilization
We measure the eﬀectiveness of the automatic stabilizers by the fraction by which the vari-
ance of aggregate activity would increase if we removed some, or all, of the automatic sta-
bilizers. If V is the ergodic variance at the calibrated parameters, and V  is the variance at
the counterfactual with some of the stabilizers shut oﬀ, then our measure of eﬀectiveness,
following Smyth (1966), is the stabilization coeﬃcient:

                                                      V
                                                 S=      − 1.
                                                      V

    This diﬀers from the measure of “built-in ﬂexibility” introduced by Pechman (1973),
which equals the ratio of changes in taxes to changes in before-tax income, and is widely
used in the public ﬁnance literature.12 Whereas built-in ﬂexibility measures whether there
are automatic stabilizers, our goal is instead to estimate whether they are eﬀective.
    To best understand the diﬀerence, consider the following result, proven in Appendix D:

Proposition 2. If assumption 1 holds, so there is a representative agent, and:

    1. the personal income tax is proportional, so τ x (·) is constant;

    2. the probability of being employed is constant over time;

    3. the Calvo probability of price adjustment θ = 1, so prices are ﬂexible;

    4. there are inﬁnite adjustments costs, γ → +∞, and no depreciation, δ = 0, so capital
       is ﬁxed;
  11
     Heathcote (2005) and Kaplan and Violante (2012) raise the MPC in a more elegant way by, respectively,
lowering the discount factor and introducing illiquid assets, but these are hard to accomplish in our model
while simultaneously keeping it tractable and able to ﬁt the business-cycle facts and the wealth and income
distributions.
  12
     See Dolls et al. (2012) for a recent example, and an attempt to go from built-in ﬂexibility to eﬀectiveness,
by making the strong assumption that aggregate demand equals output and that poor households have MPCs
of 1 while rich households have MPCs of zero.


                                                       27
  5. there are no ﬁxed costs of production, ξ = 0;

then the variance of the log of output is equal to the variance of the log of productivity.
Therefore, S = 0 and the automatic stabilizers are ineﬀective.

    While this result and the assumptions supporting it are extreme, it serves a useful pur-
pose. Note that the estimates of the size of the stabilizer following the Pechman (1973)
approach would be large in this economy. Yet, the stabilizers in this economy are completely
ineﬀective using our version of the Smyth (1966) measure. An economy may have high
measured built-in ﬂexibility while not being eﬀectively ﬂexible at all.
    To measure the eﬀectiveness of individual stabilizers, we cut each of them at a time:
ﬁrst proportional taxes, then transfers, next progressive taxes, and ﬁnally the deﬁcit. We
then calculate S for output, hours, aggregate consumption, and the variance of household
consumption, as well as the proportional change in the ergodic mean.
    We also present two diﬀerent approaches to assess the impact of the stabilizers on social
welfare. First, we compute the change in the variance of three aggregate statistics that have
been used to measure the performance of policy in the business-cycle literature: the labor
wedge, inﬂation, and an output gap. There are many diﬀerent ways to deﬁne an output gap
in an economy that has sticky prices, incomplete markets, and many taxes and transfers
moving it away form the ﬁrst best. We deﬁne the natural level of output as the equilibrium
output in an economy with ﬂexible prices and a constant price level, so that there are no
monetary non-neutralities due to either nominal rigidities or the taxation of nominal capital
income.
    Second, we calculate consumption-equivalent measures of welfare for each agent, and
then average them using their weights in the cross-sectional ergodic distribution. We include
either all agents, leading to a utilitarian measure of welfare in units of consumption, or only
those employed or those without a job, to understand which groups beneﬁt and lose with
the stabilizers.
    Throughout this section, we set γ G = 0 in the ﬁscal rule so that we show the eﬀect of
changing the stabilizers as cleanly as possible without changing the dynamics of government
purchases due to the new dynamics for government debt. Because the lump-sum taxes,
which are the other means for ﬁscal adjustment, are approximately neutral, they do not
risk confusing the eﬀectiveness of the stabilizers with their ﬁnancing. Section 4.4 focuses on
deﬁcits and government purchases.




                                              28
               Table 4: The eﬀect of proportional taxes on the business cycle

                         Full model               Representative agent          Hand-to-mouth
                 variance        average          variance      average        variance   average
 output           -0.0092        0.0117            -0.0016      0.0115         0.0103      0.0116
 hours            -0.0017        0.0004             0.0031      0.0015         0.0057      0.0006
 consumption      -0.0091        0.0093            -0.0199      0.0090         0.0482      0.0092
 hhld. cons.       0.0008
                                  Welfare eﬀects in full model:
                  Variances                                  Consumption-equivalents
  Inﬂation    Output gap      Labor wedge             Utilitarian   Employed    Not-employed
   -0.0068     -0.0156          -0.0013                0.0107        0.0105        0.0122
 Notes: for variances and means, the table shows the proportional change caused by cutting the
stabilizer. Positive numbers for the variance imply that the stabilizer was eﬀective, while positive
numbers for the average imply it lowered average real activity. For the consumption-equivalents,
a number of −0.01 says that the stabilizer raises welfare by on average 1% of consumption.


4.1    The eﬀectiveness of proportional taxes
Proposition 2 imposed no restrictions on proportional taxes, yet their eﬀect on volatility or
welfare was nil. Table 4 considers the following experiment: we cut the tax rates τ c , τ p and
τ k each by 10%, and replaced the lost revenue of 0.6% of GDP by a lump-sum tax on the
entrepreneurs.
    Lowering proportional taxes lowers the variance of the business cycle by a negligible
amount, always below 1% in the full model. That is, removing the stabilizer, actually leads
to a more stable economy. In the hand-to-mouth economy, as expected, consumption is
less stable as the variance of after-tax income is higher without the proportional taxes.
But even then, the eﬀect on the variance of output is only 1%. At the same time, when
these taxes are removed, output and consumption are signiﬁcantly higher on average in all
economies. Looking at welfare, cutting proportional tax rates lowers the volatility of all
three macroeconomic variables, and raises welfare for the diﬀerent groups.
    Intuitively, a higher tax rate on consumption lowers the returns from working and so
lowers labor supply and output on average. However, because the tax rate is the same in
good and bad times, it does not induce any intertemporal substitution of hours worked, nor
does it change the share of disposable income available in booms versus recessions. Likewise,
the taxes on corporate and property income may discourage saving and aﬀect the average


                                                 29
             Table 5: The eﬀect of the level of tax rates on the business cycle.

                        Full model             Representative agent          Hand-to-mouth
                 variance      average         variance      average        variance   average
 output          -0.0057        0.0078          -0.0129      0.0076         -0.0329    0.0075
 hours           -0.0101        0.0036          -0.0107      0.0076         -0.0085    0.0034
 consumption     -0.0171        0.0089          -0.0145      0.0087          0.0602    0.0086
 hhld. cons.      0.0117
                                Welfare eﬀects in full model:
                 Variances                                Consumption-equivalents
  Inﬂation   Output gap      Labor wedge           Utilitarian   Employed    Not-employed
   -0.1063    -0.0137          -0.0135              0.0110        0.0104        0.0153
Notes: same as those in Table 4.

capital stock. But they do not do so diﬀerentially across diﬀerent stages of the business cycle
and so they have a negligible eﬀect on volatility.
   Table 5 instead cuts the intercept in the personal income tax by two percentage points.
The conclusions for the full model are similar. Again, no intertemporal trade-oﬀs change
and, with the exception of aggregate consumption in the hand-to-mouth model, lower taxes
actually come with slightly less volatile business cycles. Section 4.3 discusses the mechanism
behind this fall in volatility.


4.2    The eﬀectiveness of transfers
To evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our two transfer programs, unemployment and poverty ben-
eﬁts, we reduced spending on both by 0.6% of GDP, the same amount in the experiment
on proportional taxes. This is a uniform 80% reduction in the transfers amounts. Recall
that these transfers redistributed resources from capitalists and employed households to the
unemployed and the needy. Again, we replaced the fall in outlays with a lump-sum transfer
to capital owners. The results are in table 6.
    Transfers have a close-to-zero eﬀect on the average level of output and hours, yet they have
a large eﬀect on their volatility. Reducing transfer payments would raise output volatility by
4% and the variance of hours worked by as much as 8%. Unemployment and poverty beneﬁts
also signiﬁcantly lower the volatility of the output gap and the labor wedge, and when they
are not present there is a large fall in welfare, especially of course for those without a job.
    At the same time, without transfers, the volatility of aggregate consumption falls by

                                              30
                   Table 6: The eﬀect of transfers on the business cycle.

                       Full model             Representative agent          Hand-to-mouth
                variance       average        variance      average        variance   average
 output          0.0417        -0.0004         -0.0061      0.0002         -0.0110    -0.0042
 hours            0.0787       -0.0098         -0.0030      0.0002          0.0037    -0.0017
 consumption     -0.0241       -0.0004         -0.0112      0.0002          0.1328    -0.0048
 hhld. cons.      0.3456
                               Welfare eﬀects in full model:
                Variances                                Consumption-equivalents
  Inﬂation   Output gap     Labor wedge           Utilitarian   Employed    Not-employed
   -0.2170     0.0374         0.0633               -0.0677       -0.0516       -0.2028
Notes: same as those in Table 4.

2%. To understand why, note that the transfers provide social insurance against the major
idiosyncratic shock that households face. As a result, when we cut transfers, the variance
of household consumption in logs rises substantially, by 35%. As households face more risk
without transfers, they accumulate more assets. This was visible in ﬁgure 4, with the large
shift of the wealth distribution to the right when transfers are reduced. Therefore, when
aggregate shocks hit, they are better able to smooth them out and aggregate consumption
becomes more stable.
    The accumulation of saving when the safety net is cut has a second eﬀect that partly
explains why the economy becomes more unstable. A household with higher savings does
not increase consumption by as much when wages rise. The income eﬀect on labor supply is
smaller, and so the uncompensated labor supply elasticity is higher. Therefore, in response
to shocks of a given size, hours worked vary more and so does output.
    Aside from the social-insurance channel, there is also a redistribution channel behind the
eﬀectiveness of transfers. In a recession, there are more households without a job so more
transfers in the aggregate. Transfers have no direct eﬀect on the labor supply of recipients
as they do not have a job in the ﬁrst place. However, they are funded by higher taxes on the
capital owners, who raise their hours worked in response to the reduction in their wealth.
This stabilizes hours worked and output.
    The two special cases also conﬁrm that redistribution and precautionary savings are what
is behind the eﬀectiveness of transfers. In the representative-agent economy, both of these
channels are shut oﬀ, and the transfer experiment has a negligible eﬀect on all variables. In


                                             31
the hand-to-mouth economy, eliminating the public insurance provided by transfers raises
the volatility of both household and aggregate consumption now. This is as expected, since
there are no precautionary savings in this economy. Moreover, the volatility of output now
slightly falls without transfers. The savers-spenders economy maximizes the disposable-
income channel since every dollar given to households is spent, raising output because of
sticky prices. Yet, we see that, quantitatively, this eﬀect accounts for little of the stabilizing
eﬀects of transfers in our economy.
    To further conﬁrm that it is precautionary savings and redistribution behind our results,
we performed a ﬁnal experiment. We lowered the households’ discount factor at the same
time that we reduced transfers, so that the aggregate assets of the households did not change.
This is not a valid policy experiment, since we are changing not just policy but also pref-
erences, but it serves to highlight the role of precautionary savings. Now, when we lower
transfers and the discount factor, the volatility of aggregate consumption rises substantially
(17%), while the volatility of hours increases by less (2%) than in table 6, leading to a small
S for output. This conﬁrms our intuition, since once the precautionary savings channel is
attenuated by lowering the discount factor, then transfers are not as eﬀective at boosting
hours worked during recessions and now do stabilize aggregate consumption by stabilizing
disposable income.


4.3    The eﬀectiveness of progressive income taxes
The next experiment replaces the progressive personal income tax with a proportional, or
ﬂat, tax that raises the same revenue in steady state. Table 7 has the results.
    Progressive income taxes have a modest eﬀect on the volatility of output or hours, but
moving to a ﬂat tax would raise the average level of economic activity signiﬁcantly, output
by 4% and consumption by 5%. This stands in contrast with our results for transfers, even
though both are redistributive policies. To understand this diﬀerence, we need to look at it
through the four channels.
    First, because marginal tax rates rise with income this discourages labor supply and
lowers average hours and investment leading to reduce average income. This well-understood
mechanism works in the cross-section, discouraging individual households from trying to
raise their individual income. However, the level of progressivity in the current U.S. tax
system is modest in the sense that the marginal tax rate function is relative ﬂat above
median income—recall ﬁgure 1. Therefore, the marginal tax rate that capitalists and many
employed households face changes little between booms and recessions. This induces little

                                               32
               Table 7: The eﬀect of progressive taxes on the business cycle.

                        Full model             Representative agent          Hand-to-mouth
                variance       average         variance      average        variance   average
 output          -0.0091       0.0446           -0.0620      0.0382         -0.0963    0.0466
 hours           -0.0109       0.0388           -0.0322      0.0383         -0.0394    0.0316
 consumption     -0.0545       0.0507            0.0232      0.0436          0.2342    0.0531
 hhld. cons.      0.1953
                                Welfare eﬀects in full model:
                Variances                                 Consumption-equivalents
  Inﬂation   Output gap     Labor wedge            Utilitarian   Employed    Not-employed
   -0.3207    -0.0376         -0.0273               -0.0371       -0.0330       -0.0715
Notes: same as those in Table 4.

substitution over time, and therefore has a negligible eﬀect on the variance.
     On average activity, though, the eﬀect is large. With a ﬂat tax, because more tax revenue
is collected from households with less income, then the wealthier households and especially
the capitalists face a signiﬁcantly lower marginal tax rate. Therefore, they save more, the
average capital stock is higher, and so the impact of ﬂattening the tax system on average
income is large.
     Second, the redistribution channel is signiﬁcantly weaker than with transfers, because
it is less targeted. When the needy receive transfers they cannot reduce their labor supply
any further. In contrast, the personal income tax mostly redistributes from rich employed
households to less rich employed households. The recipients lower their labor supply in
response to their higher income, and little stabilization results.
     At the same time, in the cross section, the progressivity of the personal income tax
provides some social insurance. Therefore, as with transfers, removing this progressivity
increases after-tax income risk, which on the one hand raises the variance of log household
consumption by 20%, and on the other hand induces households to save more thus lowering
aggregate consumption volatility. All combined, welfare falls for all groups with a ﬂat tax.
     The important roles of redistribution and precautionary savings is again highlighted by
the two special cases, where these two channels are shut oﬀ. The table shows that in either the
representative-agent or the hand-to-mouth economies, a ﬂat tax leads instead to signiﬁcantly
less volatile business cycles. Further calculations, that we do not report for brevity, show
that this fall in volatility is in large part driven by the joint presence of monetary policy


                                              33
shocks and sticky prices.
    To understand what is going on, recall the basic mechanism for why a positive monetary
policy shock causes a boom with sticky prices: lower nominal interest rates lead to lower real
interest rates, which raises consumption, demand for output, and if prices do not change, then
raises hours worked and investment. Now, with a progressive tax, ﬁrst the after-tax return
on saving faced by the capital-owners, (1 − τ x (xt ))it , is both lower as well as less sensitive
to variations in the nominal interest rate, which are driven by inﬂation. As a result, the
progressive tax makes the after-tax real interest rate respond less strongly to inﬂation and
so fall more with higher real income. Second, with a progressive tax, the increase in real
income in a boom raises the marginal tax rate, which lowers the after-tax real interest rate
by even more. Therefore, progressive taxes lead to lower real rates after positive monetary
policy shocks, and thus more volatile responses of output and hours. Part of this eﬀect was
evident in table 5 where lower marginal tax rates led to a more stable economy.


4.4     The eﬀectiveness of budget deﬁcits
To assess the role of the budget deﬁcit, we conducted two ﬁnal experiments. First, we
contrasted our baseline economy with γ G > 0 with an alternative economy where only the
lump-sum taxes adjust to close the deﬁcits so γ G = 0. In this economy, government purchases
are always constant as a ratio of output. The second column of table 8 shows the results.13
    This counterfactual economy is more stable in output but more volatile in consumption.
The intuition is simple. After a positive aggregate shock, the economy enters a boom, and
the automatic stabilizers produce a surplus that lowers public debt. Under the benchmark
ﬁscal rule, this induces government purchases to rise. This lowers the income available for
private consumption, and through this income eﬀect, labor supply increases, amplifying the
shock. When we remove the response of purchases, this eﬀect disappears and so output is
more stable.
    The last column of table 8 shows the eﬀect of not only setting γ G to zero, but also of
raising γ T to inﬁnity so that the government balances its budget every period. The results
are almost identical to the ﬁrst column. While Ricardian equivalence does not hold in our
economy, changing the time proﬁle of the taxes on capital owners has a small quantitative
eﬀect.
    To conclude, changing the timing of deﬁcits per se has little eﬀect on the economy. But
  13
     We left out the results for the two special cases from this table since they were very similar to those for
the full model. Similarly, the eﬀect on the ergodic mean is numerically close to zero.


                                                      34
                Table 8: The eﬀect of budget deﬁcits on the business cycle.

                            Fixed purchases,                               Fixed purchases
                           only taxes respond                            and balanced budget
                                                    Change in variance
output                           -0.0281                                        -0.0291
hours                            -0.0133                                        -0.0136
consumption                      0.1876                                         0.1845
                                           Welfare in consumption-equivalents
utilitarian                      -0.0005                                        -0.0005
employed                         -0.0004                                        -0.0004
not employed                     -0.0012                                        -0.0012
 Notes: for variances, the table shows the proportional change caused by cutting the stabilizer,
so a positive number implies that the stabilizer was eﬀective. For the consumption-equivalents, a
number of −0.01 says that the stabilizer raises welfare by on average 1% of consumption.


the way in which these deﬁcits are ﬁnanced can have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on volatility. In
particular, not cutting government purchases in response to public deﬁcits is an eﬀective
stabilizer.


5     Have the U.S. stabilizers been eﬀective overall?
In this section, we combine all of the experiments before. In the counterfactual, a ﬂat
tax replaces the progressive personal income tax, proportional taxes are cut by 10%, and
unemployment and poverty beneﬁts are cut by the same amount in the government budget.
Finally, we decrease the two ﬁscal adjustment coeﬃcients proportionately so that the variance
of budget deﬁcits falls by 10%. Altogether, we see this as a feasible across-the-board reduction
in the scope of the automatic stabilizers.


5.1    Baseline estimates
Table 9 shows the results of the overall experiment in our full model. The main result is in the
ﬁrst two numbers in the table: the stabilizers have had a marginal eﬀect on the volatility of
the U.S. business cycle in output or hours. Removing the stabilizers would signiﬁcantly raise
the variance of both household consumption, because of the reduction in social insurance,
and aggregate consumption, because government purchases would not be as cyclical. But an


                                               35
              Table 9: The joint eﬀect of all stabilizers on the business cycle.

                        Full model              Representative agent          Hand-to-mouth
                 variance       average         variance      average        variance   average
 output          -0.0182        0.0567           -0.0911      0.0533         -0.0847    0.0557
 hours            0.0002        0.0344           -0.0616      0.0429         -0.0262    0.0311
 consumption     0.1409         0.0603            0.2014      0.0565         0.5568     0.0593
 hhld. cons.      0.7829
                                Welfare eﬀects in full model:
                 Variances                                 Consumption-equivalents
  Inﬂation   Output gap      Labor wedge            Utilitarian   Employed    Not-employed
   -0.2182    -0.0343          0.0204                -0.0928       -0.0732       -0.2573
Notes: same as those in Table 4.

economy with smaller stabilizers would actually have more stable inﬂation as well as output
gaps. Moreover, by lowering marginal tax rates, it would be a signiﬁcantly richer economy
on average. Even though we found in the previous section that the stabilizers, and especially
the safety-net transfers, could be quite powerful at stabilizing the business cycle, the current
mix of stabilizers falls short of achieving this goal.
    In spite of the negligible impact of the stabilizers on the volatility of output, eliminating
the stabilizers would signiﬁcantly reduce welfare across the main groups in the population. To
understand what is behind this discrepancy, we repeated the experiment in an economy where
there were no aggregate shocks. The consumption-equivalents for the whole population, only
for those employed, and only for those non-employed were (−0.0918, −0.0724, −0.2552), quite
close to the numbers in the table. Most of the measured welfare beneﬁts that the stabilizers
bring come from the provision of social insurance and redistribution, and little because of
the business cycle.
    This distinction suggests that two versions of the stabilizers that are equivalent in a
representative-agent model have diﬀerent eﬀects with heterogeneity. Having tax rates in-
dexed to aggregate income, instead of individual income, would induce little redistribution
and social insurance, but could have a stronger eﬀect on intertemporal substitution.


5.2    The role of monetary policy and price stickiness
A common ﬁnding in the representative-agent version of our business-cycle model without
taxes and transfers is that a ﬁnely-tuned monetary policy can come close to reaching the

                                               36
     Table 10: The eﬀect of the stabilizers with alternative roles for monetary policy.

                        Baseline          Optimal monetary policy              Natural levels
                                                   Change in variance
output                  -0.0182                       -0.0277                     -0.0683
hours                    0.0002                       -0.0211                     -0.0470
consumption              0.1409                        0.1620                     0.1465
inﬂation                -0.2182                       -0.3675                        –
output gap              -0.0343                       -0.0251                     -0.2981
labor wedge              0.0204                        0.0066                     -0.0098
                                        Welfare in consumption-equivalents
utilitarian             -0.0928                       -0.0918                     -0.0617
employed                -0.0732                       -0.0724                     -0.0454
not employed            -0.2573                       -0.2551                     -0.1984
 Notes: same as in Table 8. The optimal monetary policy column uses the rule: log(it /it−1 ) =
0.77 log(it /it−1 ) + 0.75 log(πt−1 ) + 0.02 log(yt−1 /yt−2 ).


ﬁrst best (Woodford, 2003). If that is the case, then there may be little room for ﬁscal policy
to provide any further improvements, biasing our results against the role of the stabilizers.
In our baseline model, we guarded against this possibility both by including markup shocks,
which pose trade-oﬀs for monetary policy, and by including a simple rule for nominal interest
rates that did not respond to aggregate activity.
    Table 10 compares our baseline results with those in the full model replacing the simple
monetary-policy rule with a rule that Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2007) showed is close to
optimal in a version of the Christiano et al. (2005) model. This rule has the virtue of
depending only on observables, so it avoids the diﬃculty of deﬁning the right concept of
the output gap. As expected, the stabilizers are even less eﬀective with this alternative,
as monetary policy goes further in stabilizing the business cycle leaving less room for ﬁscal
policy.
    Second, we eliminate the role of monetary policy entirely by assuming that prices are
ﬂexible and the price level is constant as in the natural equilibrium that deﬁned the output
gap. The diﬀerences with the baseline are large. Nominal rigidities and aggregate demand
are important for the dynamics of aggregate variables and for the eﬀect that the stabilizers
have on the business cycle through their multiple channels. This was already clear when we
discussed the impact of price rigidity in explaining the eﬀect of ﬂattening personal income
taxes. The more general lesson is that even if the Keynesian disposable-income channel of

                                              37
                 Table 11: The role of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply.

                        elasticity = 1/2        elasticity = 1/5         elasticity = 1
                       variance   average      variance   average      variance   average
      output           -0.0182     0.0567      -0.0134     0.0327      -0.0170     0.0818
      hours             0.0002     0.0344       0.0022     0.0166      0.0067      0.0531
      consumption       0.1409     0.0603       0.1305     0.0333      0.1385      0.0885
                                                    variance
      inﬂation               -0.2182                 -0.2726                 -0.2033
      output gap             -0.0343                 -0.0301                 -0.0173
      labor wedge             0.0204                  0.0194                  0.0262
                                            consumption equivalents
      utilitarian            -0.0928                 -0.1010                 -0.0834
      employed               -0.0732                 -0.0813                 -0.0640
      not employed           -0.2573                 -0.2664                 -0.2452
      Notes: same as in Table 9

ﬁscal policy seems to be weak, the Keynesian role of sticky prices and aggregate demand on
the business cycle is important in this economy.


5.3    The role of hours and the intensive margin of work
In our calibration, we assumed that the Frisch elasticity of labor supply was 0.5. We found
that two of the channels through which the automatic stabilizers are more eﬀective are
by redistributing funds away from the rich, inducing them to work more, and by lowering
the need to save for self insurance reducing the uncompensated elasticities of labor supply.
Moreover, inattention and other frictions may lead to long-run Frisch elasticities between 0.5
and 1, while the short-run Frisch elasticities more relevant for the business cycle are between
0.2 and 0.5 (Chetty, 2012). Table 11 investigate the eﬀect on our conclusions of changing ψ2
in two opposite directions: lowering the Frisch elasticity to 0.2 and raising it to 1.
    The major eﬀect of changing the Frisch elasticity is not on the response of second moments
to the stabilizers, but on that of the ﬁrst moments. The higher is the elasticity, the larger the
distortion from taxes, and so removing the stabilizers leads to a larger increase in average
output, hours worked and consumption. The eﬀects on the second moments are all small
quantitatively. Therefore, looking at welfare, a lower estimate of the elasticity of labor supply
makes the automatic stabilizers more desirable, without reverting our earlier conclusions.

                                               38
                      Table 12: Endogenous job-ﬁnding probabilities

                             Baseline                            Endogenous search eﬀort
                     variance             average              variance             average
output                -0.0182             0.0567               -0.2042              0.0701
hours                  0.0002             0.0344               -0.2500              0.0609
consumption            0.1409             0.0603               -0.1248              0.0752
                                          Welfare in consumption-equivalents
utilitarian                     -0.0928                                   -0.0727
employed                        -0.0732                                   -0.0548
not employed                    -0.2573                                   -0.2202
Notes: same as in Table 9.

5.4    The extensive margin of hours and endogenous unemployment
In our baseline model, transitions across employment states et (i) are exogenous. We now
consider an extension of the model in which job-ﬁnding probabilities depend positively on
a household’s search eﬀort, measured by the hours nt (i) that households without a job
spend looking. This extension captures the possible incentive eﬀects of providing transfers
to those who are not working. This model poses some additional computational challenges
we lead us to reduce the extent of heterogeneity in the population by abstracting from skill
heterogeneity.
    Now, the household moves into employment with probability 1−exp{−qt (et (i))nt (i)}, the
functional form used by Hopenhayn and Nicolini (1997). The search eﬃciency, qt (.), depends
on the current employment status of the household, with the needy being less likely to ﬁnd
a job. Higher eﬀort in terms of hours nt (i) spent searching for a job raises the probability
of ﬁnding employment. Whereas before the eﬃciency of this search process was zero, so the
probability of ﬁnding a job was exogenous, now it is qt (.) > 0. Search eﬃciency also varies
exogenously over the business cycle to match the volatility of unemployment.
    We calibrate the steady state level and dynamics of qt (e) to match the same moments as
in our baseline calibration. Table 12 shows the results.
    The eﬀect on the economy is large and the stabilizers destabilize the economy quite
substantially. Transferring resources to those without a job discourages their search eﬀort,
prolongs unemployment spells, and therefore ampliﬁes the business cycle. Similarly, the
welfare analysis shows that the insurance provided by the stabilizers becomes less important
for welfare as unemployed households can adjust their search eﬀort as they run down their

                                                    39
assets.


6     Conclusion
Milton Friedman (1948) famously railed against the use of discretionary policy to stabilize the
business cycle. He defended the power instead of ﬁscal automatic stabilizers as a preferred
tool for countercyclical policy. More recently, Solow (2005) strongly argued that policy and
research should focus more on automatic stabilizers as a route through which ﬁscal policy
could and should aﬀect the business cycle.
    We constructed a business-cycle model with many of the stabilizers and calibrated it to
replicate the U.S. data. The model has some interesting features in its own right. First, it
nests both the standard incomplete markets model, as well as the standard new-Keynesian
business cycle model. Second, it matches the ﬁrst and second moments of U.S. business
cycles, as well as the broad features of the U.S. wealth and income distributions. Third,
solving it requires using new methods that may be useful for other models that combine
nominal rigidities and incomplete markets.
    We found that lowering taxes on sales, property, and corporate and personal income, or
reducing the progressivity of the personal income tax, did not have a signiﬁcant impact on
the volatility of the business cycle. Moreover, lowering these taxes raised average output and
improved several measures of welfare. At the same time, higher transfers to the unemployed
and poor were quite eﬀective at lowering volatility with negligible eﬀects on averages. This
suggests that expanding the safety net might lead to a more stable economy.
    In terms of the channels of stabilization, we found that the traditional disposable-income
channel used to support automatic stabilizers is quantitatively weak. Considerably more im-
portant was the role of precautionary savings and social insurance. Policies that redistribute
from the richer, who have lower MPCs and respond more strongly to cuts in wages, lower
the amplitude of the business cycle and especially the cross-sectional dispersion of household
consumption. Much of their welfare beneﬁts come from the insurance they provide, and not
from their impact on the business cycle.
    Overall, we found that reducing the scope of all the stabilizers had a modest impact on the
business cycle. While there is potential to use some of the stabilizers and exploit some of the
stabilization channels to aﬀect the business cycle, we concluded that most of this potential is
currently unfulﬁlled. Aside from expanding the safety net, making tax rates explicitly vary
with aggregate, rather than individual, income are two possible policy reforms.


                                              40
    Our results leave open a few questions for future research. First, we do not study the
optimal design of stabilizers. Before doing so, we had to understand the positive predictions
of the model regarding the stabilizers, a task that took this whole paper. Future work can
take up the challenge of optimal policy design. Second, it is possible that the eﬃcacy of
the stabilizers changes at the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Progress on these
avenues for future research will have to overcome some challenging computational hurdles,
which prevented us from undertaking them in this paper.
    Finally, each of the automatic stabilizers that we considered is more complex than our
description and distorts behavior in more ways than the ones we modeled. We wanted our
model to be suﬃciently simple so that we could understand the channels through which
the stabilizers might work, and we were limited by what we could solve. To obtain sharper
quantitative estimate of the role of the stabilizers, it would be desirable to include the ﬁndings
from the rich micro literatures that study each of these government programs in isolation.
Perhaps the main point of this paper is that to assess automatic stabilizers requires having
a fully articulated business-cycle model, so that we can move beyond the disposable-income
channel, and consider other channels as well as quantify their relevance. Our hope is that
as computational constraints diminish, we can keep this macroeconomic approach of solving
for general equilibrium, while being able to consider the richness of the micro data.




                                               41
References
Alonso-Ortiz, J. and Rogerson, R. (2010). Taxes, transfers and employment in an incomplete
  markets model. Journal of Monetary Economics, 57(8):949–958.

Andrés, J. and Doménech, R. (2006). Automatic stabilizers, ﬁscal rules and macroeconomic
 stability. European Economic Review, 50(6):1487–1506.

Antoulas, A. C. (2005). Approximation of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems. SIAM series,
 Cambridge University Press.

Auerbach, A. (2003). Is there a role for discretionary ﬁscal policy? In Rethinking Stabilization
 Policy, pages 109–150. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Auerbach, A. J. (2009). Implementing the new ﬁscal policy activism. American Economic
 Review, 99(2):543–49.

Auerbach, A. J. and Feenberg, D. (2000). The signiﬁcance of federal taxes as automatic
 stabilizers. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3):37–56.

Auerbach, A. J. and Kotlikoﬀ, L. J. (1987). Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge University
 Press.

Barrell, R. and Pina, A. (2004). How important are automatic stabilisers in Europe? A
  stochastic simulation assessment. Economic Modelling, 21(1):1–35.

Baunsgaard, T. and Symansky, S. A. (2009). Automatic ﬁscal stabilizers. IMF Staﬀ Position
  Note, 9.

Berriel, T. C. and Zilberman, E. (2011). Targeting the poor: A macroeconomic analysis of
  cash transfer programs. Fundação Getúlio Vargas manuscript.

Blanchard, O. (2006). Comments on “The case against the case against discretionary ﬁscal
  policy”. In Richard Kopcke, G. T. and Triest, R., editors, The macroeconomics of ﬁscal
  policy, pages 62–67. MIT Press.

Blanchard, O., Dell’Ariccia, G., and Mauro, P. (2010). Rethinking macroeconomic policy.
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1):199–215.

Blinder, A. S. (1975). Distribution eﬀects and the aggregate consumption function. Journal
  of Political Economy, 83(3):447–475.

                                              42
Blinder, A. S. (2006). The case against the case against discretionary ﬁscal policy. In
  Richard Kopcke, G. T. and Triest, R., editors, The Macroeconomics of Fiscal Policy,
  pages 25–61. MIT Press.

Brown, E. C. (1955). The static theory of automatic ﬁscal stabilization. Journal of Political
  Economy, 3(5):427–440.

Calvo, G. A. (1983). Staggered prices in a utility maximizing framework. Journal of Monetary
  Economics, 12(3):383–398.

Challe, E. and Ragot, X. (2013). Precautionary saving over the business cycle. Paris School
 of Economics manuscript.

Chetty, R. (2012). Bounds on elasticities with optimization frictions: A synthesis of micro
 and macro evidence on labor supply. Econometrica, 80(3):969–1018.

Christiano, L. J. (1984). A reexamination of the theory of automatic stabilizers. Carnegie-
 Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 20(1):147–206.

Christiano, L. J., Eichenbaum, M., and Evans, C. (2005). Nominal rigidities and the dynamic
 eﬀects of a shock to monetay policy. Journal of Political Economy, 113(1):1–45.

Christiano, L. J. and Harrison, S. G. (1999). Chaos, sunspots and automatic stabilizers.
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 44(1):3–31.

Cohen, D. and Follette, G. (2000). The automatic ﬁscal stabilizers: quietly doing their thing.
  Economic Policy Review, 6(1):35–68.

Congressional Budget Oﬃce (2013). The eﬀects of automatic stabilizers on the federal budget
  as of 2013. CBO report, March.

Devereux, M. P. and Fuest, C. (2009). Is the corporation tax an eﬀective automatic stabilizer?
  National Tax Journal, 62(3):429–437.

Dı́az-Giménez, J., Glover, A., and Rı́os-Rull, J.-V. (2011). Facts on the distributions of
   earnings, income, and wealth in the United States: 2007 update. Federal Reserve Bank of
   Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 34(1):2–31.

Dolls, M., Fuest, C., and Peichl, A. (2012). Automatic stabilizers and economic crisis: US
 vs. Europe. Journal of Public Economics, 96(3-4):279–294.

                                             43
Dromel, N. L. and Pintus, P. A. (2008). Are progressive income taxes stabilizing? Journal
  of Public Economic Theory, 10(3):329–349.

Fatas, A. and Mihov, I. (2012). Fiscal policy as a stabilization tool. The B.E. Journal of
  Macroeconomics, 12(3):–.

Fedelino, A., Ivanova, A., and Horton, M. (2005). Computing cyclically adjusted balances
  and automatic stabilizers. International Monetary Fund Technical Notes and Manuals
  09/05.

Feldstein, M. (2009). Rethinking the role of ﬁscal policy. American Economic Review,
  99(2):556–59.

Floden, M. (2001). The eﬀectiveness of government debt and transfers as insurance. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 48(1):81–108.

Friedman, M. (1948). A monetary and ﬁscal framework for economic stability. American
  Economic Review, 38(3):245–264.

Gali, J. (1994). Government size and macroeconomic stability. European Economic Review,
 38(1):117–132.

Gali, J., Lopez-Salido, D., and Valles, J. (2007). Understanding the eﬀects of government
 spending on consumption. Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(1):227–270.

Girouard, N. and André, C. (2005). Measuring cyclically-adjusted budget balances for oecd
  countries. OECD Economics Department Working Papers 434.

Gornemann, N., Kuester, K., and Nakajima, M. (2012). Monetary policy with heterogeneous
 agents. FRP Philadelphia working paper 12-21.

Guerrieri, V. and Lorenzoni, G. (2011). Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the liquidity
 trap. NBER Working Paper 17583.

Guo, J.-T. and Lansing, K. J. (1998). Indeterminacy and stabilization policy. Journal of
 Economic Theory, 82(2):481–490.

Hairault, J.-O., Henin, P.-Y., and Portier, F. (1997). Business Cycles and Macroeconomic
 Stability: Should We Rebuild Built-In Stabilizers? Kluwer Academic Press.



                                              44
Heathcote, J. (2005). Fiscal policy with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets.
  Review of Economic Studies, 72(1):161–188.

Heathcote, J., Perri, F., and Violante, G. L. (2010a). Unequal we stand: An empirical
  analysis of economic inequality in the united states: 1967-2006. Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 13(1):15–51.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., and Violante, G. L. (2009). Quantitative macroeconomics
  with heterogeneous households. Annual Review of Economics, 1(1):319–354.

Heathcote, J., Storesletten, K., and Violante, G. L. (2010b). The macroeconomic implications
  of rising wage inequality in the United States. Journal of Political Economy, 118(4):681 –
  722.

Hopenhayn, H. A. and Nicolini, J. P. (1997). Optimal unemployment insurance. Journal of
 Political Economy, 105(2):412–38.

Horvath, M. and Nolan, C. (2011). Tax reform and automatic stabilization: A quantitative
 theoretical assessment. University of Oxford manuscript.

Huntley, J. and Michelangeli, V. (2011). Can tax rebates stimulate consumption spending
 in a life-cycle model? Congressional Budget Oﬃce working paper 2011-02.

Jones, J. B. (2002). Has ﬁscal policy helped stabilize the postwar U.S. economy? Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 49(4):709 – 746.

Kaplan, G. and Violante, G. L. (2012). A model of the consumption response to ﬁscal
 stimulus payments. NBER Working Paper 17338.

Krusell, P. and Smith, Jr., A. A. (1998). Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroe-
  conomy. Journal of Political Economy, 106(5):867–896.

Leeper, E. M., Plante, M., and Traum, N. (2010). Dynamics of ﬁscal ﬁnancing in the United
  States. Journal of Econometrics, 156(2):304–321.

Leftin, J., Gothro, A., and Eslami, E. (2010). Characteristics of supplemental nutrition
  assistance program households: Fiscal year 2009. Technical report, U.S. Department of
  Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Oﬃce of Research and Analysis.




                                            45
Mabli, J., Tordella, S., Castner, L., Godfrey, T., and Foran, P. (2011). Dynamics of sup-
 plemental nutrition assistance program participation in the mid-2000s. Technical report,
 United States Department of Agriculture.

Mankiw, N. G. (2000). The savers-spenders theory of ﬁscal policy. American Economic
 Review, 90(2):120–125.

Mankiw, N. G. and Zeldes, S. P. (1991). The consumption of stockholders and nonstock-
 holders. Journal of Financial Economics, 29(1):97–112.

Mendoza, E. G., Razin, A., and Tesar, L. L. (1994). Eﬀective tax rates in macroeconomics:
 Cross-country estimates of tax rates on factor incomes and consumption. Journal of
 Monetary Economics, 34(3):297–323.

Musgrave, R. A. and Miller, M. H. (1948). Built-in ﬂexibility. American Economic Review,
 38(1):122–128.

Oh, H. and Reis, R. (2012). Targeted transfers and the ﬁscal response to the great recession.
 Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(Supplement):S50–S64.

Parker, J. A. (2011). On measuring the eﬀects of ﬁscal policy in recessions. Journal of
  Economic Literature, 49(3):703–18.

Parker, J. A., Souleles, N. S., Johnson, D. S., and McClelland, R. (2011). Consumer spending
  and the economic stimulus payments of 2008. NBER Working Paper 16684.

Pechman, J. A. (1973). Responsiveness of the federal individual income tax to changes in
  income. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:385–427.

Perotti, R. (2005). Estimating the eﬀects of ﬁscal policy in OECD countries. Federal Reserve
  Bank of San Francisco, Conference Proceedings.

Ramey, V. A. (2011). Can government purchases stimulate the economy?              Journal of
  Economic Literature, 49(3):673–85.

Reiter, M. (2009). Solving heterogeneous-agent models by projection and perturbation.
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 33(3):649–665.

Reiter, M. (2010). Approximate and almost-exact aggregation in dynamic stochastic
  heterogeneous-agent models. Institute for Advanced Studies, Economics Series 258.

                                             46
Schmitt-Grohé, S. and Uribe, M. (2007). Optimal simple and implementable monetary and
  ﬁscal rules. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(6):1702–1725.

Shimer, R. (2009). Convergence in macroeconomics: The labor wedge. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1):280–297.

Smyth, D. J. (1966). Built-in ﬂexibility of taxation and automatic stabilization. Journal of
  Political Economy, 74(4):396–400.

Solow, R. M. (2005). Rethinking ﬁscal policy. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21(4):509–
  514.

Spilimbergo, A., Symansky, S., Blanchard, O., and Cottarelli, C. (2010). Fiscal policy for
  the crisis. In Kolb, R. W., editor, Lessons from the Financial Crisis, pages 587–594. John
  Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Summers, L. H. (1981). Capital taxation and accumulation in a life cycle growth model.
  American Economic Review, 71(4):533–544.

Taylor, J. B. (2011). An empirical analysis of the revival of ﬁscal activism in the 2000s.
  Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3):686–702.

van den Noord, P. (2000). The size and role of automatic ﬁscal stabilisers in the 1990s and
  beyond. OECD Economics Department Working Papers, No. 230.

Veld, J., Larch, M., and Vandeweyer, M. (2013). Automatic ﬁscal stabilisers: What they are
  and what they do. Open Economies Review, 24(1):147–163.

Woodford, M. (2003). Interest and prices: foundations of a theory of monetary policy.
 Princeton University Press.




                                            47
Appendix

A      From the NIPA tables to table 1
For each entry in table 1, we construct a sum of one or more entries in the NIPA tables,
divide by nominal GDP, and average over 1988 to 2007. Here we describe the components
of each entry in table 1.


A.1     Revenues
    • Personal income taxes are the sum of federal and state income taxes (table 3.4) plus
      contributions for government social insurance less contributions to retirement programs
      (NIPA table 3.6, line 1 minus lines 4, 12, 13, 22, and 29).

    • Corporate income taxes are from line 5 of table 3.1.

    • Property taxes are the sum of business property taxes (table 3.5) and individual
      property taxes (table 3.4).

    • Sales and excise taxes are state sales taxes (table 3.5) plus federal excise taxes (table
      3.5).

    • Public deﬁcit is the residual between the two columns of the table.

    • Customs taxes are from table 3.5, line 11.

    • Licenses, ﬁnes, fees are the residual between current tax receipts from table 3.1 and
      the other revenue listed in our table.

    • Payroll taxes are contributions to retirement programs (table 3.6, lines 4, 12, 13, 22,
      and 29).


A.2     Outlays
    • Unemployment beneﬁts are from table 3.12, line 7.

    • Safety net programs are the sum of the listed sub-components from table 3.12,
      where “security income to the disabled” is the sum of lines 23, 29 and 36 and “Others”
      is the sum of lines 37 - 39.

                                              48
       • Government purchases are current consumption expenditure from table 3.1.

       • Net interest income is the diﬀerence between interest expense and interest and asset
         income both from table 3.1.

       • Health beneﬁts (non-retirement) are spending on Medicaid (table 3.12, line 33).
         multiplied by the share of Medicaid spending that was spent on children, disabled, and
         non-elderly adults in 2007 plus other medical care (table 3.12, line 34).14

       • Retirement-related transfers are the share of Medicaid spent on the elderly plus
         Social Security, Medicare, pension beneﬁt guarantees, and railroad retirement programs
         (all from table 3.12).

       • Other outlays are the diﬀerence between total outlays in table 3.1 and those listed
         here.


B         Calibration of the idiosyncratic shock processes
Each household at every date has a draw of st (i) determining the wage they receive if they
are employed, and a draw of et (i) on their employment status. This section describes how
we calibrate the distribution and dynamics of these two random variables.


B.1        Skill shocks
We use PSID data on wages to calibrate the skill process. To do this, we start with sample
C from Heathcote et al. (2010a) and work with the log wages of household heads in years
1968 to 2002. Computational considerations limit us to three skill levels and we construct
a grid by splitting the sample into three groups at the 33rd and 67th percentiles and then
using the median wage in each group as the three grid points. Skills are proportional to the
level (not log) of these wages. Computational considerations also lead us to choose a skill
transition matrix with as few non-zero elements as possible. We impose the structure
                                    ⎛                ⎞
                                      1−p    p    0
                                    ⎜                ⎟
                                    ⎝ p   1 − 2p  p ⎠,
                                       0     p   1−p
  14
   See table 2 in the 2008 actuarial report of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. https:
//www.cms.gov/ActuarialStudies/downloads/MedicaidReport2008.pdf


                                                 49
where p is a parameter that we calibrate as follows. From the PSID data, we compute the
ﬁrst, second and fourth auto-covariances of log wages. Let Γi be the ith auto-covariance.
                                 
We use the moments Γ2 /Γ1 and Γ4 /Γ2 , each of which can be viewed as an estimate of the
autoregressive parameter if the log wages follow an AR(1) process.15 The empirical moments
are 0.9356 and 0.9496, respectively. To map these moments into a value of p, we minimize
the equally-weighted sum of squared deviations between these empirical moments and those
implied by the three-state Markov chain. As our time period is one quarter, while the PSID
                                     
data are annual, we use Γ8 /Γ1 and Γ16 /Γ8 from the model. This procedure results in a
value of p of 0.015.


B.2      Employment shocks
Steady state In addition to diﬀerences in skill levels, households diﬀer in their employment
status. A household can be (1) employed (E), (2) unemployed (U) or (3) needy (N). To
construct a steady state transition matrix between these three states we need six moments.
First, it is reasonable to assume that a household does not transit directly from employed
to long-term unemployed or from long-term unemployed back to unemployed. Those two
elements of the transition matrix are therefore set to zero.
    The distribution of households across states gives us two more moments. As the focus of
our work is on the level and ﬂuctuation in the number of individuals receiving diﬀerent types
of transfers, we deﬁne unemployed as individuals who are receiving unemployment beneﬁts
and needy as those receiving food stamps.
    In the U.S., the Supplemental Nutritional Assistance Program is the largest non-health,
non-retirement social safety net program. SNAP assists low-income households in being able
to purchase a minimally adequate low-cost diet. Recipients of these beneﬁts are generally
not working.16 One virtue of using SNAP participation as a proxy for long-term unemploy-
ment is that it avoids the subtle distinction between unemployment and non-participation
in the Current Population Survey while still focussing on those individuals who likely have
poor labor market prospects. If we instead used time since last employment to identify
those in long-term unemployment, we would include a number of individuals with decent
opportunities to work if they chose to do so such as individuals who have retired or who
  15
     The ratio Γ1 /Γ0 is not used as this ratio is heavily inﬂuenced by measurement error, which leads to
an underestimate of the persistence of wages. The moments that we use are also used by Heathcote et al.
(2010b) to estimate the persistence of the wage process.
  16
     In 2009, 71% of SNAP recipient households had no earned income and only 17% had elderly individuals
(Leftin et al., 2010).


                                                   50
choose to work in the home. Between 1971, when the data begin, and 2011, the average
insured unemployment rate was 2.9%.17 Between 1974, when the SNAP program was fully
implemented nationwide, and 2011, the average ratio of SNAP participation to the insured
labor force was 8.7%. We refer to this as the SNAP ratio.18
    Our ﬁnal two moments speak to the ﬂows across labor market states. We calibrate the
ﬂow into unemployment using the ratio of initial claims for unemployment insurance to the
stock of employed persons covered by unemployment insurance. Between 1971 and 2011,
the average value of this ratio was 5.16%. Many spells of unemployment insurance receipt
are short and such spells are an important component of the data on ﬂows.19 In our model,
the minimum unemployment spell length is one quarter so we take care to account for the
short spells in the data as part of our calibration strategy. We imagine that when a worker
separates from their job, they immediately join the pool of job seekers and can immedi-
ately regain employment without an intervening (quarter-long) period of unemployment. To
identify the probability of immediate reemployment, we assume it is the same as the job
ﬁnding probability of other unemployed workers. In addition, we calibrate the probability
of transitioning from long-term unemployment to employment based on the ﬁnding of Mabli
et al. (2011) that 3% of SNAP participants leave the program each month.
    Our procedure is as follows: we use the moments above to create a target transition
matrix across employment states that our model should generate. This transition matrix
has the form:           ⎛                                                  ⎞
                     E     1 − s1 (1 − f2 )    s1 (1 − f2 )        0
                        ⎜                                                  ⎟
                     U ⎝         f2         (1 − f2 )(1 − s2 ) (1 − f2 )s2 ⎠
                     N           f3                  0           1 − f3
where element (i, j) is the probability of moving from state i to state j. There are four
parameters here s1 , s2 , f2 , f3 , which we set as follows: f3 = 0.0873, equivalent to 3% per
month; s1 = 0.0516 is the ratio of initial claims to covered employment; f2 = 0.540 and
s2 = 0.577 are chosen so the invariant distribution of the Markov chain matches the average
shares of the population in each state.
  17
     The insured unemployment rate is the ratio of the number of individuals receiving unemployment insur-
ance beneﬁts to the number of employed workers covered by unemployment insurance.
  18
     This ratio is calculated as the number of SNAP participants divided by the sum of the number of workers
covered by unemployment insurance and the number of individuals receiving UI beneﬁts.
  19
     In a typical quarter, the number of people who ﬁle an initial claim for UI is greater than the stock of
recipients at a point in time.




                                                    51
Business-cycle dynamics of employment risk An important component of our model
is the evolution of labor market conditions over the business cycle. One eﬀect of the ﬂuc-
tuations in labor market conditions is to alter the number of households receiving diﬀerent
types of beneﬁts over the cycle. A second eﬀect is to alter the amount of risk that households
face, which has consequences for the consumption and work decisions.
    As we analyze the aggregate dynamics of the model with a linear approximation around
the stationary equilibrium, it is suﬃcient to specify how the labor market risk evolves in the
neighborhood of the stationary equilibrium. Let Πt be the matrix of transition probabilities
between employment states at date t and t + 1. We impose the following structure on the
evolution of Πt
                             Πt = Π0 + Π1 [χ log zt − (1 − χ)εt ] ,

where Π0 and Π1 are constant 3 × 3 matrices. Π0 is the matrix of transition probabilities
between employment states in steady state. The term in brackets is a composite of the
technology and labor market shocks and the parameter χ controls how much the labor
market is driven by technology shocks as opposed to monetary shocks. We set χ so that the
technology shocks account for 50% of the variance of the unemployment rate in keeping with
the view that they drive 50% of the variance of output.
    What remains is to specify the matrix Π1 .20 We use a Π1 that has two non-zero, oﬀ-
diagonal elements that allow the probability of losing employment to be counter-cyclical
and allow the probability of moving from long-term unemployment to employment to be
procyclical. We limit ourselves to these two parameters so as to economize on the number
of parameters that must be calibrated. We choose these two elements of Π1 to match the
standard deviations of the insured unemployment rate and the SNAP ratio deﬁned above.
    The standard deviation of the insured unemployment rate is 0.00937 and the standard
deviation of the SNAP ratio is 0.0205. These procedures leave us with the following:
               ⎛                     ⎞                 ⎛                 ⎞
                0.9694 0.0306    0                      3.21 −3.21  0
              ⎜                      ⎟                 ⎜                 ⎟
         Π0 = ⎝0.5398 0.1948 0.2654⎠ ,            Π1 = ⎝ 0    0     0 ⎠,          χ = 0.45,
                0.0873    0   0.9127                    5.06  0    −5.06

where the the (i, j) element of the Π matrices refers to the transition probability from state
i to state j and the states are ordered as employed, unemployed, long-term unemployed.
 20
      The rows of Π1 must sum to zero so that the rows of Πt always sum to one.




                                                    52
C      Decision problems and model equations
In this section of the appendix, we derive the optimality conditions that we use to compute
the equilibrium of the model.


C.1     Capital owner’s problem
The capital owner chooses {ct , nt } to maximize expression (1) subject to equations (2) and
(3). Deﬁne b̃t = bt /pt and πt = pt /pt−1 and note that p̂t /pt = 1 + τ c . Then we can rewrite
the constraints as:

                        (1 + τ c )ct + b̃t+1 πt+1 − b̃t = xt − τ̄ x (xt ) + Tte           (28)
                        xt = it b̃t + wt s̄nt + dt .                                      (29)

   Setting up the Lagrangian, with m1t and m2t as the Lagrange multipliers on constraints
(28) and (29), respectively, the optimality conditions are:

                                  β t c−1     1      c
                                       t = mt (1 + τ )
                                               
                                 m1t πt+1 = Et m1t+1 + it+1 m2t+1
                                      m2t = m1t (1 − τ x (xt ))
                               β t ψ1 nψt 2 = m2t wt s̄,

    These can be rearranged to give:
                                                       
                                     1      1 − τ x (xt )
                          ψ1 nψt 2=                         wt s̄,                        (30)
                                     ct       1 + τc
                                                                    
                               1          1 + it+1 (1 − τ x (xt+1 ))
                                  = βEt                                ,                  (31)
                               ct                 ct+1 πt+1

which are the capital-owner’s labor-supply and Euler conditions. Finally, notice that the
capital owner’s stochastic discount factor is:

                                      m2t+s   β s c−1
                                                   t+s (1 − τ (xt+s ))
                                                             x
                             λt,s =         =                          .                  (32)
                                      m2t         c−1
                                                   t (1 − τ (xt ))
                                                             x




                                                   53
C.2      Other households’ problem
The idiosyncratic state of a household is its real bond holdings b̃, its employment status e
and its skill level s. Let J be the set of all (e, s) pairs and let S be the collection of aggregate
state variables. Then the problem of a household with real assets b̃ and labor market states
j ∈ J can be written as
                                                                                                     
                                              n1+ψ2         
               V (b̃, j, S) = max log(c) − ψ1        + β̂Et        ωjj  (n, S)V (b̃ , j  , S  )
                               c,n            1 + ψ2        j  ∈J


subject to

                      (1 + τ c )c + b̃ π  − b̃ = x − τ̄ x (x) + T s (j)
                                                  x = i(S)b̃ + I{e(j)=2} s(j)w(S)n + T u (j).

Here the expectation operator is over aggregate states and ωjj  (n, S) is the probability of
moving from state j to j  . This probability can potentially be inﬂuenced by search eﬀort if
e(j) = 2 and e(j  ) = 2.
   From this problem, one can derive an Euler equation and a labor supply condition that are
analogous to those for the capital owner’s problem. One diﬀerence, however, is that in these
analogous expressions the expectation operator reﬂects an expectation over idiosyncratic
uncertainty as well as over aggregate uncertainty.
   For the extension in Section 5.4, there is an additional optimality condition for households
that are not employed, which determines the household’s search eﬀort
                                                       ∂ωjj  (n, S)
                                    ψ1 nψ2 = β̂Et                     V (b̃ , j  , S  ).               (33)
                                                      j  ∈J
                                                             ∂n


C.3      Intermediate Goods’ Firm
A ﬁrm that sets its price at date t chooses p∗t , {ys (j), ks (j), ls (j)}∞
                                                                          s=t to solve


         
         ∞                                                                                                  
                              s−t            p∗t
max Et         λt,s (1 − θ)              1−τ  k
                                                   ys (j) − ws ls (j) − (υrs + δ) ks (j) − ξ − (1 − υ)rs ks (j) ,
         s=t
                                                ps




                                                              54
subject to
                                                              μ/(1−μ)
                                                         p∗t
                                          ys (j) =                        ys
                                                         ps
                                          ys (j) = as ks (j)α l(j)1−α .

where the ﬁrst constraint is the demand for the ﬁrm’s good and the second its production
function. By deﬁning r̂t ≡ (1 − υτ k )/(1 − τ k )rt , we can we can rewrite the objective function
as if all capital costs were deductible, but the cost of capital were higher (r̂t > rt if υ < 1).
Dropping the constant 1 − τ K and substituting in the demand curve gives the modiﬁed
problem:
                                                                                
                            ∞
                                  p∗t
                                      1/(1−μ)
             max ∞ Et                         ys − ws ls (j) − (r̂s + δ) ks (j) − ξ λt,s (1 − θ)s−t
      ∗
     pt ,{ks (j),ls (j)}s=t
                            s=t
                                  ps

subject to
                                         μ/(1−μ)
                                    p∗t
                                                     ys = as ks (j)α l(j)1−α .
                                    ps

   The ﬁrst order conditions with respect to ks (j) and ls (j) are:

                                (r̂s + δ) = Ms αas ks (j)α−1 ls (j)1−α .                              (34)
                                ws = Ms (1 − α) as ks (j)α ls (j)−α ,                                 (35)

where Ms is the Lagrange multiplier on the production function constraint at date s, which
is real marginal cost at date s.
    We can derive several useful features of the solution from these two optimality conditions.
First, taking their ratio:
                                        ws     1 − α ks (j)
                                             =              ,
                                     r̂s + δ      α ls (j)
so that all ﬁrms have the same capital-labor ratio and, by market clearing, ks (j)/ls (j) = ks /ls
for all ﬁrms.
    Second, these optimality conditions allow us already to derive the expression for dividends




                                                          55
as a function of factor prices. Total factor payments are

                                                          (r̂s + δ) ks = Ms αas ksα ls1−α ,                                                              (36)
                                                                            ws ls = Ms (1 − α) as ksα ls1−α .                                            (37)

The aggregate after-tax dividend of the intermediate goods ﬁrms is then
                    1                                                 1                                                         
                                                                                pt (j)
                         dit (j)dj    = (1 − τ )           k
                                                                                       yt (j) − wt (j)lt (j) − (r̂t + δ) kt (j) − ξ dj
                 0                                                  0            pt

and by market clearing this becomes
                                                  1                         
                                                       dit (j)dj = (1 − τ k ) yt − Mt at ktα lt1−α − ξ .                                                 (38)
                                               0


Similarly, total proﬁts are
                                 1                                                   
                                      pt (j)
                                             yt (j) − wt lt (j) − (rt + δ) kt (j) − ξ dj
                                 0     pt
                                    1                                                               
                                          pt (j)
                                =                yt (j) − wt lt (j) − (r̂t + δ + rt − r̂t ) kt (j) − ξ dj
                                    0      pt
                                                                     1−υ
                                = yt − Mt at ktα lt1−α − ξ + τ k              r̂t kt .                                                                   (39)
                                                                    1 − υτ k

And revenue from the corporate income tax is the diﬀerence between (39) and (38).
  Finally, we turn to the optimality condition with respect to p∗t :
                                                                                1/(1−μ)−1                             μ/(1−μ)−1          
            
            ∞
                                                        1                   p∗t                ys       μ           p∗t                 ys
       Et            λt,s (1 − θ)s−t                                                              − Ms                                            = 0,
            s=t
                                                       1−μ                  ps                 ps      1−μ          ps                  ps

which we can rewrite as

     
     ∞                         1/(1−μ)−1                                                     ∞                                            μ/(1−μ)−1
            1             p∗t                           ys                                              μ                               p∗t                 ys
Et                                                         λt,s (1 − θ)s−t = Et     λt,s (1 − θ)s−t Ms
     s=t
           1−μ            ps                            ps                      s=t
                                                                                                       1−μ                              ps                  ps


                                                                                      ! "μ/(1−μ)−1
                                                           ∞
                                p∗t       pt E t           s=t   λt,s (1 − θ)s−t Ms μt ppst                           ys
                                                                                                                      ps    p̄A
                                      =                               ! "μ/(1−μ)                                           ≡ Bt
                                                                                                                                .                        (40)
                                pt                                ∞                                                         p̄t
                                                       pt E t     s=t ps
                                                                        pt        ys
                                                                                     λ (1 − θ)s−t
                                                                                  ps t,s




                                                                                         56
This equation gives the solution for p∗t . It is useful to write p̄A       B
                                                                   t and p̄t recursively. To that
end,

                                      
                                      ∞                                                        μ/(1−μ)−1
                                                                       s−t                 pt                ys
                     p̄A
                       t   = pt E t         λt,s (1 − θ)                      M s μt
                                      s=t
                                                                                           ps                ps
                           = M t μt y t +
                                                                 μ/(1−μ)−1      
                                    −1                       pt
                           Et pt+1 πt+1 Et+1 λt,t+1
                                                 (1 − θ)
                                                           pt+1
                              ∞                                    μ/(1−μ)−1
                                                  s−t−1         pt+1            ys
                           ×       λt+1,s (1 − θ)       Ms μ
                             s=t+1
                                                                 ps             ps
                                                                          
                                                             −μ/(1−μ) A
                           = Mt μt yt + Et λt,t+1 (1 − θ) πt+1        p̄t+1 ,                                          (41)

where πt+1 ≡ pt+1 /pt . Similar logic for p̄B
                                            t yields

                                                                                
                                                                 −μ/(1−μ)−1 B
                             p̄B
                               t = y t + E t   λ t,t+1 (1 − θ) π t+1       p̄ t+1 .                                    (42)

   Next, comes the relationship between p∗t and inﬂation. The price index is
                                                               1                           1−μ
                                                                              1/(1−μ)
                                       pt =                          pt (j)             dj
                                                             0


and with Calvo pricing we have
                                                  1                                                           1−μ
                                                                        1/(1−μ)
                    pt =        (1 − θ)                 (pt−1 (j))                   dj +     θ (p∗t )1/(1−μ)
                                                0
                            !                                                           "1−μ
                                            1/(1−μ)
                       = (1 − θ) pt−1                        + θ (p∗t )1/(1−μ)                    .



Therefore                                           ⎛                                      ⎞1−μ
                                           ⎜                          1−θ          ⎟
                                      πt = ⎝                          ! ∗ "1/(1−μ) ⎠                  .                (43)
                                                                        pt
                                                         1−θ            pt

    Finally, note that because the capital-labor ratio is constant across ﬁrms, the production
of variety j follows:                            α
                                                 kt
                                    yt (j) = at       lt (j).
                                                 lt

                                                                        57
The demand for variety j can be written in terms of the relative price to arrive at
                                                        μ/(1−μ)                             α
                                                pt (j)                                    kt
                                                                           y t = at                   t (j).
                                                 pt                                       t

Integrating both sides yields
                                   1               μ/(1−μ)                                 α         1
                                            pt (j)                                        kt
                                                                       djyt = at                               t (j)dj.
                                0            pt                                           t           0


By market clearing we have then that:

                                                           St yt = at ktα 1−α
                                                                           t   ,                                                       (44)

where                                                                             μ/(1−μ)
                                                                   1
                                                                           pt (j)
                                                  St =                                          dj.
                                                               0            pt
St reﬂects the eﬃciency loss due to price dispersion and it evolves according to
                                                                                                     μ/(1−μ)
                                                              −μ/(1−μ)                          p∗t
                                St = (1 −            θ) St−1 πt                       +θ                             .                 (45)
                                                                                                pt

   Throughout this subsection, we have dropped most of the t subscripts on μt . When the
equations in this subsection are linearized around the zero-inﬂation steady state, the markup
shock only enters equation (41).


C.4     Capital goods ﬁrm
The capital goods ﬁrms chooses a sequence {kt+1 , kt+2 , · · · } to maximize
                                                                                                                         2    
                  
                  ∞
                                                                                    ζ                          ks+1 − ks
                                            p −(s−t+1)
             Et         λt,s (1 + τ )                           rs ks − ks+1 + ks −                                             ks .
                  s=t
                                                                                    2                             ks

The discounting by 1/(1 + τ P ) comes from the property tax since:

                                                   1             1
                                        vt =            dkt +        Et [λt,t+1 vt+1 ] .                                               (46)
                                                  1−τ P       1 − τP




                                                                            58
    This problem leads to the ﬁrst-order condition
                                                                  2                      
          kt+1 − kt                  λt,t+1              ζ kt+2 − kt+1         kt+2 − kt+1 kt+2
1+ζ                       = Et                rt+1 + 1 −                  +ζ                        .
             kt                      1 + τp              2    kt+1                kt+1      kt+1
                                                                                                                 (47)

This expression can be transformed into one that only includes variables dated t and t + 1 by
                                                    lag
writing it in terms of k̂t = kt+1 and introducing k̂t = k̂t−1 . Dividends paid by the capital
goods ﬁrm are the term in brackets in the objective function less τ p times the value of the
ﬁrm, which follows equation (46).


D      Proofs for propositions
Proof of proposition 1. Before turning to the full proof, we highlight the intuition for the
result. With ﬂexible prices, there is an aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function, so if
the capital stock and employment are ﬁxed, then the proposition will be true as long as the
labor supply is ﬁxed. Equating the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and
leisure for households to their after-tax wage gives the standard labor supply condition:
                                                                                     1/ψ2
                                                           (1 − τ x )st (i)wt
                                            nt (i) =
                                                           ψ1 ct (i)(1 + τ c )

Perfect insurance implies that consumption is equated across households. But then, our
balanced-growth preferences and technologies imply that ct /wt is ﬁxed over time, so the
condition above, once aggregated over all households, gives a constant labor supply.
    The full proof goes as follows. Under complete markets, the households will fully insure
idiosyncratic risks. Therefore, we treat them as a large family that pools risks among its
members. In determining the family’s tax bracket, we assume the tax collector applies the
tax rate corresponding to the average income of its members.
    The large family maximizes
                                                                                                           
                          
                          ∞
                                                     n1+ψ2                   ν
                                                                                                nt (i)1+ψ2
                  E0            βt       ln(ct ) − ψ1 t     +                    ln ct (i) − ψ1            di
                          t=0
                                                     1 + ψ2              0                       1 + ψ2




                                                                59
subject to
                                            ν                   
                               p̂t                ct (i)di + ct + bt+1 − bt = pt [xt − τ̄ x (xt )] + Tt ,
                                          0


where Tt is net non-taxable transfers to the household and
                                                      ν
                   xt = (it /pt )bt + wt s̄nt + dt +     st (i)nt (i) + Ttu (i)di.
                                                                                  0


The household also faces the constraint nt (i) = 0 if et (i) = 2. Let m1t be the Lagrange
multiplier on the former constraint and m2t be the Lagrange multiplier on the latter. Then
the ﬁrst order conditions of this problem are

                                                     βt
                                                         = p̂t m1t                                                                ct
                                                      ct
                                                   βt
                                                         = p̂t m1t                                                            nt (i)
                                                  ct (i)
                                                               #                     $
                                                    m1t = Et m1t+1 + m2t+1 (it /pt )                                           bt+1
                         m1t pt [1 − τ x (xt )] = m2t                                                                            xt
                                      β t ψ1 nψt 2       = m2t wt s̄                                                             nt
                                β t ψ1 nt (i)ψ2 = m2t wt st (i)                                                               nt (i)

These ﬁrst order conditions can be rearranged to obtain

                                                  ct (i) = ct ,
                                                                                                       
                                                     1                1 + it+1 [1 − τ x (xt+1 )]
                                                        = βEt                                               ,
                                                     ct                      ct+1 πt+1

and aggregate labor input satisﬁes
                                                                              1/ψ2                                                          
                     ν
                                                       1 1 1 − τ x (xt )                       1+1/ψ2
                                                                                                                        ν
                                                                                                                                       1+1/ψ2
    s̄nt +               st (i)nt (i)di =                                wt               s̄            + Et                (st (i))            di ,
                 0                                     ψ 1 ct 1 + τ c                                               0


where Et is deﬁned as the mass of non-capital-owner households who are employed. In this
ﬁnal step we should only integrate over those households that are not at a corner solution,
but this is trivial as the marginal disutility of labor goes to zero as nt (i) goes to zero so
all households with positive wages are employed and it is only those who exogenously lack


                                                                           60
employment opportunities who will set nt (i) = 0.
    Proceeding similarly for the representative agent decision problem stated in the propo-
sition and deﬁning aggregate labor input in that case to be (1 + Et )st nt , one reaches the
conclusion that the two models will deliver the same Euler equation and condition for aggre-
gate labor supply. Therefore, the two models will generate the same aggregate dynamics.

Proof of proposition 2. Under assumption 1, we can use the representative agent formulation
from proposition 1. The labor supply condition for this problem is
                                                           1/ψ2
                                          (1 − τ x )wt st
                                     nt =                           ,
                                          ct (1 + τ c )ψ1

where τ x is the (constant) marginal tax rate. Under the conditions of assumption 2, the
aggregate resource constraint is: ct + gt = yt . But, since there is a constant ratio of gt to yt ,
the resource constraint implies that ct /yt is constant and equal to 1 − ḡ/ȳ. Moreover, with
ﬂexible prices, we can write wt = (1−α)y
                                     μLt
                                         t
                                           , where Lt is aggregate labor input. Using these two
results to substitute out ct and wt we obtain
                                                                       1/ψ2
                                       (1 − τ x )(1 − α)yt
                         nt =                                                   ,
                              (1 − ḡ/ȳ)yt (1 + τ c )ψ1 μnt (1 + E)

where we have used the fact that the aggregate labor input is nt st (1+E), where employment
is constant by assumption. Using this expression, we can solve for nt as
                                                                       1/ψ2
                         1+1/ψ2            (1 − τ x )(1 − α)
                        nt        =                                             .
                                    (1 − ḡ/ȳ)(1 + τ c )ψ1 μ(1 + E)

Because the right-hand-side does not depend on time, it follows that nt is constant over time.
   Next, recall that capital is ﬁxed and prices are ﬂexible, so aggregate output is

                                    yt = at K α [(1 + E)sn]1−α ,

where K and n are the constant inputs of capital and hours, 1 + E is total employment and s
is the skill level of the representative agent, which is also constant over time by the fact that
the labor market risk is unchanging over time so the composition of the pool of workers is
stable. It follows from this equation that the variance of log output is equal to the variance
of log productivity, at .
    That S = 0 follows from the fact that the productivity process is exogenous and therefore

                                                 61
not aﬀected by the presence or absence of automatic stabilizers. Notice that S = 0 holds
regardless of whether one uses output or consumption as the measure of activity as ct /yt is
constant. For hours, the ratio is not deﬁned since there is no variation in hours worked.




E     Numerical solution algorithm
As the main text described, the key steps involved in solving the model are: (i) to discretize
the cross-sectional distributions and decision rules, (ii) to solve for the stationary equilibrium,
(iii) to collect all of the many equations deﬁning the approximate equilibrium, and (iv)
reducing these to a smaller system with little loss in accuracy. We elaborate on each of these
steps next.


E.1     Discretizing the model
For each discrete type of household characterized by a skill level and an employment status,
we approximate the distribution of wealth by a histogram with 1000 bins. We approximate
the policy rules for savings and labor supply by two piece-wise linear splines with 100 knot
points each. We deal with the borrowing constraint in the approximation of the policy func-
tions by, following Reiter (2010), parameterizing the point at which the borrowing constraint
is just binding, and then constructing a grid for higher levels of assets. As a result of these
approximations, there are now 1200 variables for employed workers, and 1100 variables for
unemployed workers (who do not choose labor supply).


E.2     Solving for the stationary equilibrium
Solving for the steady state of the model requires two steps: ﬁrst, solving for the house-
hold policy rules and distribution of wealth and second, solving for the aggregate variables
including the assets and consumption of the representative capital owner. These two steps
are interrelated as the equilibrium interest rate depends on the capital-owner’s marginal
tax rate, which depends on the capital-owner’s income and therefore wealth, which in turn
depends on the level of wealth held by households.
    We use an iterative procedure to ﬁnd the equilibrium income of the capital owners.
Given a guess of the capital-owner’s income and therefore marginal tax rate, we ﬁnd the
equilibrium interest rate from the capital-owner’s Euler equation and then the solution of


                                                62
the intermediate goods ﬁrm’s problem to ﬁnd the equilibrium wage. With these objects, we
solve the households problem to ﬁnd their consumption and asset positions. With these in
hand, we use standard techniques from the analysis of representative agent models to ﬁnd
the rest of the aggregate variables. Finally, we check our guess of the capital-owner’s income
and iterate from here.


E.3      System of equations
Keeping track of the wealth distribution We track real assets at the beginning of
the period using Reiter’s procedure to allocate households to the discrete grid in a way that
preserves total assets. As we have nominal bonds in the model, we account for the eﬀect
of inﬂation in the evolution of the household’s asset position. For each discrete type of
household this provides 1000 equations.

Solving for household decision rules We use the household’s Euler equation and the
household’s labor supply condition to solve for their decision rules by imposing that these
equations hold with equality at the spline knot points. This provides 100 equations for
unemployed households and 200 for employed households.

Aggregate equations In addition to those equations that relate to the solution of the
household’s problem and the distribution of wealth across households, we have equations
that correspond to the capital-owner’s savings and labor supply decisions, as well as those
that correspond to the ﬁrms’ problems. These equations are discussed in more detail in
Appendix B. We use equations (28), (30), (31), (40), (41), (42), (43), (36), (37), (44), (45),
(46), (47), and an auxiliary variable that carries an extra lag of capital. In addition, from
the main text we have equations (22), (23), (24), (26), (25), (27), and exogenous AR(1)
processes for t , at , and μt . We use these equations to solve for ct , nt , bt Mt , p∗t /pt , p̄A     B
                                                                                                   t , p̄t ,
                                                   lag
St , πt , yt , wt , rt , vt , kt , lag of capital kt , dt , Bt , Tte , gt , and it .


E.4      Linearization and model reduction
At this stage, we have a large system of non-linear equations that the discretized model
must satisfy. We follow Reiter (2010, 2009) in linearizing this system around the stationary
equilibrium using automatic diﬀerentiation and then solving the linearized system as a linear
rational expectations model. The full linear system is too large to solve directly so we use


                                                    63
the model reduction step introduced by Reiter (2010). The only change that we make to
Reiter’s procedure is the way we select the observation matrix (C in Reiter’s notation). The
importance of this matrix is that it speciﬁes those variables that the model should reproduce
accurately. Reiter includes those aggregate variables that enter the household’s decision
problem. In his case, that is the capital stock, which determines prices. In addition to these
variables, we add those that we are interested in for our results (output, hours and aggregate
consumption). Finally, we found it necessary to include the level of government debt in order
to achieve an accurate solution.21 We believe that the importance of government debt stems
from its strong inﬂuence on the equilibrium interest rate.


E.5      Endogenous search eﬀort
In Section 5.4, we consider an extension of the model with endogenous search eﬀort. Solving
the model in that case has some extra steps. First, we must parameterize the search decision
rule of unemployed households much as we parameterize the labor supply decision rule
for employed households. To do that, we use equation (33) evaluated a 100 points for
each discrete type of household. In order to evaluate that equation, we must calculate the
household’s value function. Therefore, we parameterize the value functions with splines with
50 grid points for each discrete type of household and use the Bellman equation at those
points to ﬁnd the value function.22




  21
     We found this in initial exploration of models for which was possible to ﬁnd the exact solution of the linear
model (i.e. versions of the model with less heterogeneity so the model reduction step was not necessary).
  22
     To improve the accuracy of the spline approximation, we interpolate over a transformation of household
assets given by log(b + 1). After this transformation, the value function is closer to linear, which improves
the accuracy of the spline approximation.


                                                       64
