NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL UTILIZATION
AND CAPITAL ACCUMULATION:
THEORY AND EVIDENCE

Matthew D. Shapiro

Working Paper No. 1900

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER'S research program
in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1900
April 1986

Capital Utilization and Capital Accumulation: Theory and Evidence

ABSTRACT

A firm may acquire additional caoital ini-ut by nurchasing new cai-

tal or by increasing the utilization of its current capital. The margin
between capital accumulation and capital utilization is studied in a model
of dynamic factor demand where the firm chooses capital, labor, and their

rates of utilization. A direct measure of capital utilization--the work
week of capital--is incorporated into the theory and estimates. The estimates imply that capital stock is costly to adjust while the work week of

capital is essentially costless to adjust. The estimated response of the
capital stock to changes in its price and in the required rate of return
is more rapid than found in other estimates.

flatthew D. Shapiro

Cowles Foundation for Research
in Economics
Yale University
Box 2125 Yale Station
New Haven, CT 06520

1. Introduction
In this paper, I examine the link between capital utilization and

the dynamic demand for capital. A firm can vary the intensity of use of
its capital by lengthening its work week as well as by changing the work

week and amount of labor. When a firm decides--for whatever reason--that
it needs more capital services than it already has, it has two options.
It may either acquire additional physical capital or use its current capi-

tal more intensively. As long as the firm is not at a corner, it has these
two choices regardless of whether the quantity of labor is increased cor-

respondingly. That is, the choice of amount of capital services can be
made separately from the choice of labor input and the capital-labor ratio.
The Federal Reserve Board's and the Bureau of Economics Analysis's
published measures of capacity utilization are not necessarily economically
meaningful measures of capital utilization. Each measures actual output relative to potential rather than at what rate of intensity capital is being used.
In this paper, I discuss an alternative measure of capital utilization, the

work week of capital. By assuming that capital is idle if no labor is present,
the work week of capital can be deduced from data on shift work of labor.
I discuss construction of such a series, present some results about its statistical properties, and integrate it into a model of dynamic factor demand.
I estimate the model of dynamic factor demand and study how capital accumulation and capital utilization respond to changes in the cost of capital.

The aim in this paper is to analyze and quantify how the firm's abil-

ity to vary capital utilization impinges on its demand for capital. Why
firms use their capital so little is a persistent puzzle. The main purpose
of this paper is not to resolve this puzzle, but rather to analyze how the
1

margin between extending shift work and adding new capital affects the de-

cision to buy new capital. Nonetheless, my estimates are consistent with
the view that the productivity of shift work is low.2
Uncertainty about the future plays a central role in the firm's in-

vestment decision. For example, whether the firm exoects a shock to be
permanent or temporary will determine whether it responds mainly by increasing its capital stock or by increasing the utilization of the current stock.

I use the research strategy advocated by Hansen and Singleton (1982) of
estimating the stochastic first-order conditions of the firm's decision

problem. This methodology allows expected future outcomes to drive current
decisions without requiring the econometricians to characterize fully their
distribution.

To simulate the estimated model, I make further assumptions about
the environment facing the firm.

I can then solve using the algorithm of

Blanchard and Kahn (1980) for the estimated response of capital demand and

capital utilization to changes in factor prices. The current response of
demand and utilization depends on current and future values of factor prices

and the required rates of return. These changes can arise because of changes
in tax policy. Hence, the estimates can be used to study changes in tax
policy based on estimated structural parameters of the representative firmts
obj ective function.

In Section 2, I discuss the work week of capital as a measure of

capacity utilization. In Section 3, I discuss the theory of interrelated
factor demand with variable factor utilization. I present estimates of
the model in the fourth section. In the fifth section, I consider some extensions concerning the overidentifying restrictions of the model and the
aggregation problem.

I explore in Section 6 the dynamic response of capital

3

to changes in costs induced, for exanirle, by changes in tax policy.
The work week of capital overshoots the steady state when prices and rates

of return change. The estimated response of capital stock to changes in
prices and required rates of return is substantial. This result provides
an important challenge to the standard view that prices and required rates
of return are empirically unimportant in models of the demand for capital.
I summarize the results in the last section.

2. Neasuring Capital Utilization
There is no officially published time series directly measuring capi-

tal utilization in U.S. manufacturing. "Capacity utilization" as published
by the FRE, BEA, or in the Wharton index is a measure of actual output rela-

tive to potential, not a measure of capital utilization. This point is
stressed not to criticize the FRB, BEA, or Wharton indexes per se but to

characterize their economic content. In particular, they are not good measures of the intensity of use of the canital stock as maintained by some researchers [Nadiri and Rosen (1969) and Tatoin (1980), for example]. I discuss
in the Appendix how these measures of capacity utilization are essentially

detrended output. The correlation of detrended value-added in manufacturing
and the FRB index is 0.88.

The measure of capital utilization I propose to use is the average

work week of capital. The series is analogous to the well-known average

work week of labor, Ht

,

measured in man-hours. Capital is working only

if some labor is present, that is, if the plant is open. Published information on shift work is therefore used to construct the implied work week
of capital.

The Bureau of the Census in 1929 collected and again since 1973

4

collects information directly on the work week of capital [see Foss (1981)

for details]. These data are too infrequent and not collected over a long
enough continuous time span to be useful in this study.
The measure of the work week of capital I use here is based on the

nuer of workers on late (second and third) shifts in manufacturing. Data
on shift work are available beginning in the early 1950s from the Area Wage
Survey

conducted

by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The survey gives the

percentage of workers on the second and third shifts in the various SMSAs.

Let L1 ,

L2

and

,

L3 denote employment on the first, second, and third

shifts. Consider a series

S =

(1)

[H(L1

-

L2)

+

80(L2

-

L_)

+

120L31/L1

The series S measures the work week of capital. Equation (1) is equivalent to Taubman and Gottschalk's (1971) equation (2.3) up to a normaliza-

tion. Suppose that only one shift is worked so L2 and L3 are both zero.
In this case S ,

the work week of capital, equals Fl ,

the work week of

labor. Increasing the utilization of capital is achieved exactly by

in-

the utilization of labor. The index is constructed so that
overlapping shifts are not double-counted. In particular, it assumes that
creasing

overtime

work on one shift overlaps with that on another shift if more than

one shift is worked. This insures that S does not overstate the length
of the work week of capital. In particular, it helps to ensure that S
is not spuriously correlated with the work week of labor, which is an alternative indicator of capital utilization.3

Now suppose that two equally-sized shifts are worked so that L1

and L2 are equal and L3 is zero. Then the work week of capital is eighty
hours. (No information is available on the length of late shifts so aver-

5

age hours are used.) If three equal shifts are worked, then the work week
of capital is 120. It is presumed that if more than one shift works, they

are

of equal size. Therefore, L1 ,

aggregate production workers, L ,
the

L2

and

,

L3 can be deduced from

and from the shares of shift work in

Area Wage Survey.

Taubman and Gottschalk (1971) construct a quarterly index S for
1952 through 1968 based on Area Wage Survey data. The Survey is conducted

for

different SNSAs at different points in

time. They use this information

to construct a quarterly series from the disaggregate data. I extend the
series through 1982 based
for the post 1968 period.4

on published and unpublished summary statistics
I then use a modification of the Chow-Lin (1969)

procedure for best linear unbiased distribution. The instrument for the
distribution is quarterly average hours.

I estimate the relationship be-

tween quarterly hours and S on the 1952 to 1968 period. From these estimates, I construct fitted values for quarterly S after 1968 by redistributing the annual residual equally over each quarter of the year. The
entire series is given in the Appendix.
Use of an interpolated series creates an errors-in-variables problem.
In Section 5.2, I discuss estimates that are robust to measurement error

in S
There are shortcomings to use of this measure of the work week of

capital as a measure of capital utilization. First, because of data limitations, it does not account for work on weekends. In 1976, the average
plant in the U.S. manufacturing industry operated 5.3 days per week [Foss

(1981, p. 9)] so at least on average weekend work is negligible. Second,
the measure is for capital in use so it does not account for temporary plant

closings. Permanent plant closings should, in principle, be captured in

6

the measured capital stock. Finally, the work week of capital is a better
measure of capital utilization in assembly industries such as automobiles
than in process industries such as blast furnaces and petroleum refining.

In process industries, it may be extremely costly to completely shut down

a plant. Hence, utilization may

be

varied by changing the quantity of

materials processed.

Before presenting the theoretical model of the interrelation between
the stock demand and utilization of factors, it is useful to consider the
correlation of the work week of capital with other macroeconomic variables.

For the following discussion, I detrend the data with linear and quadratic

trends.5 The correlation of the work week of capital with output is 0.66,
so it is strongly pro-cyclical. The correlation of the work week of production workers with output is 0.70; the utilization rates of capital and

labor are about equally correlated with output. The two utilizations have
correlation 0.77.

The correlation of the work week of capital with labor productivity

(output per man-hour) is 0.13. Longer hours for capital means a higher effective capital-labor ratio, and consequently higher labor productivity.

The correlation of the capital stock with the sane measure of labor productivity is 0.08,

so

high frequency changes in productivity are more substan-

tially correlated with the work week than the stock of capital. Foss (1981)
emphasizes the importance of changes in capital utilization for the trend

determination of productivity. Tatom (1980) notes that variation in capital
utilization might explain pro-cyclical labor productivity. The correlations
presented here are consistent with capital utilization being part of the

source of pro-cyclic productivity. Tatom uses FRB capacity utilization
to proxy for capital utilization, which, for reasons I discuss above, does
not directly measure capital utilization.

7

3. Factor Utilization and the Theory of Dynamic Factor Demand
The technology I study allows the firm to choose independently its

capital and labor stocks and their rates of utilization. The firm takes

factor and product prices as given. The level of output is determined by
the firm's choice of inputs and their utilizations rather than by an exog-

enous constraint. Thus, the choice of the rate of utilization determines
output, and not vice versa. The scope to vary utilization gives the firm
flexibility in responding to shock to demand and cost. In particular, it
may respond to temporary shocks principally by adjusting utilization and
to permanent shocks principally by adjusting the stock of a factor.
The effect of varying utilization on maximized profits can be di-

vided into four parts. First, under typical concavity assumptions, increasing the utilization of one factor should decrease the marginal product of

that factor. Second, increased factor utilization may impose added variable cost on the firm. For example, to increase labor utilization a firm
must pay the wage rate plus a possible premium for overtime. To add a shift
the firm may pay a shift premium. Third, as I demonstrate, changing utilization or quantities employed by different factors implies different

adjustment costs. These different adjustment costs have different implications for profits. Specifically, the adjustment cost of capital is substantial and significant, that of employment is smaller yet significant,

and that of hours of employees and of capital is nil. Fourth, the rate of
utilization may affect user cost of capital by changing the rate of depre-

ciation Isee Taubman and Wilkinson (1970)]. Haking the rate of depreciation endogenous has the unfortunate consequence of making the level of the

capital stock unobservable. I do not examine the implications of utilization for user cost in the context of this paper's model.

8

Nadiri

and Rosen (1969) study capacity utilization in a model where

finns are not explicitly forward-looking. They study dynamically interrelated factor demands for labor and capital where the level of utilization

of both capital and labor are choice variables of the firm. They use a
Cobb-Douglas production function where capital, capacity utilization, em-

ployees, and hours of employees all have different shares. Nadiri and Rosen
use capacity utilization to measure capital utilization. Measured capacity
utilization is essentially output divided by potential. Consequently, capacity utilization as measured cannot be an independent choice of the finn.

It

is therefore misleading to estimate an independent "demand" for it.6
The literature on interrelated factor demand under rational expec-

tations largely overlooks the issue of capacity utilization. That is, it
is typically assumed that the current stock of factors is always utilized

fully. An exception is theoretical work by Abel (1979), whose model is
close to the one in this paper. Sargent (1978) estimates a dynamic demand
function for labor. He does in a sense address the issue of utilization
by estimating separate demands for straight-time and overtime employment.
He finds that straight-time employment has a cost of adjustment far in excess

(e.g., 40 times) that for overtime employment. His conclusion regarding
the different cost of adjustment of overtime and straight-time work is simi-

lar to a result in this paper: that the number of employees is costly to
adjust but that the number of hours they work is not. He does not, however,
study demand for capital or its utilization.
In other studies of dynamic factor demand under rational expectations,

factors are utilized fully. Meese (1980) estimates the interrelated demands
for capital and man-hours. Kennan (1979) estimates the demand for labor

9

as a function of current and expected future output. Pindyck and Rotemberg
(1983) separate white-collar from blue-collar employment but again assume
that each is utilized at a constant rate.
I now consider an explicit model of the firm that yields demands
for both capital and labor and their rates of utilization.

3.1. Technology
This section extends the theory of interrelated factor demand to
account explicitly for the firm's separate choice of factor utilization. /

In

addition to choosing its stock of capital, Kt

tion workers, Lt ,

workers, N ,

it

and their hours, Ht ,
can

also

,

its

stock of produc-

and its stock of non-production

choose the number of shifts it operates. The

number of shifts is proportional to the work week of capital, St .
is, the number of shifts is essentially the ratio of
If the firm

That

to Ht

chooses to extend the work week of capital, S , with-

out changing labor input, it would correspondingly reduce the effective

capital-to-labor ratio. Thus, one would expect, but not require, that the
firm add labor when it adds shifts. If the work week of capital is extended
by lengthening the work week of production workers,

,

then

no corres-

I-It

ponding increase in labor is required to keep fixed the ratio of workers
to machines. Recall from Section 2 that to chose the work week of capital

the firm in fact choses the amount of work on late shifts. To emphasize

this connection I refer to S as the work week of capital, but the reader
is free to think of an increase in S as the decision to move workers

from the early to late shifts. In any case, S is a choice variable of
the firm independent of the total production worker employment, Lt
To make consideration of the technology concrete, consider the pro-

10

duction

function to he used in the empirical work.

function augmented by

(2)

log y =

terms

for costs of adjustment. it is

log1f(K, Lt, Nt, Ht, S, Kt_t_l, L_q1L1
Nt -

=

I use a Cobb-Douglas

a0
-

+

a

_1_1 Ht H1,
-

log(K)

+

aL

St -

log(L) + aN

log(N) + aH

(l/)[g(K - dK 1)2 + g(L
+ g (N. q N1—i
)2 + g,(H
nfl
L—l

- [(K_
+

b0g0)

+ a5 log(S)

-

-H

-

NA -

St1)]

L.

L-L

)2 + g(S

-S

)2]

1)(L_q1L1)

g(K_dK i)(H_H i

+

+

÷

+

g5(N _q

a1t

+

iNi)(S _Si)

+g(H _Ht i)(S _S1)]

vf

Terms in levels are the standard, Cobb-Douglas, components. Those in changes
represent the output foregone when the levels of factors are varied. The

parameter d is the survival rate of capital (one minus the depreciation
rate); the variable

is the survival rate of labor (one minus the quit

rate). In a related model [Shapiro (1984)], I find that the estimated adjustment cost parameters are insensitive to choosing different values of
the elasticity of substitution in a constant elasticity of substitution

specification. The cost of adjustment determines the dvnathcs of the model,
Hence, the Cobb-Douglas specification appears to be a reasonable, simplifying specialization in this class of applications.

Consider the effect on output of varying

the work week of capital,

11

S .

Varying St may involve costs of adjustment. As with hours, H.t

I expect the cost of adjusting the work week of capital to be small. Chang—

ing St ,

ceteris

paribus, involves a rescheduling of production, which

should be easy to do relative to changing the level of inputs.

Now consider the effect of the level of the work week of capital on

output. Suppose that the production function exhibits constant returns
to scale so that doubling capital and workers holding work week constant

doubles output. This implies the parameter restriction

aK + aL

aN = 1

Suppose the firm wants to replicate the output produced by the plant not

L

by doubling Kt ,

,

and

Nt ,

but

by doubling the work week of capi-

tal keeping the capital-to-labor ratio constant. That is, a second shift
is added that replicates the first shift. To double output, the firm needs
to double the labor input but only change the work week of capital holding

capital stock fixed. Presuming labor is as productive at night as during
the day, which is likely to be true as a first approximation, this scheme

should just double output. This discussion abstracts from the adjustment
costs.

This example illustrates a natural restriction on the parameters
aK ,

aL

,

aN

,

and

ing Kt (and Ht )
aK equals aS .

aS .

If doubling

L ,

Nt

,

and S while hold-

constant doubles output, and aK +

aL

+

aN

= 1

,

then

Such a result is highly intuitive. Extending the work

week of capital creates capital services in exactly the same way as adding

a new piece of equipment does. Therefore, Kt and S should have the
same output elasticities. One would expect them to have very different
costs of adjustment. In particular, one would expect the output foregone
by adjusting the physical quantity of an input to far exceed the cost of
changing the length of time that it operates.

12

The costs of increasing Kt and St are, however, very different.
In particular, increasing K involves the purchase of additional equip-

ment. How the cost of extending S is measured effects critically the

estimate of a .

I

discuss issues of measuring factor cost in the next

section.

3.2. Input Costs
The labor costs of a firm are a function of the number of employees,
the number of hours they work, and the degree to which they work late shifts.
That is, in addition to the premium for overtime there is a premium for
hours worked on late shifts.

I assume that non-production workers are paid a fixed amount. The
wage bill of production workers is given by the expression

wLH = wLt1J [w0 + .5w1 (Hr/Ho)

(3)

+

w2 (SfI10)] +

w is the average real wage, w the straight-time wage, H0 the
average of Ht , and v an error term. The term in S captures the
where

premium for work at hours other than the standard shift. It is paid when

the

work week of capital exceeds the work week of the typical worker.

The overtime premium, w1 ,

is

typically 0.5. Information on the

reported premium for work on late shifts is available in the Area Wage

Survey. For 1973 through 1975, the average percentage pay differential
for work on the second shift is 7.8 percent and for work on the third shift
is 10.3 percent (see BLS Bulletin 1850-89, Area Wage Survey Summaries,
1975, p. 101).

The low value of the late-shift premium, w2 ,

which I confirm in

the time—series estimates, poses theoretical difficulties for the model
and estimates of the work week of capital. The premium is very small (corn-

13

pared to the overtime premium, for example). If w2 as directly estimated
represents the true marginal labor cost of extending the work week of capital, one is confronted with the puzzle discussed in the introduction:

Why is the work week of capital so low? Given the low incremental labor
cost, why is late shift work so rare? Put another way, if costs are indeed
this low, then labor productivity on late shifts must be very low. Based

on the low figure for w2 ,

the estimate of a5 is substantially lower

than that of aK
Consider another alternative explanation for the low value of
Firms in manufacturing operating late shifts typically rotate such work
using a schedule that is essentially fixed among their existing work force.

If late work is expected and rotation is customary, most of the premium
needed to get workers to umdertake it may be built into the average wage

rather than explicitly made a function of late work. In this case,
would be substantially underestimated. There is evidence in British data
that such practice is customary [see ?farris (1964, p. 137)].

Note that a similar argument cannot be made for overtime. The Fair
Labor

Standards Act requires that a standard premium be paid for overtime

hours so these payments cannot be averaged into the straight-time wage.
Hence,

the measured data for overtime, unlike those for late shifts, more

closely approximate the marginal cost to a firm. There are no such legal
restrictions on shift premium.

The proposed solution to the puzzle of why there is so little shift
work given that the average cost of labor does not increase much on late
shifts is that the average cost does not replicate the marginal cost.

I

posit that the true marginal cost may be better proxied by the overtime

premium. Alternatively, one can ask what is the estimate of marginal cost

given the theoretical condition that aK equal

a .

In

the next section,

14

I discuss the initlications of these considerations.

In addition to there being variable cost for production workers,
there is fixed cost of employing both production workers and non-production
workers. These are any payments not a function of hours worked, which, in the

case of non-production workers, are all the costs. The fixed compensation

cost of a production worker is denoted s ;

the compensation of a non-

production worker is denoted as
The real purchase price of capital is given by

(4)

P

-

tPVCCAt

-

ITC)

where p is the real, after-tax purchase price of capital, Pt the real

before-tax price, t the corporate tax rate, PVCCA the present value
of depreciation allowances, and ITCt the investment tax credit rate.
I assume that the survival rate of capital, d ,

is

a constant. Given

that the intensity of use of capital is variable in the model this assump-

tion may be controversial. The advantage of making the assumption is that
it makes the capital stock easily measured. The disadvantage is that it
may lose one of the substantial costs of increasing the work week of capi-

tal. The construction of these data is discussed in the Appendix.

3.3. The Firm's Decision Problem
The firm maximizes

the

expected present discounted value of cash

flow. The expected value of real, discounted, after-tax cash flow is given

by

15

EtR.{f(K.,

(5)

Lt+j

Kj -

Lt+j, Nt+±, Ht+j,

-

Nt+± -

t+i - t+i—l'

t+i -

—

t+i-1

t+i

K

-

pt+i(Kt+ _dK+i)

-

[w+.Lt+1Ht+.(wo
+

+

.5wi(H./Ho)

+w2(S ./H0)) +

L
N
+ s
.L
.N .jLlt t+i
.)J
t+i t+].
t+i t+i

s

where Et denotes expectation taken conditional on information known to

The multi-period discount rate,

the firm at time t .

varying and random. It is defined by R+ =

•

,

1

is

time

where p is

t+j—l

j=l

the investorts required rate of return.8 In the following, the discount

rate from time t to t+1 is denoted as r =

Pt
For the firm to be acting optimally, the first-order conditions of

the problem must hold. Differentiating (5) with respect to capital, production workers, non-production workers, hours of production workers, and
the work week of capital yields the five following stochastic first-order
conditions:

(6a)

- dKi) - g(L -

E{IaK/K —
-

g(H Hi)

+

g(L1 qL)

+

-

—

-

gKs(St
+

-

- g(N - q1N1)

S1)]y(l - t) + [g(K1 - dK)

(N41 -

qN) + g(H41 - Ht)

- S)]y+i(l - t+i)dr - p + drp+1}

= 0

16

(6b)

g(L _q

E{[aL/L _g(K _dKi) -

-

iLt i -

1fl(l t)

-

g(H Hti)

+

1+i — dKt) + g(L1 - qL)

-

-

g(N _q1N1)

-

- qN)

+

+g(H1 _H) +g5(S1 _Sfly+i(1 _tKt+1 )qr
-

(6c)

[wH(wo

+

.5wi(H/Ho) +w9(S/Ho)) +s](1 -t)}

E{[aN/N _g(K. _dKi) -

g(L _q

1Li) _g(N _q1N1)
- dK)

g(H _Hi) - g(S _S ifly(l -t) +
+g(L1 _qL) +g(N1 - qN) +g(H1
-

= 0

_H)

-t)) = 0
(ôd)

E{{a/H -

+

g(K -dKi) - g(L_q

gHH (Ht -H t-1 )

-

-

iLi) _g(N _q1N1)
S1)]y(l - +
dK)

t)

[g(K1

g(L41 - qL) + g(N1 - qN) + g(FI1 Ht)

+g(S1 _S)]y+i(l _t1)qr _wL[wi(H/Ho)](1 -t)} = 0
(6e)

- dK1) - g(L - q1L1) - g5(N g(S - S1)]y(1 - + [g(K1

Efla/S -

t)
_Hi)
+
g(L1 - qL) + g(N1 - qN) + g(H1 - Ht)

-

N)
dKt)

+g5(S1 _S)]y+1(1 -t )r+1
-w Lt H
t =
ttt(w2/H0)(1 _tK)
where
=

f(K,

Lt,

Nt,

H,

S, Kt - dKtl,

Lt —

N_q1N1. Ht_Htl, S_Si)

0

17
The final equation of the model is the expression for the wage bill of production workers (3).

I

estimate equation (3) and the five first-order con-

ditions (6) on data for U.S. manufacturing.

The data

are described in the

Appendix.

4. Results
Estimation is carried out using non-linear three stage least squares.

Realized values replace the conditional expectations. The error terms in
the resulting equations are strictly expectational (except for the measure-

ment errors v in equation (3)). In particular note that the productivity
shock v from equation (2) does not enter the system (6). That is, the
shock is embodied by the output data. The shock does not appear even if
it is serially correlated.9

Data known at time t are valid instrumental variables. The
instruments used are the level and logs of the factors, Kt ,
Ht ,
,

and St ,

the level of the factor prices, w

the tax rate, t ,

turn, ri ,

survival

rate of labor,

Lt.
,

,

the

Nt

and

rate of re-

and a constant and trend. Only the lagged rate of return

is a valid instrument because rt is not known until the beginning of

period t+l .

Although output appears in the equations, it, like the fac-

tors, is endogenous. Output is not used as an instrumental variable.
Rotemberg (1984) shows that if the overidentifying restrictions of the model
do not hold exactly what different lists of instruments can yield differ-

ing estimates. I discuss the importance of this issue in Section 5.1.
Table I gives the estimates of the parameters of the firm's deci-

sion problem. Column (i) gives estimates where there are no interrelated
adjustment costs; column (ii) gives them for where there are no adjustment

costs for the work weeks of capital and labor, Ht and S. ,

but

where

the stock of capital, production workers, and non-production workers, Kt

18

and

,

are subject to interrelated adjustment costs. All other

interrelated adjustment costs always differ insignificantly and economically unimportantly from zero.

Consider the estimates of the parameters of equation (3) relating
hours and shift work to wages. The estimate of the overtime premium,

w1

is 0.42 in column (i) and 0.50 in column (ii). The estimate in column (ii)
is exactly the theoretical value; the estimate in column (i) is close to

it. Hence, the estimate of the function for the wage bill is broadly consistent with the stylized facts about overtime pay.

As anticipated in the theoretical discussion, the estimated premium

for work on the late shift, w2 ,

is

small. The estimated premium of 0.05

in either column (1) or (ii) is consistent with the observation from the

Area Wage Survey discussed above. The time series evidence does not rely
on the information about the wage premium given in the Area Wage Survey.

Both the evidence and the time series evidence point to a late shift prem-

ium substantially below that of the overtime premium. I discuss below the

implications of the estimate of w2 for the estimate of the output elasticity of the work week •of capital.

Consider now the estimates of the output elasticities. The elastic-

ities for production workers,

aL ,

and non-production workers, aN

and the implied elasticity for capital,

aK ,

are

consistent with their

shares in national income. The elasticity of hours of production workers,
Ht ,

is

Lt .

If they were equal, production workers and their hours would be perfect

only slightly larger than that of the stock of production workers,

substitutes!0 In that case, the level of labor input could be treated
as man-hours rather than workers and hours separately. The adjustment costs,
which depend on the changes in inputs, and the contribution to the wage
bill, are, of course, still very different for hours and workers.

19

The output elasticity of the work week of capital,

a ,

mated to be only 0.026. Recall that the theoretical value of

to that of aK ,

is

esti-

a is equal

which is plausibly estimated to be about one-quarter.

Hence, if the estimate of the shift premium is taken from the data on the
average wage, the productivity of shift work is estimated to be very low.

The only way for the model to be consistent with that data is for the implied productivity of lengthening the work week of capital to be very low.
This finding is consistent with the observed low apparent productivity of
shift work found in studies discussed in footnote 2.
As argued above, the data on average wages may be misleading about

the marginal cost of work on late shifts. Specifically, if firms and workers
have an implicit contract to share work on late shifts equally among workers
and if the pattern of such work is reasonably predictable, the straight-

time wage might average a low wage for work during the day and a high wage

for work during the night. In that case, the average wage is a poor mdicator of the marginal cost of increasing shift work to the company.

11

Consider the coefficients measuring the lost output from changing

the amount of an input. Column (i) of Table I gives estimates without

interrelated adjustment costs. Colun (ii) gives estimates with interrelated adjustment costs for capital, production workers, and non-production

workers. All other interrelated adjustment costs are insignificant and
insubstantial. Indeed, the adjustment costs for hours and shifts are likewise insignificant and economically unimportant so they are left out of
column (ii).

It is difficult to evaluate the size of the adjustment costs based

on the parameters alone. It is informative to consider the marginal adjustment costs that they imply. Consider first the costs of adjustment in the

equation for capital. The estimate of g of 0.0008 in column (ii) im-

20

plies

an adjustment cost of 5.0 percent of the cost of investment. That

is, for an average amount of investment, if there is no gross change in

the amount of labor, output is reduced by 5.0 percent of amount of the

investment. Average investment in the sample is 9.6 and average output is
62 measured in billions of 1972 dollars at quarterly rate. Therefore, the
foregone output caused by adding the average amount of capital is less than

one percent of average output. In particular, it is substantially smaller
than

other estimates ISummers (1981) and Heese (1980) , for example]. Pindyck

and Rotemberg (1983) ,

justment

on

the other hand, share my finding of moderate ad-

costs.

The interrelated adjustment costs for capital and production workers

and non-production workers are small: they are an order of magnitude smaller

than the own-adjustment cost of capital. The sign of g is negative,
so the cost of adjusting capital is reduced when non-production workers

are also being adjusted. That is, changing the stock of capital is facilitated by adding non-production workers.

It is more difficult to evaluate the adjustment costs of labor because although the stock is being adjusted, labor, unlike capital, is paid

as a flow. In any case, one can compare the marginal adjustment costs to
the flow cost of labor. In the case of production workers the adjustment
costs

are all small. Consider the estimate of 0.0403 for g in (ii),

that is, the adjustment cost for non-production workers. It is substantial:
the marginal adjustment cost for the typical change in non-production workers

is

about 3 percent

of output

per

quarter. Non-production workers receive

about one quarter of output.
In

summary,

the adjustment costs of both the work week of capital

and of labor are small. This result is not surprising given the relative
ease of adjusting the schedule of production relative to adjusting the stock

21

of

an input. The cost of adjusting production workers is also small. The

adjusting capital is significant but substantially smaller than
found in other studies. Thus, the estimate iuqlies quicker adjustment of
cost of

the

capital stock than others find.

5. Extensions
5.1. Failure of the Overidentifying Restrictions

The J statistic given at the bottom of Table I is a test of the
overidentifying restrictions of the model. It is distributed as chi.-squared
with degrees of freedom equal to number of instruments minus number of parm-

eters. There are 114 instruments (19 instruments times 6 equations) so
the overidentifying restrictions are soundly rejected in all the specifications.

Rotemberg (1984) suggests that if the overidentifying restrictions

of such a model are rejected, different instrument lists can yield widely

different estimates. Specifically, if the weighting of the instruments is
arbitrary, the estimates can have any probability limit. Note that the
weighting scheme is determined here not arbitrarily, but optimally by threestage least squares.

In order to evaluate the problem raised by Rotemberg's work,
I present estimates of the model with alternative instrument lists.

The first uses just price data; the second uses just quantity data. This
division is economically as well as statistically meaningful. That is,
the stochastic properties of prices and quantities are very different. In
particular, factor quantities have high variance and are strongly pro-cyclic;
factor prices vary little and are only weakly cyclic.

Estimates of the model with the two instruments lists are presented
in columns (ii) and (iii) of Table II. The exact lists are given at the

bottom of Table II. Both lists yield overidentification, but to a lesser

degree than by taking the union of the lists. Column (i) replicates column
(ii) of Table T for comparison. In columns (ii) and (iii), the parameters

and w2 are constrained to have the same value as in column (1). The

estimates of w1 and w2 ,

the

parameters of the equation for the wage

bill (3), require both price and quantity data to be identified. Hence,
they are left out of the experiment.
The estimates in column (ii) and column (iii) of Table II also strongly

reject the overidentifying restrIctions. Therefore, one cannot infer either
that it is only the price data or only the quantity data that are invalid

instruments. An economically meaningful way to evaluate the problem is
to see how much the estimates change given the rejection.

The estimate of aL ,

the

production workers' output elasticity,

changes little over the choice of instruments. Likewise, the coefficient

aH is stable. The coefficient aN ,

the

output elasticity for non-

production workers, and consequently capitaPs implied output elasticity,

does change substantially. The implied aK is column (ii) is 0.18 which

is somewhat lower than conventional estimates. The coefficients in
the adjustment cost change more, but they are less precisely estimated

in the first instance. The most serious change occurs in g ,
where the estimate not using price data implies a very high adjustment
Cost.

Errors in variables can be analyzed as a failure of the over-

identifying restrictions. The work week of capital contains a measurement
error because of the distribution of annual data to quarterly frequency.

The importance of this problem can be evaluated by considering estimates

where St is excluded from the instrument list. These estimates may be
consistent even if St is measured with error.

In column (Iv) of Table 2,

I present estimates of the model where

St and its log are excluded from

the instrument list. The estimates are virtually identical to those in
colunni (i). Hence, the measurement error does not have a quantitatively
important affect on the results.

The results of the analysis of varying the instruments is indecisive.
In particular, it does not isolate the invalid instruments as either belong-

ing to the price or quantity subset. With either set of instruments, about

half the coefficients are remarkably stable. The other half change by
amounts that would importantly affect the dynamics implied by the model,

but they never change so much as to take on values that could be excluded

a priori. Moreover, it is a minor victory that I am able to arrive at a
not entirely implausible set of estimates with the price data alone as in-

struments even though they vary much less than the quantities. In any case,
one is less confident about the point estimates of the parameters that change
importantly.

The rejection of the overidentifying restrictions indicates either
the theory is false or that some of the strong auxiliary assumptions are

false. These assumptions include a Cobb-Douglas production function and
the presence of only one lag in the cost of adjustment term. These assumptions could be relaxed by less parsimonious paranieterizations. A cost of
less parsimony is increased difficulty in interpreting the estimated pararn-

eters. On the other hand, a less parsimonious model is much more likely
to fail to reject the overidentifying restrictions. Seeking less parsiinonious models that fail to reject overidentifying restrictions is not necessarily

a promising research strategy. Tests of such models are likely to lack power.

24

5.2. Aggregation Problem
Problems with using aggregate data are pervasive in macroeconomics.
There is typically a tension between the theoretical discussion and the

empirical implementation. The aggregation problem is, perhaps, more severe
or more obvious, in the application to shift work. Specifically, finns
may be heterogeneous in their policies toward shift work. This section
evaluates the consequences of this aggregation problem for the analysis
in this paper.

Suppose that there are two types of firms, one that always works

only one shift and one that has varying shifts. Let S1 be the constant
work week of the first type of firm and S2 be the work week of the second
type of firm. I assume that the fraction of type one firms is a constant,
b .

Then

(7)

S =

bS1

4

(l-b)S2

All the variation in S comes from the second type of firm. Substituting
(7) into the objective function (5) and differentiating with respect to

the choice variable, S2 ,

yields

the following modified first-order con-

dition for S

(6e')

a5(1_b)Y/S = WtLtHtW2/HO

In light of the estimates of the adjustment cost coefficients, I set them

to zero. The tax rate cancels so (6e') is the familiar marginal product

equals marginal cost condition. The estimates of a in Table 2 do not

allow b to be separately identified. That b is large is another possible explanation for why a is estimated to be so much lower than aK
when w2 is freely estimated. If many firms, for whatever reason, never

25

work late shifts, then the interpretation that shift work is unproductive

seems to be correct. In any case, b can be regarded as a normalization
of equation (6e') because a5 is a free parameter. Therefore, the reasons
discussed in footnote 11, whether there is an aggregation problem of this
type affects the interpretation of the coefficients but does not change

the dynamics iilied by the estimated model.

6. Dynamics
In this section, I explore the dynamics implied by the estimates

of the model. In particular, I examine the effect of changes in the price
of capital and investors' required rate of return on the demand for capi-

tal and its work week. The estimates have broader application, but the aim
here is to study the demand for capital. Estimating the first-order conditions
of the model allows more realistic parameterizations than estimating the

solution directly. The model cannot, however, be solved analytically.
To study the dynamics, I linearize the first-order conditions to study the
response of the model to small changes in the cost of capital.

The exact procedure I follow is (a) linearize the estimates of equations (6) and (3) from Table I, column (ii), about the sample average values

for the variables;12 (b) put the linearized system in the canonical form
of Blanchard and Kahn (1980) and solve it; and (c) examining how the factor
demands change when the price affecting them are changed.

13

Linearizing

these equations is unlikely to be misleading. First, the estimated cost
of adjustment parameters carry implications for the

dynamics.

The

simula-

tions serve to illustrate what the estimates already imply. Second, the
cost of adjustment terms are linear except for multiplication by the level

of other variables. These terms govern the dynamics of the simulation.

26

Abel and Blanchard (1983) show linearizing such functional forms is a good
approximation.

Some assumption must be made to close the model. In particular,
though the representative firm in the manufacturing sector is a price-taker
in the labor market, the sector as a whole does not face elastic labor supply.

To the contrary, labor supply is highly inelastic, and hence bounds the
response to a shock that could otherwise make the economy expand indefinitely.
I add a final relationship to the system to take into account inelastic
labor supply.

I assume that the labor supply curve has a constant elasticity

of o.i.14 The equation that labor supply equals labor demand is solved
with equations (6) and (3).
I consider the effect of changing both the purchase price of capital

and the investors? required rate of return on the demand for capital and
its

work week.

I consider decreases in these two components of the iurplied

cost of capital, but the results are exactly reversed for increases. A
decrease

in the required rate of return of investors increases the discount

rate and hence increases the value of the firm. The discount rate, r
enters the del highly non-linearly. As I outline above, this problem is
overcome by linearizing the system. Bernanke (1983) uses a similar procedure.

Figures 1 through 4 give the response of the capital stock and its

work week to different changes in the price of capital and the rate of re-

turn. The changes can be thought as changes in tax rates. A decrease in
the purchase price of capital can arise when the investment tax credit is

increased or depreciation allowances are liberalized. A decrease in investors'
required rate of return may occur when the tax rate on investment income
is

reduced.

27

In Figure 1, I present the change in the demand for capital and its
work week for a permanent, ten percent reduction in the cost of capital.

The reduction is unexpected; once it occurs, it is expected to, and indeed
does, last indefinitely. The first column gives the change in the price.
The second and third columns give the percent change in the stock and work

week of capital. The fourth and fifth columns give the levels of the stock
and work week (deviation from steady state). In the long run, the capital
stock

increases by 3.1 percent and the work week of capital increases by 9.7

percent iiying respective elasticities of about one-third and one. The
capital stock is costly to adjust so it responds only gradually to the change
in

price. Half the adjustment has taken place after five quarters, which

is much more rapid than found in other studies. In a similar experiment,

Summers (1981) finds half the adjustment taking twenty years. The magnitudes
of the long run changes are comparable with those Summers estimates.'5

The work week of capital is costless to adjust. Indeed, it overshoots
its steady state value by 17 percent in quarter 3. It then gradually falls
to its steady state value. For the entire period of adjustment, the firm
has a lower capital stock than it desires given the new factor prices.
Hence, it correspondingly increases the utilization of its stock by expand-

ing its work week. Note that the figures give the response of demand for
capital and its work week to changes in prices. The response of equilibrium
quantities will be smaller and depend on elasticities of supply. In particular, the interest rate may rise when demand for capital is stimulated

by policies such as the investment tax credit. Noreover, the premium for
work on late shifts may rise in the face of large increases in demand by
firms

for night work.

28

In Figure 2, I present the response of capital to the ten
percent decrease in its cost that is expected in quarter I to be permanent. In quarter 9, the price of capital unexpectedly increases to its

original level. Through quarter 8, the dynamics are exactly as in the first

example. In quarter 9, when the firms

discover

that the reduction is only

temporary, they suddenly have capital substantially above the steady state

value of zero. Because of the ad-ustment cost, the stock only gradually
returns to its steady state value. On the other hand, the rate of utilization is free to adjust and therefore overshoots to offset the capital

stock being above its steady-state value. The work week approaches the
steady state from below.

Figure 3 gives

the response of capital to a permanent decrease

in investorst required rate of return.

It has a large effect on the

demand for capital because it increases the present discounted value
of cash flow as well as reducing the implied rental rate on capital. The
steady state increase in the capital stock from a ten percent reduction

in investors' required rate of return is 20.3 billion 1972 dollars, or ten

percent of the average stock.16 Because of the linearity of the solution,
the relative changes of the stock and the work week and the rates of adjust-

ment are exactly as in Figure 1. Note that the increase of the capital
stock would be smaller if the shock to the required rate of return were
not permanent, or, 'of course, if the shock were smaller.

In a final experiment, I consider an expected, future, permanent
reduction in the investors' required rate of return. But when the reduction is expected to take place, it is revealed that no reduction will take

place. Hence, the interest rate never changes. These dynamics are displayed

in Figure 4. Such a scenario could occur if the govermnent announces

a tax cut on investors' income to take effect in 9 quarters, if

29

the firms believe the government, and if the government then reneges on its

commitment. This is an effective policy for temporarily increasing the
capital stock, but one which cannot be repeated often [see Fischer (1980)].
Future flows from the current capital stock are discounted at a lower rate,

so the stock increases. In quarter 9, the firms discover they have been

misled. They only gradually reduce their capital stock, but immediately
adjust its utilization. Indeed, the utilization rate overshoots its steady
state value and approaches it from below.
I find a potentially substantial effect of the real interest rate and

the purchase price of capital on the demand for capital. The standard view
is, however, that "The rental price of capital, a conglomeration of interest

rate and tax variables, is not very useful in explaining quarterly data of
business fixed investment in the United States over the past twenty-five
years" fClark (1979, p. 104)] .

Clark

does not conclude that the cost of

capital is unimportant in theory, but that they do not vary enough given
slow adjustment of the stock to be important in the data.

The findings of this paper provide important challenges to this standard

view. First, I find a substantial effect of interest rates and factor prices
on the demand for capital. Second, the adjustment costs I estimate are
small enough so that the capital stock can respond somewhat to business-.

cycle frequency changes in interest rates and prices. Third, lower interest
rates increase the present discounted value of cash flow so future labor
services, which will be associated with the capital services, are also more
highly valued.

It is useful to consider why prices and interest rates are important

in my model but not in non-structural reduced forms such as considered by
Clark.

ISee also Bernanke (1983) for a related discussion.] My procedure

30

is as follows: I specify a structural model; I estimate the first-order
conditions of the model with a parameterization that is too complicated to
solve explicitly; and I linearize the estimated system to study its dynamics.

Clark estimates linear reduced forms. Although the linear reduced form
may correspond to some structural model, estimating it may not obey the

restrictions implied by the production function and by profit maximization

(in equation (6) for example))7 Consider equation (6a). The interest
rate enters the implied rental cost of capital by multiplying p ,

but

also by multiplying the future value of the factors. The implied reduced
form is highly non-linear in variables and parameters. It is easy to impose the appropriate restrictions by estimating the first-order condition.
By linearizing after estimating, I impose the restrictions, at least locally,
when examining the effect of prices and interest rates on investment.

7. Conclusion
This paper provides the analytic mechanism and empirical evidence
to analyze the dynamic demand for capital, labor, and their levels of util-

ization. The work week of capital measures the utilization of the stock.
It is constructed using data on the amount of shift work.
The productivity of extending the work week of capital must be low

relative to the costs given how few late shifts are worked. The average
wage premium for working on late shifts is low. This implies that the output
elasticity will be estimated to be low.

I consider two alternative explana-

tions of these facts, both of which are consistent with the data, and both

of which imply the same macroeconomic dynamics. The first is that the

31

marginal wage premium is much higher than the average wage premium. The
second

is that there is an aggregation problem if some firms have rules

against late shifts.

The estimated adjustment costs are also consistent with theory. The
adjustment cost on capital is again estimated to be much lower than found
in other studies, imtlying more plausible rates of response to stocks.

As with hours of production workers, the work week of capital is virtually

costless to adjust. Thus, it provides a margin to easily absorb transitory
shocks to product or factor prices.
Additionally, when the work week of capital is taken into account,

the output elasticity of the work week of labor is not substantially larger

than that of the stock of labor. Hence, the greater marginal product of

hours (Ht) compared to workers (Lt) the work week of capital is excluded
can be understood to arise because those extra hours imply a lengthening of
the work week of capital, not because a current worker working an extra

hour is more productive than a new worker. The estimates of (6) provide
some justification for letting hours and workers enter multiplicatively in

levels in the production function. On the other hand, their adjustment
costs and contribution to labor's compensation are very different.

The work week of capital is essentially costless to adjust so it
will respond immediately to shocks whereas the stock of capital will respond

slowly. The plausibly estimated adjustment costs imply that the rate of
adjustment is not instantaneous, but is much more rapid than as estimated

in other studies. The work week of capital provides an extra margin along
which to adjust. In the response to a shock, the work week of capital will
overshoot to compensate for the slow adjustment of the stock. The ma2nitude
of the overshooting is about twenty percent.

32

I find a large effect on the capital stock of changing interest rates

and

factor

prices. These estimates provide a challenge to the standard

view that prices are not important in determining demand for capital. The
long run elasticity of the capital stock with respect to the price of capi-

tal is estimated to be about thirty percent. The elasticity with respect
to the required rate of return is about one.

-D)

TABLE I

Estimate

of First-order Conditions (6)
and Equation for the Wage Bill (3)
1955 QIlI through 1980 QIlI

(i)

w

(ii)

.76
(.016)

.72
(.023)

.42

.50
(.044)

(.030)
.05

.05

(.001)

(.001)

(.005)

(.001)

aN

.28
(.004)

.27
(.004)

aH

.48
(.008)

.48
(.011)

.027
(.001)

.026
(.001)

.0005
(.0004)

.0008
(.0006)

aL

a5

*

-.0009
(.0009)

.1275
(.0296)

.0403
(.0302)

— .0001

(.0001)

ss

*

.0016
(.0005)

-.0020
(.0019)
.0149

(.00 36)
.1

358

362

errors in parentheses.
test of overidentifying restrictions [see Hansen (1982)].

Standard

*indicates

magnitude of estimate < .00005.

34

TABLE II

Estimate of First-order Conditions (6)
and Equation for the Wage Bill (3)
1955 QIlI through 1980 QIlI
Alternative Instrument Lists
(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

A

B

C

.72
(.0004)
.50

.72
(.0004)
.50

.72
(.0004)
.50

(i)

Instrument list:

AB
.72

wo

(.023)
.50
(.044)
.05
(.001)
.47
(.001)
.27

Wi
W

aL
aN

.05

(.004)

a
a5

.47

.47

(.008)

(.005)

.35
(.020)

.27
(.004)

.05
.47
(.005)
.27
(.004)

.48
(.007)
.026
(.0004)

.48

.48

(.011)

(.007)

.47
(.007)

.026

.026
(.0004)

.025
(.0004)

.0005
(.0008)

.0026

.0008

(.0006)

(.0008)

(.0007)

-.0009

—.0046

- .0007

(.0009)

(.0033)

.0009
(.0014)

.0873
(.0507)

.0448
(.0310)

(.001)
.0008

KK

.05

(.0009)

.0403

.7641

(.0302)
.0016

(.3260)

(.0005)

(.0011)

.0034
(.0007)

.0018
(.0005)

-.0020

-.0146

-.0013

-.0015

(.0019)

(.0128)

(.0029)

(.0019)

.0149
(.0036)

.0382
(.0244)

.0169
(.0063)

.0155
(.0036)

J

362

176

262

317

k

114

48

72

102

LN

.0023

Standard errors in parentheses.
J test of overidentifying restrictions [see Hansen (1982)], which is dis-

tributed as chi-squared with k degrees of freedom where k is the number
of instruments with time equations.

In columns Cii), (iii), and (iv), w1 and w2 are constrained (see text).

*indicates

Ins truinent
A

B

magnitude of estimate < .00005.
lists:
K
N
L
K
s , s
constant, •.trend,
w, p ,
constant, trend, K, L, N, H, S, log(K), log(L), log(N), log(H), log(S)

t,

r,

C constant, trend, tK, w, K, r, 5L, 5N q, K, L, N, H, log(K), log(L),
log(N), log(H) (that is, all excluding S and log(S)).

35

Figure 1

Response of Capital to a Permanent,
in the Price of Capital

Unexpected Ten Percent Decrease

0.0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

quo tiers

Note: Stock measured in billions of 1972 dollars.
hours.

Work week measured in

36

Figure 2

Response of Capital to an Unexpected Ten Percent Decrease in
Its Price Expected to be Permanent But Actually Lasting Eight
Quarters

7.0

5.0

3.0

1.0

-1.0

0

20

30

40

50

60

quarters

Note: Stock measured in billions of 1972 dollars. Work week measured in
hours.

37

Figure 3

Response of Capital to a Permanent, Unexpected Ten Percent Decrease
in Investors' Required Rate of Return

2:

0

10

20

30
quarters

40

50

60

Note: Stock measured in billions of 1972 dollars. Work week measured in
hours.

38

Figure 4

Response of Capital to a Future, Permanent Ten Percent Decrease
in Investors' Required Rate of Return When the Decrease Does Not
0 c cur

7.5

5.0

2.5

00

-2.5
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

quarters

Note: Stock measured in billions of 1972 dollars. Work week measured in
hours.

APPENDIX

A. Capacity Utilization Data
This Appendix discusses how published data on capacity utilization do

not represent directly data on capital utilization. Ideally, one would have
an independent measure of the rate of utilization of each of labor and cap-

ital. At any point in time, the firm has four choices, how much labor and
capital to hire or buy, and at what rate to use each. Because higher utilization has a cost, it does not always pay to have maximum utilization.

There are no published figures at the macroeconomic level for util-

ization of capital analogous to average hours of labor. An analogous figure
would measure the physical utilization of the capital. For a machine it
could measure the rate of speed of operation or percentage of the time it

is in operation. For a structure, it could measure the percentage of the
time it is in use. The published figures for capacity utilization reflect
the ratio of output to "potential output" rather than the actual utilization
of capital. One could imagine using energy consumption as a proxy for capital

utilization. Such a procedure again asks how much of an alternative factor
is utilized.

The Fed constructs its index of capacity utilization by dividing its
index of industrial production by an index of capacity measured in units
of output.

[See the Federal Reserve System, Measures of Capacity and

Capacity Utilization (1978) for details.] It bases the index of capacity
on McGraw-Hill surveys and the BEA's data on capital stock. The capacity
figures are available only annually; the Fed interpolates the within-year

figures. Therefore, most of the variation in the Fed's index of capacity
utilization is caused by variation in output. Indeed, the concept being

40

measured is close to output divided by potential or trend output.

The BEA constructs its series for capacity utilization from a quar-

terly survey of firms. In the survey's questionnaires the BEA fails to
define what it means by capacity utilization but it "believe[s] that most
respondents use a measure of 'maximum practical capacity. "

[See Bureau

of Economic Analysis, Handbook of Cyclical Indicators (1977, p. 25), emphasis
added. ]

The BEA defines maximum practical capacity as output where a stand-

ard work-week's of labor to be supplied.

Variations in both measures of capacity utilization come mainly from

the amount of labor input. Therefore, the choice of measured capacity
utilization is not independent from the choice of other inputs.

B. Data for the Estimates
The data are quarterly for manufacturing from 1955 through 1980.

The output data

are the Federal Reserve Board's quarterly index of

output in manufacturing scaled so it equals annual NIPA output in 1967.

The quarterly data for investment is from the Survey of Current Business.

Structures and equipment are aggregated. I construct the capital stock

data (Kt) using a fixed depreciation rate of 0.0175 per quarter and a
benchmark net capital stock of 311.8 billion 1972 dollars at the end of

1981 (see the Survey of Current Business (October 1982, p. 33)). This depreciation rate is also imposed in estimating the Euler equations.

The data for employment (Lt, N) ,

wages, the quit rate, and hours

are from the BLS establishment survey. The wage (wt) series is the average straight-time rate per hour for the production workers. The data on

average hourly earnings (w) are also used in equation (3). The hours
(Hr) series is total average weekly hours. Hours are multiplied by the

41

number of weeks in the quarter in the marginal cost expressions in the Euler

equations to express cash flow at quarterly rate. To construct the fixed
cost of employing a worker

s- and sN ),

I

divide the compensation minus

wages, salaries, and contribution to social insurance into the number of

workers using annual national income and product accounts data. These costs
include employer contributions to pensions and health insurance. The annual
NIPA figures are interpolated.
The expression for the price of capital is given in equation (4).

The purchase price

is the implicit deflator from the BEA. The

quarterly series for the present value of depreciation allowances (PVCCAt)

and the investment tax credit (ITCt) are those computed by Data Resources
Inc. The present value of depreciation allowances are computed using the
technique outlined by Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981). Expected tax savings
assuming current law remains unchanged are discounted by using the firm
structure of interest rates.

I estimate the required rate of return with

the after-tax, real return on three-month Treasury bills plus a constant
risk premiuiu of two percent per quarter.

a weighted average of the

return

I calculate the premium by taking

in excess of the return on Treasury bills

of the stock market and of corporate bonds. The weight for equity is 0.8.
The excess return of the stock market is 6,7 percent; the excess return of
corporate bonds is 0.6. ISee Ibbotson and Sinquefeld (1982, p. 15) .1

There-

fore, the premium is about eight percent at annual rate or about two percent
at quarterly rate.

Construction of the work week of capital is discussed in detail in

the text. The data are given in Table A-i.

42

TABLE A-i

The Work Week of Capital: St
United States Manufacturing Industry
(hours)

1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

1970
1971
1972

1973
1974
1975

1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981

1982

QI

Qil

Qill

QIV

54.

56.1
55.4
49.9
54.6
55.2
54.9
52.8
54.4
53.9
53.6
54.8
55.1
55.2
55.5
57.0
55.6
56.3
54.8
53.5
53.8
56.0
56.2
55.0
54.3
54.9
55.7
56.1
55.0
54.0
54.6
53.8

55.9
55.4

55.7
55.3
52.7
54.8
55.3
52.8
53.0
53.3
52.8
53.9
54.8
55.0
55.5
56.3
57.5
56.5
57.8
55.0
53.2
54.8

55.1
53.4
54.3
55.1
54.8
54.0
55.3
55.0
53.6
55.1

55.0
55.2
56.9
57.4
57.8
58.9
54.6
54.4
53.7
55.4
56.0
56.0
54.1
55.2
54.9
55.0
56.5
55.5
54.4
53.2

49.1

54.7
55.2
54.6
52.9
53.5
53.5
53.8
54.8
55.1
55.4
55.9

57.3
56.3
57.1
55.4

53.8
54.3
55.6
56.2
56.0
55.1

55.0
55.7
56.2
55.6
53.7
54.1
53.5

56.1

56.3
54.6
55.7
54.9
55.9
56.4
55.4
54.7
53.2
53.4

43

FOOTNOTES

1This paper is a revision of the second chapter of my 1984 M.I.T. Ph.D dissertation. I am very grateful to my committee, Stanley Fischer, Jerry
Hausman, and Olivier Blanchard, and to Andrew Abel, Ernst Berndt, Zvi
Griliches, N. Gregory Mankiw, James Poterba, David Romer, Julio Rotemberg,
and Lawrence Suimners for their extensive comments and discussion.

I grate-

fully acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Foundation
and

the Social Science Research Council Subcommittee on Monetary Research.

has long

been observed that most capital in most countries is idle most

of the time (.see Foss (1963, 1981) and Betancourt and Clague (1981)). For
example, the average work week of capital for United States manufacturing

industries is 55 hours according to the series to be discussed below. This
low level of utilization is common across countries. Moreover, businesses
typically plan investment so that most capital is idle most of the time

(see Marris (1964, 1970)). That is, many firms plan to operate only one
shift. Given that the productivity of capital is not constrained by preference, custom, law, or biology as is labor, it seems surprising that the

work week of capital only slightly exceeds that of labor. The biological
and social constraints on shift work are discussed in Mott, etal. (1965),

Maurice (1975), and Hedges and Sekscenski (1979). Mott, etal. provide
survey evidence on attitudes of workers and their families toward work on

late shifts. Work on late shifts yields substantial disutility beyond work
in the day, but the added disutility does not appear to be enough to explain

the low level of shift work. Maurice provides a summary of law about shift

work for a sample of developed countries. Hedges and Sekscenski survey the

44

biological literature on the physiological effects of work on late shifts.

Winston (1974, 1982) surveys the theoretical literature on the utilization

puzzle. Betancourt and Clague study the choice of shift work in a static
context.

31f there is only one shift then average hours of workers would also be the
average hours of capital.

4The sources of the annual data on the distribution of shift work is the

Bureau of Labor Statistics, Area Wage Surveys: Metropolitan Areas, United
States and Regional Summaries, various years. [The BLS report numbers are
1660—92, 1685—92, 1725-96, 1775-98, 1795-29, 1850—89, 1900—82, and 1950-77,

Table B-i.] I am grateful to the BLS for providing me with unpublished
data for years after 1978. Murray Foss provided me with part of an unpubfished monograph which alerted me to these data.

51n the estimates of the model itself, the data are not detrended.

6Feldstein and Foot (1971) and Eisner (1978) include capacity utilization

in a regression to explain investment. In their models, firms are quantity
constrained, so capacity utilization is a proxy for the shadow profitability

of investment. A quantity-constrained firm with low utilization has little
incentive, to add capacity.

7Shapiro (1984) gives more detailed consideration of a related model but
where capital is utilized at a constant rate given labor input.

45

8i estimate the required rate of return with

the

after-tax, real return on

three-month Treasury bills plus a constant risk premium of two percent per

quarter. See Appendix for details. An instrumental variables procedure
allows consistent estimation even though the rate of return is uncertain
and may, in general, covary with the other variables in equation (5).

9Use of output data makes the

productivity

shock observable (abstracting

from the sampling error in the estimated parameters). Hence, these estimates do not become unidentified in the presence of productivity shocks as

discussed by Garber and King (1983). In their paper, the shocks are unobservable. Of course, identification of this model, as with all models,

depends on assumptions on the error terms. In any case, the approach in
this paper of incorporating a particular productivity shock seems a substantial improvement over the standard practice of assuming that there are no
shocks at all.

10

If shifts are omitted from the analysis, the output elasticity of hours

will be substantially greater than that of production workers because the
hours of workers are then in part proxying for the hours of capital.

Consider rescaling the shift work equation (6e) by multiplying it by a
constant. Note that the estimated coefficients for the cost of adjustment
'

,

and so on) are essentially zero. Hence, multiplying (6e)

by a constant will simply increase a and w2 by the sane proportion.
Suppose we wished to constrain aS to equal the estimated aK ,

which

is about one-quarter. To achieve this, equation (6e) would be multiplied

by about ten. In particular, the implied w2 would be about ten times

46

the estimated value of 0.05, that is 0.5. Hence, if we imDose that the
productivity of capital and shifts are the same, the implied shift premium

is exactly the overtime premium. Hence, one way of understanding the low
propensity to use late shifts is that the actual cost of running late shifts

is substantially higher than the data seems to ily. Note, however, that
this issue only effects the interpretation of the coefficients. The dynamics
studied below are unchanged by the scale of equation (6e).

Kt = 202.0

,

Lt

d = 0.9825

,

s

and t = 0.49

.

= 13.6

142.1

=

,

4.8

=

N

,

s

=

,

II

1698.1

=

'

40.2

,

=

To calculate the intercept, a0 ,

St
'

=

55.0

P
in

=

62.5

=

12The average values needed to carry out the linearization are
,

0.68

q.
,

=

0.94

w

=

1.75

the production func-

tion (2) I set it so (2) holds given the average values and the parameter

estimates. I ignore technological progress so the simulations are deviations from the steady state.

alternative would be to simulate the non-linear Euler equations. Given
that more assuniptions are needed to simulate the model than to estimate it
(see footnote 14) ,

studying

the linearized system is a cost effective way

to approximate its dynamic properties. The simulations are carried out
using a computer program written by
Olivier Blanchard.

Jeffery

Zax and provided to me by

47

14Hausman (1981) estimates the uncompensated wage elasticity of labor suDply
to be virtually nil for adult males, but substantially higher for females.
Ten percent in a compromise.

I assume that non-production workers are in

elastic supply because the sector demands relatively few of them. Also,
implicit in the simulations is that the price of capital is given except
for the tax considerations and that capital is elastically supplied.

'5Suinmers studies the entire non-farm business economy which is over four

times the size of manufacturing. His simulation in Table 6 (p. 37) yields
results substantially similar to those in this paper in the long run, but
with much slower adjustment to the steady state.

16This change in the capital stock is larger than Summer's (p. 109). He

assumes inelastic labor supply, which could partially account for the differ-

ences. It may also be the case that my linearization breaks down for changes
this large.

'71n that I reject the overidentifying restrictions my estimates are not

consistent. It is difficult to judge the consistency of estimates in
Clark'S tradition.

48

REFERENCES

Abel,

A. B. (1979), Investment and the Value of Capital, Garland, New York.

_________ and 0. J. Blanchard (1983), "The Present Value of Profits and
the Cyclical Movements of Investment," National Bureau of Economic

Research Working Paper No. 1122, Cambridge, MA. Forthcoming in
Econometrica.

Betancourt, R. R. and C. K. Clague (1981), Capital Utilization: A Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Bernanke, B. S. (1983), "The Determinants of Investment: Another Look,"
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 73, 71-73.

Blanchard, 0. J. and C. H. Kahn (1980), "The Solution of Linear Difference
Models under Rational Expectations," Econometrica, 48, 1305-1311.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1978),

Federal Reserve

Measures of Capacity and Capacity Utilization, Washington.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce (1977), Handbook
of Cyclical Indicators, G.P.O., Washington.

Bureau of Labor Statistics, Area Wage Surveys: Metropolitan Areas, United
States and Regional Summaries, various numbers.

Chow, G. C. and A. Lin (1971), "Best Linear Unbiased Interpolation Distribution, and Extrapolation of Time Series by Related Series," Review of
Economics and Statistics, 53, 372-375.

Clark, P. K. (1979), "Investment in the 1970s: Theory, Performance, and
Prediction," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 73-113.

Eisner, R. (1978), Factors in Business Investment, National Bureau of Economic
Research General Series No. 102, Ballinger, Cambridge, MA.

49

Feldstein, M. S. and D. K. Foot (1971), "The Other Half of Gross Investment:
Replacement and Modernization Expenditures," Review of Economics and
Statistics, 53, 49-58.

Fischer, S. (1980), "Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation and Benevolent Dissembling Government," Journal of Economic Dyanmics and Control, 2, 93-107.

Foss, 1. F. (1963), "The Utilization of Capital Equipment: Postwar Compared
with Prewar," Survey of Current Business, 43, 8-16.

_________ (1981), Changes in the Workweek of Fixed Capital: U.S. Manufacturing,
1929 to 1976, American Enterprise Institute, Washington.
Garber, P. M. and R. G. King (1983) , "Deep Structural Excavation? A Critique

of Euler Equation Methods," National Bureau of Economic Research Technical Working Paper No. 31, Cambridge, MA.

Hansen, L. P. (1982), "Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments
Estimators," Econometrica, 50, 1029-1054.

_________ and K. S. Singleton (1982), "Generalized Instrumental Variables
Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models," Econometrica,
50, 1269-1286.

Hausman, J. A. (1981), "Labor Supply," in H. J. Aaron and J. A. Pechman, eds.,
How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior, The Brookings Institution,
Washington.

Hedges, J. N. and E. S. Sekscenski (1979), "Workers and Late Shifts in a
Changing Economy," Monthly Labor Review, 102, 14-22.

Ibbotson, R. G. and R. A. Sinquefeld (1982), Stocks, Bonds, Bills and

tion: The Past and the Future, Financial Analyst Research Foundation,
Charlottesville, VA.

Jorgenson,

D. W. and M. A. Sullivan (1981), "Inflation and Corporate Capital

Recovery," in C. R. Hulten, ed., Depreciation, Inflation, and the
Taxation of Income from Capital, The Urban Institute, Washington.

50

Kennan, J. (1979), "The Estimation of Partial Adjustment Nodels with Rational
Expectations," Econometrica, 47, 1441-1455.

Marris, R. (1964), The Economics of Capacity Utilisation: A Report on
shift Work, Caithridge University Press, Cathridge.

_________ (1970), Multiple Shiftwork, National Economic Development Office
Monograph 1, HMSO, London.

Maurice, N. (1975), Shift Work: Economic Advantages and Social Cost, International Labor Office, Geneva.

Meese, R. (1980), "Dynamic Factor Demand Schedules for Labor and Capital under
Rational Expectations," Journal of Econometrics, 14, 141-158.

Mott, P. E., F. C. Mann Q. McLoughlin, and D. P. Waick (1965), Shift Work:
The Social, Psychological, and Physical Consequences, University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

Nadiri, N. I. and S. Rosen (1969), "Interrelated Factor Demand Functions,"
American Economic Review, 59, 457-471.
Pindyck, R. S. and J. J. Roternberg (1983), "Dynamic Factor Demands under Rational

Expectations," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 85, 223-238.

Rotemberg, J. J. (1984), "Interpreting the Statistical Failure of Some Rational
Expectations Macroeconomic Models," American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings, 74, 188-193.

Sargent, T. J. (1978), "Estimation of Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules under
Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, 86, 1009-1044.
Shapiro, H. D. (1984), "The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor," Cowles

Foundation Discussion Paper No. 735, New Haven, CT. Forthcoming in
Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Summers,

L. H. (1981),

Brookings

Papers

"Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-Theory Approach,"
on Economic Activity, No. 1, 67-127.

51

Taubman, P. and P. Gottschalk (1971) , "The Average Workweek of Capital in

Manufacturing," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 66,
448—455.

Taubman, P. and M. Wilkinson (1970), "User Cost, Capacity Utilization, and
Investment Theory," International Economic Review, 11, 209-215.
Tatorn, J. A. (1980), "The 'Problem' of Real Wages and Productivity," Journal

of Political Economy, 88, 385-394.

Winston, G. C. (1974), "The Theory of Capital Utilization and Idleness,"
Journal of Economic Literature, 12, 1301-1320.

__________ (1982), The Timing of Economic Activities, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.

