                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                COMMUNITY-WIDE JOB LOSS AND TEENAGE FERTILITY

                                           Elizabeth Ananat
                                        Anna Gassman-Pines
                                      Christina M. Gibson-Davis

                                         Working Paper 19003
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19003


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2013




The authors would like to thank Eric Bannister, Dania Francis, Matthew Panhans, and Megan Reynolds
for their outstanding research assistance. They gratefully acknowledge the support of the Smith Richardson
Foundation; Ananat and Gibson-Davis gratefully acknowledge the support of the William T. Grant
Foundation; and Gassman-Pines gratefully acknowledges the support of the Foundation for Child Development.
Helpful feedback on this paper was provided by: seminar participants at the UC-Davis Economics
Department; meeting participants at the Population Association of America; and members of the Beyond
Test Scores research team at Duke University, especially Charlie Clotfelter, Phil Cook, Ken Dodge,
Helen Ladd, and Jake Vigdor. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Elizabeth Ananat, Anna Gassman-Pines, and Christina M. Gibson-Davis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Community-Wide Job Loss and Teenage Fertility
Elizabeth Ananat, Anna Gassman-Pines, and Christina M. Gibson-Davis
NBER Working Paper No. 19003
April 2013
JEL No. J13,J65

                                                ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of economic downturns on the birth rates of 15- to 19-year-olds, using county-level
business closings and layoffs in North Carolina over 1990-2010 as a plausibly exogenous source of
variation in the strength of the local economy. We find little effect of job losses on the white teen birth
rate. For black teens, however, job losses to 1% of the working-age population decrease the birth rate
by around 2%. Birth declines start five months after the job loss and then last for over a year. Linking
the timing of job losses and conceptions suggests that black teen births decline due to increased terminations
and perhaps also changes in pre-pregnancy behaviors; national data on risk behaviors also provide
evidence that black teens reduce sexual activity and increase contraception use in response to job losses.
Job losses seven to nine months after conception do not affect teen birth rates, indicating that teens
do not anticipate job losses and lending confidence that job losses are “shocks” that can be viewed
as quasi-experimental variation. We also find evidence that relatively advantaged black teens disproportionately
abort after job losses, implying that the average child born to a black teen in the wake of job loss is
relatively more disadvantaged.


Elizabeth Ananat                                       Christina M. Gibson-Davis
Sanford School of Public Policy                        Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University                                        Duke University
Box 90245                                              Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708                                       Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                               cgibson@duke.edu
eoananat@duke.edu

Anna Gassman-Pines
Sanford School of Public Policy
Duke University
Box 90245
Durham, NC 27708
agassman.pines@duke.edu
       It is well known that, in the United States, overall fertility falls during economic

downturns (Bongaarts and Feeney 1998; Fishback, et al. 2007; Rindfuss, et al. 1988). These

aggregate declines, however, mask heterogeneous responses across demographic groups.

Different racial, marital status, and education groups diverge in their fertility responses to

weakened economic circumstances, in both magnitude and direction (Dehejia and Lleras-Muney

2004; Schaller 2012). The response of teen fertility, in particular, to downturns is even less clear.

Most work has not focused on teen fertility, and the little extant research provides inconclusive

evidence (Arkes and Klerman 2009; Levine 2002). Contradictory findings may be due to the

endogeneity and imprecision of the economic measures used, combined with the low base rate of

teen, as compared to adult, childbearing (Martin et al. 2012).

       While teen fertility accounts for a relatively small share of U.S. births, it is nevertheless

of independent demographic and policy interest. Teen childbearing is believed to be influenced

by a different set of decisions than is adult fertility (Levine 2001). Many teens are deciding

whether or not to initiate sex for the first time, or whether to initiate sex within the context of

their current relationship (Abma et al. 2010), whereas adults are typically sexually active. As a

result, teens have three behavioral margins through which to react to economic news (sexual

activity, contraception, and abortion) while the vast majority of adults have only two

(contraception and abortion). In this paper we are able to provide evidence on all three potential

ways in which teens may respond to downturns.

       Teens also have different primary activities as alternatives to paid employment. Many

teens view education as the main alternative to work, while many adult women view

childbearing as the main alternative. Within Becker’s (Becker 1960; Becker and Tomes 1976)

canonical framework on fertility, this difference means that while the income effects of



                                                                                                       3
downturns, in terms of reduced economic support from family members for new mothers and

their babies, may be similar between teens and adults (Caldwell and Antonucci 1997),

substitution effects (moving toward childbearing when pushed by market forces away from paid

employment) may be substantially weaker for teens. Indeed, research on teens’ educational

investments suggests that the high school dropout rate declines (Black et al. 2005) and college

attendance increases (Betts and McFarland 1995) in response to downturns. Moreover, because

teens have longer time horizons for future childbearing, postponing fertility in response to

income shocks may be less costly for teens than for adults. In the Becker framework, then,

reduced family resources put downward pressure on both teen and adult fertility but teens may

be more likely than adults to substitute toward education rather than childbearing when the labor

market is weak. Thus, the net response of teen fertility to downturns is predicted to be more

strongly negative than the adult response.

        There are also, however, reasons that teen fertility might increase in response to

downturns. A weak economy increases stress and anxiety (Catalano et al. 2011), and depresses

expectations and aspirations about the future (Guiliano and Spilimbergo 2009). These types of

changes have been linked to increased teen sexual activity (Buhi and Goodson 2007; Carpenter

2005; Kirby 2001a; Vesely et al. 2004). Moreover, recent work by Kearney and Levine (2012)

argues that U.S. teens exhibit higher fertility when they face greater “despair” about the

prospects of getting ahead economically.

        Finally, changes in teen and adult fertility have different policy implications. Neither pro-

nor anti-natalist policies are popular in the U.S., suggesting that policymakers do not have strong

opinions about the current overall U.S. fertility rate. By contrast, the U.S. teen fertility rate is the

highest in the developed world (Kearney and Levine 2012), and policymakers of all political



                                                                                                       4
persuasions generally agree that teen fertility should be reduced. While recent research argues

that teen fertility is a symptom rather than a cause of disadvantage (Kearney and Levine 2012),

disagreement on this point remains and concerns about the impact of having a teen mother on

child outcomes persist (National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy 2011).

       This study aims to shed light on the relationship between downturns and teen

childbearing. The colloquial term “downturn,” however, lacks a precise economic definition.

National recessions are denoted by negative growth in gross domestic product, but a “bad

economy” on a smaller scale generally refers to weak demand in the local labor market. The

most easily available (and therefore most commonly used) measures of labor market conditions,

however— including local unemployment rates, the employment-to-population ratio, or total

area income—are influenced by changes in labor supply as well as labor demand. A negative

correlation between changes in the employment-to-population ratio and in area fertility, for

example, may reflect an impulse to increased childbearing that leads to lower labor-force

attachment among women instead of a decline in labor market conditions that drive residents to

consider parenthood as an alternative to work.

       To avoid these concerns, we instead use a measure of sudden increases in forced

separations from employment to capture change in local economic conditions. We measure

monthly county-level business closings and layoffs, which, as shown in previous studies

(Jacobson et al. 1993; Stevens 1997) and confirmed in our own tests (Ananat et al. 2011a,b),

typically occur because of changes in local circumstances that are unrelated to changes in the

characteristics of the workers (e.g. increased pressure from globalization). Such job losses are

considered exogenous “shocks” to the workers and allow us to estimate the causal effect of local

downturns on fertility rates.



                                                                                                   5
         We have constructed a dataset of county-level monthly business layoffs and closings for

North Carolina from 1990 to 2010, and we combine these data with vital statistics records of

births among women ages 15-19 in North Carolina counties over the same period. We use the

timing of job loss relative to gestation, which is included in the birth record, to estimate whether

variation in the fertility rate is driven by changes in abortion or pre-conception behaviors. We

infer that changes in the birth rate arising from job losses that occur zero to four months post-

conception reflect changes in abortion behavior (as these pregnancies already existed when the

job loss occurred). We infer that changes in the birth rate arising from job losses that occur one

to nine months pre-conception reflect the net effect of changes in contraceptive practice and

sexual activity as well as decisions about abortion made after conception. We also conduct

falsification tests in which we measure the effect of job loss seven to nine months after

conception on births, because teens cannot alter their fertility decisions so close to giving birth.

Significant results in these tests would suggest either that job losses do not come as a surprise or

that some other community change simultaneously leads both to job losses and to changes in

teen fertility. We also utilize data from national surveys to provide additional evidence on sexual

activity and contraceptive practices.

         We examine outcomes separately for white and black teens.1 While both white and black

communities experience and are affected by job loss (Ananat et al. 2011b), black teen fertility

may respond differently to local job losses than white teen fertility does, for two reasons. First,

underlying patterns of teen reproductive behavior vary by race. In 2008, the white teen birth rate

in the U.S. was 26.7 per 1,000; the black teen birth rate was 62.8 per 1,000 (Martin et al. 2010).

In North Carolina, rates were 32.8 for whites and 64.4 for blacks (authors’ calculation). White

1
  In the early years of the sample the Latino population in North Carolina was too small to provide stable county-
level measures of teen birthrates. Throughout the paper, the terms “white” and “black” are used to refer to non-
Hispanic members of those racial groups.

                                                                                                                     6
teens also use contraception less consistently than blacks, but blacks have higher pregnancy rates

and are disproportionately more likely to have an abortion (Jones et al. 2010; Martinez and

Copen 2010). This apparent contradiction in contraception use and pregnancy rates could be due

to differences in sexual activity between black and white teens. These different underlying

patterns may also change in divergent ways in response to community-wide job losses. Second,

black teenagers may feel the economic effects of job loss more immediately than whites. Black

families may be more likely to directly experience job loss than white families (Kletzer 1998).

Given that black teenagers are more likely to live in households with lower incomes and fewer

assets (Darity and Nicholson 2005), their families may also be less able to buffer the economic

consequences of job loss. Among those not experiencing individual or family job loss first-hand,

black teenagers may also be more worried than whites about their future job prospects, as

minority workers are more vulnerable to economic downturns than white workers (Kletzer

1998).

         Our study makes several contributions to the literature. First, ours is the first study of teen

fertility to use forced job losses, rather than the unemployment rate, to determine the causal

relationship between economic downturns and teen birth rates. As discussed above, forced job

losses, unlike changes in other measures of the local labor market, are likely to be exogenously

related to changes in fertility. Moreover, business closings and layoffs represent unequivocally

bad economic news. By contrast, changes in other measures, such as the unemployment rate, are

an ambiguous measure of changes in economic circumstances. That rate can go up because

positive economic news or a promising new job placement program draw new potential workers

into job search, and it can go down if workers become discouraged in their search and drop out

of the labor market. Although measures such as the employment-to-population ratio or total local



                                                                                                      7
income are unaffected by discouraged workers, such measures may change spuriously for other

reasons (e.g., because women decide to leave work to start families, or because changing

technology causes workers to voluntarily go back to school). Reliance on any of these more

traditional measures as the measure of a bad economy may partially account for the

inconclusiveness of past studies on the effects of downturns (e.g. (Arkes and Klerman 2009;

Levine 2002). Using forced job losses ensures that our measure of economic change is both

exogenous and clearly negative.

        Second, our study is the only one of which we are aware to utilize monthly, rather than

yearly or quarterly, measures of economic circumstances and of teen births. Monthly data are

critical because they allow us to calculate the elapsed time between the month of the negative

economic shock and the month of conception, permitting us to separately distinguish termination

and pre-conception fertility responses to job loss. Monthly data also allow us to precisely

identify how long economic shocks continue to influence teen fertility after they occur. Third,

this is the first study to estimate the effect of local job loss on county-level birth rates. Using a

more highly resolved geographic unit allows us to more closely measure local economic

circumstances. North Carolina is the only state to provide a long-term panel of job loss estimates

at the county level. Fourth, to bolster our results from North Carolina, we utilize national-level

data to demonstrate that the behavioral responses found in North Carolina reflect those in the

U.S. overall and to lend insight into the mechanisms by which teen fertility falls. Finally, our

data set includes data through 2010, making our results reflective of current patterns of teen

childbearing, and therefore directly relevant to the most recent economic crisis.

        We find that black but not white teens reduce their childbearing in response to local job

losses. Reductions are concentrated among black teens who are relatively advantaged, as proxied



                                                                                                        8
by teens having made age-appropriate educational progress. Evidence from the timing of job loss

and from surveys suggests that reductions are driven by all three potential channels: increased

abortion; increased use of contraception; and decreased sexual activity. Job losses that occur

seven to nine months after a conception do not affect teen birth rates; passing this falsification

check suggests that job losses are a surprise to the community and provides confidence that job

losses are exogenous to fertility behavior. Complementary models on women ages 20 to 24 find

small and insignificant effects of job loss on fertility, consistent with the hypothesis that the

pressures of downturns are more uniformly and strongly negative for teen fertility than for young

adults’ fertility.



Method

Data

        Birth data come from the North Carolina Detailed Birth Record Database (NCDBR). The

NCDBR contains information on all live births in the state, obtained through the long form birth

certificate. It includes maternal demographic information, including age, race, and residence at

time of delivery. The data include births that occurred to white or black women who were

between the ages of 15 and 19 and resided in North Carolina, totaling 231,712 births between

January 1990 and June 2010.2 County-level monthly birth rates for white and black teens were

generated to serve as the dependent variables in the analysis. Birth rates were indexed by the

month of conception, rather than the month of delivery, using the exact date of birth and

gestational age at birth (reported on the long form birth certificate) to calculate the date of

conception. Birth rates for each county-month were calculated as the number of births conceived


2
 In July 2010, NC instituted a new birth certificate form, with changes in the type and measurement of outcomes,
and post-June data are not comparable to pre-June data

                                                                                                                   9
that month in that county to women in that age and race group per 1,000 women in that age and

race group in that county in that year.3 The monthly birth rates were then annualized (multiplied

by 12) for ease of interpretation.

        The independent variable of interest, community-wide job loss, comes from the North

Carolina Job Loss databank (NCJLD). The NCJLD uses data from the North Carolina

Employment Security Commission (NCESC) to construct monthly information on any business

that closes or lays off workers. The NCESC gathers information from both firms and a statewide

survey of newspaper accounts of closings and layoffs. The NCJLD contains, for all 100 counties

and for the years 1990-2010, the company name, industry, and number of workers terminated.

We conduct tests to determine whether fertility behaviors change prior to the job losses (if, for

example, community residents hear rumors prior to the job loss and teens alter their fertility

behaviors in response); results discussed below suggest that they do not. Total job losses in each

county in each month are scaled by the working-age (ages 25-64) population in that county that

year. Roughly two-thirds of our job losses reflect firm closings, while the rest represent layoffs.

        Job losses vary both across counties and over time. Maximum losses in each county over

the time period under observation range from zero, for five small farming communities, to 9% of

the working-age population. The intraclass correlation, calculated as the ratio of the between-

county variance in job loss to the total variance, is 0.0119. Thus, only 1.19% of the variation in

job loss occurs because of variation between counties; the remaining variation arises from

within-county variation over time.




3
  We considered three sources of time-varying measures of county population: decennial Census data with linear
interpolation used for inter-Census years; estimates from the North Carolina Governor’s Office, and Surveillance
Epidemiology and End Results estimates from the National Cancer Institute. Each of these sources provided data
that correlated above .99 with each other source and estimates are robust to using any source.

                                                                                                                   10
       Our job loss measure is more likely to reflect exogenous changes in the local economy

than is the unemployment rate, which is determined both by economic change and by

phenomena such as “discouraged workers” that may separately influence fertility. As one would

expect, however, our measure does predict an increase in the unemployment rate. Within

counties (controlling for county and year fixed effects and county-specific linear trends), a job

loss to one percent of a county’s working-age population leads to an increase in the

unemployment rate the following quarter of 0.49% (standard error=0.06); the effect fades in the

next quarter, causing an increase in unemployment relative to baseline of 0.37% (standard

error=0.04). The effect continues to fade in subsequent quarters.

       The entire period January 1990-June 2010 consists of 24,600 county-months (100

counties in North Carolina, with 12 months per year, over 20.5 years). However, conceptions

occurring during months for which job losses for the relevant time periods (either 12 months

before or nine months after conception) are not available are excluded from the sample. This

restriction eliminates conceptions occurring in 1990, the last three months of 2009, and the first

six months of 2010, with 22,500 county-months remaining. We further restrict the sample to a

balanced panel of counties that contain at least five white and five black teens during the entire

period; 91 counties meet this restriction. The final analysis sample includes 20,475 county-

months.



Analytic Plan

       We use ordinary least squares regression to model the effect of community job loss on

birth rates. The models estimate the effect of the number of recent jobs lost in a given county in

a given month on the subsequent birth rates for teens in that county; following Chamberlain



                                                                                                     11
(1982), we include job losses with different timing relative to conception in the same model. We

use the following Eq. 1:
             ௠ାସ
 ௖௠௬ = ଵ ∑௜ୀ௠ ௖௜ + ଶ ∑௠ିଵ              ௠ାଽ
                            ௜ୀ௠ିଽ ௖௜ + ଷ ∑௜ୀ௠ା଻ ௖௜ + ௠ + ௖ + ௖ ×  + ௬ +                 (1)

where BRcmy is the annualized rate of births to a given demographic group (e.g., white teens)

conceived in month m in year y in county c and JLci represents the number of jobs lost to

closings and layoffs in that county c in month i, as discussed in more detail below. Time is

indexed relative to conception date, rather than birth date, because birth dates conditional on

conception timing might be affected by a worsening economy (e.g. the share of births that are

pre-term might increase). The models include dichotomous indicators for: month of conception

(௠ ), in order to capture seasonal variation in conceptions; county of residence (௖ ) and county

over-time trends (௖ × ), in order to capture permanent and linearly-evolving differences in

conceptions by county; and year of conception (௬ ), in order to capture state-wide changes that

may affect conceptions in all counties in a given year. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors

are clustered at the county level to adjust for non-independence of observations within a county

over time. All models are weighted by the county-level race-specific population of 15- to 19-

year-olds. Unweighted models provide very similar but less precise results.

       Using this modeling approach means that estimates isolate the effect of job losses that

were “shocks” to a county, relative to the overall economy in the state each year and relative to

the county’s own gradually evolving labor market. Likewise, estimates isolate birth rate “jumps”

in a county, relative to overall birth rates for that demographic group in the state in that year and

relative to the county’s own gradually evolving birth rate for that demographic group.

       Job losses are measured over three time periods relative to pregnancies. First,

ଵ represents the effect of job losses that occur zero to four months post-conception on the


                                                                                                   12
number of already-extant pregnancies that result in births. Abortion behavior, but not

contraception or sexual-activity decisions, can affect births on this margin. Second, ଶ represents

the effect of job losses that occur one to nine months pre-conception4 on the rate of pregnancies

conceived and then realized as births. Job losses may affect births on this margin by changing

pre-pregnancy health behaviors that affect conception rates (sexual activity and/or contraception)

and/or by changing abortion behavior post-conception. Third, ଷ represents the effect of job

losses that occur seven to nine months post-conception on the number of already-extant

pregnancies that result in births. We expect that ଷ = 0, because teens cannot respond to job

losses that occur so close to the birth by avoiding birth. An estimate of ଷ that is significantly

different from zero would suggest either: that teens anticipate job losses; that their observed

birthrates are affected by other actions taken in response to job losses, such as migration; or that

some other community change is occurring that drives both job losses and teen fertility. Any

such explanation would cast doubt on the validity of our identification strategy. Therefore

estimates of ଷ serve as falsification checks.

         The underlying rates of pre-pregnancy behaviors or abortion cannot be estimated using

North Carolina data, as they are not accurately observed at the county level by demographic

group.5 Instead, changes in pre-pregnancy and abortion behaviors are inferred by examining

changes in birth rates in response to differently timed job displacement (in addition, in part three

of the Results section we examine national evidence on changes in reported pre-pregnancy

behaviors). For example, consider an instance of job loss that occurred in January of 2000. Any
4
  When separate measures for job losses in each of a series of three-month intervals preceding the conception are
included in a model, effects for one-three, four-six, and seven-nine months are significant and of similar magnitude,
while effects more than nine months prior to conception are small and insignificant; results are presented in
Appendix Table A1. For efficiency, we combine job losses for one-nine months into a single measure and do not
include job losses for earlier periods in our main specification.
5
  Attempts were made to analyze micro-level North Carolina abortion data; however, these data were missing
important demographic indicators in such a high percentage of cases as to render the data unusable. Nationally, both
black and white teens have significant abortion rates (Jones, Finer and Singh 2010).

                                                                                                                  13
deviation from the expected average birth rate from May to September among births with

conceptions prior to January (a change in the rate of births in May of at least 20 weeks gestation,

or a change in the rate of births in September of at least 34 weeks gestation) would represent a

change in the outcome of pregnancies that were already conceived when the job loss occurred.

The most likely cause is a change in the termination rate (changes in miscarriage rates are

discussed below). Deviations from the expected average birth rate among births conceived in

February through November of 2000, after job loss takes place, could by contrast result from any

or all of the following: changes in the termination rate, changes in sexual activity, and changes in

contraception.

        In the text, we interpret our results as a percentage change in the birth rate associated

with a 1% job loss to the working-age population. For example, consider a county with 100,000

adults aged 25-64 that experienced exactly one instance of job loss during the period under

study. If that job loss occurred on January 1, 2000, and affected 1,000 individuals, then the value

of our job loss measure for that county would be 1,000/100,000, or 1.00%, during the post-

conception (termination) period for births conceived between September and December 1999,

and zero otherwise.6 An OLS estimate of ଵ = -2 can be interpreted to mean that a job loss to

1% of a county’s working-age population on January first resulting in an annualized rate of two

fewer births per 1,000 teens who were in their first four months of pregnancy on January first. If

the estimate is for black teens, for whom the average county base rate of births conceived over

the 1991-2009 period is 74.1, a decline of 2.7% in the birth rate (-2/74.1) would be reported in

the text.




6
 For the pre-pregnancy job loss measure, the value would be 1.00% for births conceived between February and
November 2000, and zero otherwise.

                                                                                                              14
Results

    1. Main Results

         North Carolina’s (NC) teen birth rate tracks well with the national birth rate (results not

presented, but available upon request). Over the period 1991-2010, the NC teen birth rate was

always higher than the national teen birth rate, but it followed the same general trend: rising in

the early 1990s and declining steadily thereafter.

         Table 1 displays descriptive statistics for the community-wide job losses and Table 2

displays descriptive statistics for teen birth rates and teen sexual behavior. Table 1 reports that, in

a typical county, on average each month, job losses affected 0.05% of the working-age

population; the maximum was 9.01%. During the five months post-conception, the average total

job loss was 0.27% and during the nine months pre-conception, the average total job loss was

0.47%. For comparison, during the Great Recession (December 2007 to June 2009), the average

monthly rate of job loss nationally was 0.22%.7 Consistent with other research on teenage

fertility (Hamilton et al. 2010), the average county-level black teenage birth rate was nearly

twice as high as it was for whites (Table 2).

         Table 3 presents the results of estimating Eq. 1 for all teens, divided by race. 8 Results

indicate that job losses have no effect on the fertility rate of white teens, but have a negative

effect on the fertility rate of black teens. We can reject that effects of either pre-conception or

zero-four month post-conception (early pregnancy) job losses are the same for blacks and whites

(p=.020 for the difference between early pregnancy estimates for blacks and whites; p=.0001 for



7
  Authors’ calculations, using data obtained from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
8
  In other specifications, we considered whether job loss was non-linearly related to teen fertility, by squaring job
loss, by logging job loss, and by dividing our continuous measure of job loss into dichotomous categories (e.g., no
job loss, .01 to 1% job loss, etc.) We also considered specifications in which the effect of job loss varied by the level
of pre-existing unemployment. We found little evidence supporting a non-linear model of the relationship between
job losses and teen fertility, or that the effect of job loss varied by levels of pre-existing unemployment.

                                                                                                                      15
the difference between pre-conception estimates for blacks and whites). Effects for blacks are

large in magnitude: job losses that occur zero to four months after conception to 1% of the

working-age population decrease the birth rate by 1.15 births per 1,000; job losses that occur one

to nine months before conception decrease the birth rate by 1.74 births per 1,000 (p < .05 for

both). These changes in births represent a 1.6% to 2.4% decrease in the birth rate of black teens.

The estimated effects on black teen fertility for pre- and early-pregnancy job losses do not differ

from each other (p=.379), leaving it unclear whether black teens respond to job loss only by

adjusting their termination behavior in response to both pre-conception and early-pregnancy

shocks, or whether pre-conception behaviors also change when teens receive information about

changes in their communities’ economic circumstances prior to conception. We explore this

topic further in Section 3.

       Job losses seven to nine months after conception do not affect the birth rates of either

blacks or whites; point estimates for both groups are small and insignificant. Further, for blacks,

the effect of job losses seven to nine months after conception differs significantly from the

estimate for pre-conception losses (p=.069), and are in the opposite direction from both pre-

conception and early-pregnancy losses. These findings provide evidence that estimates of the

relationship between job losses and fertility are not driven by spurious factors, as such factors

would be unlikely to operate just before or four months after but not seven months after

conception. These findings also provide reassurance that job losses are unanticipated; if

information about upcoming job losses typically leaks prior to occurrence, then teens would be

able to respond to the news prior to its announcement in their third trimester.

   Table 4 presents the results for the effect of job loss on the birth rates of young women ages

20-24. Job loss does not affect the birth rates of either white or black women in their early 20s.



                                                                                                     16
Point estimates for black young adult women are one-third to one-half the size of those for black

teens, and do not approach statistical significance. Further, because birthrates are much higher

for adult women than for teens, the point estimates imply potential birthrate changes of only

0.3% to 0.5%, nearly an order of magnitude smaller than our estimates for teens. The null

findings among young women are supportive of the hypothesis that the pressures of local

downturns are more uniformly and strongly negative for teen fertility than for adult women’s

fertility.

    2. Specification checks

         To further address potential concerns that findings represent a spurious correlation

between job loss and fertility rates, we estimate several additional models that test the validity of

the main findings. The first set of analyses examines whether out-migration rather than

individual fertility declines can account for the observed drop in births, by measuring the

relationship between county-level population counts for teenagers and job losses last year (Table

5).9 Significant effects of job losses on migration would affect the interpretation of the main

results, as it would open the possibility that some of the effect of job loss on teenage birth rates

might stem from changes in the size or composition of the teenage population in a given county.

Results indicate no relationship between lagged job losses and the total number of white female

teens or black female teens. Thus, migration does not appear to be driving the results.

         In a series of models, we omit the county, the year, or the monthly fixed effects; results

are similar in magnitude and direction, although less precisely estimated when fewer fixed



9
  These analyses can only be conducted using SEER data, as SEER measures vary non-linearly within decade,
population group and county. Monthly population counts of teenagers are not available. In other work (Ananat,
Gassman-Pines and Gibson-Davis 2011) we have estimated the effect of job losses last year on this year’s county
public school enrollment for various grades and found no relationship; as those data represent actual counts rather
than population estimates, they provide a stronger additional falsification test and lend confidence that endogenous
migration is not occurring.

                                                                                                                   17
effects are included. In other models, each county or each year is dropped one at a time; results

are substantially similar across all of these models, indicating that results are not driven by one

county or one year. Finally, we run models controlling for county female population over time or

for the contemporaneous unemployment rate; again, results are substantially similar. These

models provide additional evidence that we have identified a true relationship between

community job loss and teen birth rates, and that the main findings are not a spurious result of a

particular regression approach or set of observations.



       3. Mechanisms

            We next explore why the decrease in black teen childbearing occurs. In particular, we

examine who among black teens appears to reduce their fertility, and how they reduce fertility.

            In order to answer the first question, we examine changes in characteristics of teens

observed giving birth. We use the NCDBR to measure two characteristics that likely identify

levels of sociodemographic disadvantage: whether the teen fails to report the father’s name on

the birth certificate and whether the teen has not made age-appropriate educational progress. We

define a teen as having not made age-appropriate educational progress if she has not completed

the minimum grade that would be expected for her age (e.g., a teen who is 15 should have at

least finished eighth grade; 19-year-olds should have graduated from high school).10 Following

the “marginal child” literature (Ananat et al. 2009; Gruber et al. 1999), we identify those who

select out of childbearing when local job losses occur by estimating changes in the average

characteristics of those who give birth, using Eq. 2:

     ln (   ௖௠௬   = ଵ ∑௠ାସ            ௠ିଵ              ௠ାଽ
                        ௜ୀ௠ ௖௜ + ଶ ∑௜ୀ௠ିଽ ௖௜ + ଷ ∑௜ୀ௠ା଻ ௖௜ + ௠ + ௖ + ௖ ×  + ௬ +                   (2)


10
  Other measures of disadvantage, such as whether the mother used Medicaid to pay for the birth, are not available
until December 2010.

                                                                                                                18
where Scmy is the share of teens observed giving birth in county c in month m in year y, who have

a given characteristic (e.g. failed to make age-appropriate educational progress), and the other

variables are as defined in Eq. 1.

       Estimates of Eq.2 are presented in Table 6. Consistent with our findings of no change in

the birth rate for white teens, we also find no effects of job loss on the markers of social

disadvantage for white teens. By contrast, results indicate that job losses, in reducing the black

teen birth rate, also alter the composition of the population of black teenagers who give birth.

Black teens with lower levels of disadvantage become less represented among black teens giving

birth in the first few months after job losses occur. Job losses zero to four months post-

conception increase the share of black teens giving birth who have not made age-appropriate

educational progress by 0.52% and increase the share of black teens giving birth who do not

report the father’s name on the birth certificate by 0.34%. These point estimates suggest that the

entire increase in abortions among those black teens who are pregnant at the time of the job loss

occurs among those who have made age-appropriate educational progress and who would have

identified the father if they had given birth. By contrast, there is no change in the educational

composition of black teens giving birth among those who conceive after job losses, and the share

reporting father characteristics actually increases, a point we explore further below.

       We next examine how teens appear to reduce their fertility. From our earlier results, we

have evidence that black teens reduce fertility by increasing pregnancy terminations, and our

results are consistent with the possibility that black teens increase pregnancy avoidance as well.

Our data do not provide direct evidence on pregnancy avoidance, however, and it is possible that

job losses, even when they occur prior to conception, do not affect conceptions but instead

merely increase abortions. Moreover, if job losses do increase pregnancy avoidance, they could



                                                                                                    19
do so through either reduced sexual activity, increased use of contraception, or both.

Unfortunately, no representative data on sexual activity and contraception use exist at the county

level. Therefore, in order to investigate whether and how pregnancy avoidance behaviors change

in response to job losses, we turn to U.S. state-level survey data on sexual activity and

contraceptive behaviors and U.S. state-level data on job loss.

        Data on teen sexual behaviors are taken from the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS),

which is fielded biannually in February through April of odd years by the Centers for Disease

Control (CDC). In states that agree to participate, the CDC draws a probability sample of all high

schools in the state and then randomly samples individual classes from within each high school

(e.g., Mrs. Smith’s second period Algebra class). All students in the selected classes comprise

the sample for that state. If the overall survey response rate is at least 60%, the CDC considers

the results to be generalizable to the entire population of the state’s high school students. Only

years in which states’ response rates meet this threshold are included in the analyses.

        The YRBS asks teens to report on recent sexual behaviors. We consider three behaviors:

whether the teen has had sexual intercourse in the past three months; whether, among those who

have had sexual intercourse, the teen has had sex with two or more partners in the past three

months; and whether, among those who have had sexual intercourse, the teen used any method

of birth control the last time she had sex. Because this sample is school-based, it will not capture

behaviors of teens who are not in school; however, since changes in fertility appear to occur

either proportionally or more than proportionally among teens who have made age-appropriate

educational progress, these data can nonetheless be informative about the behavioral margins

driving fertility reductions.




                                                                                                     20
        U.S. state-level job loss data are taken from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Mass

Layoff Statistics, which report, for each state and the District of Columbia when available, the

number of workers in a year who are affected by mass closings or mass layoffs that last longer

than 30 days. 11 Data are available from 1995 to 2009. Summary statistics indicate that on

average, 0.72 % of the working-age population files unemployment claims due to mass layoffs

and closings each year (Table 1), and the measure has substantial variation in job losses across

states and years. For more details on the U.S. state-level job loss data, see Ananat et al. (2011).

        In order to identify the effects of job losses on sexual behavior, we estimate Eq. 3:

           Behavior୧ୱ୲ = βJobLossୱ୲ିଵ + δ୲ + δୱ + ε                                                            (3)

where Behaviorist is the self-reported behavior (e.g. having used contraception the last time she

had sex) of teen girl i12 surveyed in state s in year t. JobLossୱ୲ିଵ is the percent of workers in a

state affected by mass job losses13 for the year-long period up to and including the quarter the

YRBS was administered. The fixed effects for state (δୱ ) and year (δ୲ ) are included to control for

persistent differences between states and for any event that may have affected all states in a

given year. We report heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors that are clustered at the state

level. All models are weighted to correct for the YRBS’s complex survey design.

        Results are presented in Table 7. In response to job loss, black teenagers report no change

in the incidence of sex in the past three months, but are significantly less likely to have had two

or more sexual partners, and are significantly more likely to report using a method to prevent

pregnancy the last time they had sex. White teenagers report no change in the incidence of sex or


11
   “Mass” is defined as 50 or more workers. BLS does not collect data on layoffs or closings affecting fewer than 50
workers.
12
   We are unable to measure outcomes as logged population shares as in equation (2) because of the YRBS’s
complex survey design. Therefore, we estimate equation (3) as a linear probability model.
13
   The technique used to combine the two measures of job loss available at the state level, separations and total
initial claimants (see Table 1), are described in Ananat et al. (2012).

                                                                                                                 21
the number of sexual partners; the latter effect is significantly different from the effect for black

teens (p = .07). White teens are more likely to employ pregnancy prevention in the wake of job

losses than they are in the absence of job loss; however, the effect for whites is half the size of

the effect for blacks, and the difference between the black and white coefficients is statistically

significant (p < .05). These results are consistent with the hypothesis that black teens, more so

than white teens, increase pregnancy avoidance behaviors in response to job losses. In addition,

the reduction in black teens’ reports of multiple sexual partners after job losses can help explain

why the share of births with no father characteristics reported falls for births conceived after job

losses (see Table 5). A shift toward monogamous partnering will increase certainty about

paternity, and may improve relationship quality as well. Thus the smaller number of black teens

who do conceive and give birth after job losses may on average be more comfortable reporting

the father on the birth certificate than were the teens who gave birth prior to the job loss. While

results from the YRBS can only be suggestive about the case of North Carolina,14 estimates are

consistent with the hypothesis that the decrease in black teen fertility in North Carolina

subsequent to job losses is driven by changes in sexual activity and increased pregnancy

avoidance as well as increases in the use of abortion.



Discussion

         The decision to bear a child as a teenager is a profoundly important choice with

potentially life-altering implications. We find evidence that changes to the local economy affect

black teens’ childbearing choices. Job losses to 1% of a county’s working-age population



14
  State-level estimates of effects of job losses on black and white teen fertility are consistent with our North
Carolina estimates. However, because job loss data for other states are only provided quarterly, it is not possible to
estimate our models using state-level data.

                                                                                                                     22
decrease black teenagers’ fertility by about 2%. White teen fertility is not affected, nor is the

fertility of women in their early 20s.

       Our identification strategy allows us to use the timing of job loss relative to the timing of

births to examine how teens’ fertility responses to losses vary depending on when, relative to

conception, the losses occur. Community-wide job losses significantly affect the realization of

black teen births that have already been conceived. Although we cannot measure abortion rates

directly, changes in abortion behaviors most likely account for these effects, since job losses zero

to four months, but not seven to nine months, after conception affect the birth rate. Local job

losses also affect the rate of black teen births conceived one to nine months later. As job losses

could affect births that have not yet been conceived by causing changes in sexual activity or

contraception, as well as by continuing to affect termination behaviors, we are unable to say

exactly what behavioral change or changes account for this decline in births. Using national data,

however, we find evidence that job losses decrease the likelihood that a black teen had two or

more sexual partners in the past three months and increase the probability that a black teen used

birth control the last time she had sex. White teen girls reported a much smaller increase in birth

control use, and reported no change in having had two or more partners. The concordance of

these self-reported behavior patterns by race nationally with the race-specific birth responses we

observe in North Carolina lends confidence that we are identifying a true, rather than spurious,

set of causal relationships between job losses and teen fertility.

       We find no evidence that local job losses affect the fertility of young women ages 20 to

24. These results are consistent with a Becker-style model in which the effects of local

downturns on teen fertility are more strongly and uniformly negative than are effects on young

adult women.



                                                                                                    23
         Evidence on changes in the composition of the population of teens who give birth

subsequent to job losses suggests that relatively advantaged black teens disproportionately

increase terminations in response to local downturns. Among those who persist in giving birth

when job losses occur during pregnancy, the share of black mothers who do not report father

characteristics on the birth certificate increases, as does the share who are not making age-

appropriate educational progress. One implication of this pattern is that job losses temporarily

worsen the birth circumstances of the average child born to a black teen mother, although sexual

and contraceptive behavioral changes after job losses undo some of these effects in the medium

term. Concordant with our other findings, we observe no change in the composition of white

teens giving birth.

         An alternate explanation for declines in teen births is increased miscarriage. We believe

this is unlikely to be the correct explanation, for the following reasons. First, it is somewhat

unlikely that black but not white teens would experience increased miscarriage; it is even less

plausible that black teens who are making age-appropriate educational progress would

experience larger increases in miscarriage than would others. Second, although stress has been

associated with increased miscarriage risk (Burton and Jauniaux 2004), most of the variance in

the miscarriage rate occurs because of congenital anomalies, not because of maternal behaviors

or experiences (Goddijn and Leschot 2000; Regan and Rai 2000). The declines in births

observed here could only be accounted for by a 20% increase in miscarriage,15 which is much

larger than research on miscarriage has suggested is plausible. Third, the national data showing



15
   The miscarriage rate for women is estimated to range from 11 to 12 miscarriages per 1,000 pregnancies (Knudsen
et al. 1991; Regaet al. 1989; Warburton and Fraser 1964). Assuming a miscarriage rate of 12%, then the implied
pregnancy rate is 84.2 (based on a birthrate of 74.1 births per 1,000 women and pregnancy rate of 74.1/(100-.12), or
84.2%). A miscarriage rate of 12% would thus translate into 10.1 losses per 1,000 black teens (82.6-74.1) (for
miscarriage rate of 11%, 9.2 losses would be found). The observed decrease of over 2 births for this group, if caused
by increased miscarriage, implies over a 20% increase in the miscarriage rate due to job loss.

                                                                                                                  24
changes in sexual activity and contraceptive use imply that not all of the change in fertility could

come from miscarriage.

       We also do not believe the drop in observed black teen births is driven by migration

among prospective mothers out of the community. While we cannot test migration in a manner

completely parallel with the fertility analysis due to data limitations, we find no significant

relationship between last year’s job losses and this year’s teenage population. Moreover, we note

that for migration to account for our results, it would have to be of a very specific form and

follow a very specific pattern of timing. It would have to differentially occur among black teens;

differentially occur among those black teens who have made age-appropriate educational

progress; differentially occur among those black teens who report father characteristics on the

birth certificate in a way that varies based on pregnancy timing; and occur five to nine months

after job losses occur but not one to three months afterwards. By contrast, at the state level, job

losses would have to cause out-of-state migration differentially among black teens, and

differently among those black teens who do not use contraception and who have high numbers of

sexual partners. Thus, we do not believe migration can account for our results.

       We therefore believe we have identified true changes in black teens’ decision-making

about fertility, and not changes in miscarriage or migration. While it is possible that teens reduce

fertility because of a perception that their families are now less able to provide them with

financial support (an effect likely to be stronger among black teens, because black families have

lower levels of resources and assets than white families (Darity and Nicholson 2005)), note that

local job losses may change teens’ sexual and fertility behaviors even if they do not experience

personal financial hardship, and this may be especially true for black teens. For example, in the

wake of a changed opportunity structure following job losses, teens, especially those who are



                                                                                                      25
age-appropriate educational progress, may feel an increased impetus to further educational

investment; since black teen mothers are much more likely to have made age-appropriate

educational progress than white teen mothers (see Table 2), this effect may be concentrated

among blacks. In addition, teens may perceive that their communities will be less able to provide

them with assistance, and since black families have lower resources than white families, black

teens may be particularly dependent on community support.16 Finally, teenage sexual behavior is

determined in part by perceived norms (Kirby 2001b), which can spread quickly throughout a

peer group (Fletcher 2007). Job loss that affects some teens’ decisions might in this way have

ripple effects on other teens, particularly within race group, throughout a community.

Unfortunately, we cannot identify which of these mechanisms account for the effects we

identify; this is a promising area for future research. In addition, we have concentrated on one

state. Although North Carolina is varied in population, its birth rate tracks well with national

averages, and our state-level analysis is consistent with our North Carolina findings, further work

is necessary to fully document the relationships between job losses and teen fertility across the

U.S.

         Despite these limitations, we provide important results showing that increases in

community-wide job losses decrease the birth rates of black teens, but not of white teens or of

young adult women. These results align with those of other studies of fertility (Levine 2002), as

well as those showing that blacks are disproportionately impacted by economic downturns

(Fairlie and Kletzer 1998; Farber 2004). Moreover, our results underscore that economic

contractions have consequences that reach far beyond those typically considered by

policymakers.

16
  We note, however, that immediate changes in funding for community services are unlikely to be responsible for
the decrease in teen fertility because effects occur too quickly after job losses to be driven by government or non-
profit funding cycles.

                                                                                                                   26
References


Abma, J.C., G.M. Martinez, and C.E. Copen. (2010). Teenagers in the United States: Sexual

       Activity, Contraceptive Use, and Childbearing, National Survey of Family Growth 2006-

       2008. Vital and Health Statistics 23:1-47.

Ananat, E. O., D.V. Francis, A. Gassman-Pines, and C. Gibson-Davis. (2011). Children Left

       Behind: The Effects of Statewide Job Loss on Student Achievement. NBER Working

       Paper No. 17104.

Ananat, E. O., A. Gassman-Pines, and C. Gibson-Davis. (2011). The effects of local employment

       losses on children's educational achievement. Pp. 299-313 in Whither Opportunity?

       Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income Children, edited by G.

       J. Duncan and R. Murnane. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.

Ananat, E.O., J. Gruber, P.B. Levine, and D. Staiger. (2009). Abortion and Selection. Review of

       Economics and Statistics 91:124-136.

Arkes, J.and J.A. Klerman. (2009). Understanding the Link between the Economy and Teenage

       Sexual Behavior and Fertility Outcomes. Journal of Population Economics 22:517-536.

Becker, G.S. (1960). An Economic Analysis of Fertility. Pp. 209-231 in Demographic and

       Economic Change in Developed Countries, edited by G.S. Becker. Princeton, NJ:

       Princeton University Press.

Becker, G.S.and N. Tomes. (1976). Child Endowments and the Quantity of Chidlren. Journal of

       Political Economy 84:S143-S162.

Betts, J.R.and L.L. McFarland. (1995). Safe Port in a Storm: The Impact of Labor Market

       Conditions on Community College Enrollments. The Journal of Human Resources

       30:741-765.

                                                                                             27
Black, D.A., T.G. McKinnish, and S.S. Sanders. (2005). Tight Labor Markets and the Demand

       for Education: Evidence from the Coal Boom and Bust. Industrial & Labor Relations

       Review 59:3-15.

Bongaarts, J.and G. Feeney. (1998). On the Quantum and Tempo of Fertility. Population and

       Development Review 24:271-291.

Buhi, E.R.and P. Goodson. (2007). Predictors of Adolescent Sexual Behavior and Intention: A

       Theory-Guided Systematic Review. Journal of Adolescent Health 40:4-21.

Burton, G.J.and E. Jauniaux. (2004). Placental Oxidative Stress: From Miscarriage to

       Preeclampsia. Reproductive Sciences 11:342-352.

Caldwell, C.H.and T.C. Antonucci. (1997). Childbearing During Adolescence: Mental Health

       Risks and Opportunities. Pp. 220-245 in Health Risks and Developmental Transitions

       During Adolescence, edited by J. Schulenberg, J.L. Maggs, and K. Hurrelmann.

       Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

Carpenter, C. (2005). Youth Alcohol Use and Risky Sexual Behavior: Evidence from Underage

       Drunk Driving Laws. Journal of Health Economics 24:613-628.

Catalano, R.F., S. Goldman-Mellor, K. Saxton, C. Margerison-Zilko, M. Subbaraman, K.

       LeWinn, and E. Anderson. (2011). The Health Effects of Economic Decline. Annual

       Review of Public Health 32:431-450.

Chamberlain, G. (1982). Multivariate Regression Models for Panel Data. Journal of

       Econometrics 18:5-45.

Darity, W.A., Jr.and M.J. Nicholson. (2005). Racial Wealth Inequality and the Black Family. in

       African American Family Life: Ecological and Cultural Diversity, edited by V.C.

       McLoyd, N.E. Hill, and K.A. Dodge. New York: The Guilford Press.



                                                                                            28
Dehejia, R.and A. Lleras-Muney. (2004). Booms, Busts, and Babies' Health. The Quarterly

       Journal of Economics 119:1091-1130.

Fairlie, R.W.and L.G. Kletzer. (1998). Jobs Lost, Jobs Regained: An Analysis of Black/White

       Differences in Job Displacement in the 1980s. Industrial Relations 37:460-477.

Farber, H.S. (2004). Job Loss in the United States, 1981–2001. Research in Labor Economics

       23:69-117.

Fishback, P.V., M.R. Haines, and S. Kantor. (2007). Births, Deaths, and New Deal Relief

       During the Great Depression. Review of Economics and Statistics 89:1-14.

Fletcher, J.M. (2007). Social Multipliers in Sexual Initiation Decisions among U.S. High School

       Students. Demography 44:373-388.

Goddijn, M.and N.J. Leschot.(2000). Genetic Aspects of Miscarriage. Bailliere's Clinical

       Obstetrics and Gynaecology 14:855-865.

Gruber, J., P. Levine, and D. Staiger. (1999). Abortion Legalization and Child Living

       Circumstances: Who Is the “Marginal Child”? The Quarterly Journal of Economics

       114:263-291.

Guiliano, P.and A. Spilimbergo. (2009). Growing up in a Recession: Beliefs and the

       Macroeconomy. NBER Working Paper No. 15321.

Hamilton, B.E., J.A. Martin, and S.J. Ventura. (2010). Births: Preliminary Data for 2009. in

       National Vital Statistics Reports, vol 59, no 3. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for

       Health Statistics.

Jacobson, L.S., R.J. LaLonde, and D.G. Sullivan. (1993). Earnings Losses of Displaced

       Workers. The American Economic Review 83:685-709.




                                                                                               29
Jones, R.K., L.B. Finer, and S. Singh. (2010). Characteristics of U.S. Abortion Patients, 2008.

       New York: Guttmacher Institute.

Kearney, M.S.and P.B. Levine. (2012). Why Is the Teen Birth Rate in the United States So High

       and Why Does It Matter? Journal of Economic Perspectives 26:141-166.

Kirby, D. (2001)a. Emerging Answers: Research Findings on Programs to Reduce Teen

       Pregnancy. Washington, DC: National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy.

Kirby, D. (2001)b. Understanding What Works and What Doesn't in Reducing Adolescent

       Sexual Risk-Taking. Family Planning Perspectives 33:276-281.

Kletzer, L.G. (1998). Job Displacement. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 12:115-136.

Knudsen, U.B., V. Hansen, S. Juul, and N.J. Secher. (1991). Prognosis of a New Pregnancy

       Following Previous Spontaneous Abortions. European Journal of Obstetrics &

       Gynecology and Reproductive Biology 39:31-36.

Levine, P. (2001). The Sexual Activity and Birth-Control Use of American Teenagers. Pp. 167-

       217 in Risky Behavior among Youths: An Economic Analysis, edited by J. Gruber.

       Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Levine, P. (2002). The Impact of Social Policy and Economic Activity Throughout the Fertility

       Decision Tree. in NBER Working Paper No.9021. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of

       Economic Research.

Martin, J.A., B.E. Hamilton, P.D. Sutton, S.J. Ventura, T.J. Mathews, and M.J.K. Osterman.

       (2010). Births: Final Data for 2008. National Vital Statistics Reports 59.

Martin, J.A., B.E. Hamilton, S.J. Ventura, M.J.K. Osterman, E.C. Wilson, and T.J. Mathews.

       (2012). Births: Final Data for 2010. in National Vital Statistics Reports, vol 60, no 2.

       Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.



                                                                                                  30
Martinez, G.and C.E. Copen. (2010). Teenagers in the United States: Sexual Activity,

       Contraceptive Use, and Childbearing, National Survey of Family Growth 2006–2008. in

       Vital Health Stat 23 (30). Hyattsville, MD National Center for Health Statistics.

National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy. (2011). Counting It Up: The

       Public Costs of Teen Childbearing. Washington, DC.

Rega, L., P.R. Braude, and P.L. Trembath. (1989). Influence of Past Reproductive Performance

       on Risk of Spontaneous Abortion. British Medical Journal 299:541-545.

Regan, L.and R. Rai. (2000). Epidemiology and the Medical Causes of Miscarriage Bailliere's

       Clinical Obstetrics and Gynaecology 14:839-854.

Rindfuss, R.R., S.P. Morgan, and G. Swicegood. (1988). First Births in America: Changes in the

       Timing of Parenthood. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Schaller, J. (2012). Booms, Busts, and Fertility: Testing the Becker Model Using Gender-

       Specific Labor Demand. Davis, CA: University of California - Davis.

Stevens, A.H. (1997). Persistent Effects of Job Displacement: The Importance of Multiple Job

       Losses. Journal of Labor Economics 15:165-188.

Vesely, S.K., V.H. Wyatt, R.F. Oman, C.B. Aspy, M.C. Keglerd, S. Rodine, L. Marshalle, and

       K.R. McLeroy. (2004). The Potential Protective Effects of Youth Assets from

       Adolescent Sexual Risk Behaviors. Journal of Adolescent Health 34:356-365

Warburton, D.and F.C. Fraser. (1964). Spontaneous Abortion Risks in Man: Data from

       Reproductive Histories Collected in a Medical Genetics Unit. American Journal of

       Human Genetics 16:1-25.




                                                                                               31
Table 1- Summary Statistics: Job Losses as a Percent of Working-Age (25-64) Population

                                           Mean         SD
                          a
North Carolina counties
 0-4 months after conception                .27        (.55)
 1-9 months prior to conception             .47        (.76)
 7-9 months after conception                .16        (.40)
 Overall monthly job loss                   .05        (.22)

Sample size                            20,475 county-months

    Overall annual job loss                 .61        (.90)

Sample size                              1,729 county-years

U.S. states
                       b
 Annual separations                         .75        (.48)
                               c
 Annual total initial claimants             .72        (.54)

Sample size                                506 state-years

a
 Measured as the total number of workers who lost jobs during the period as a percent of the
county's working age (25-64) population.
b
Measured as the total number of workers separated from employment due to mass layoffs or
mass closings as a percent of the state's working-age (25-64) population.
c
 Measured as the total number of initial claimants for Unemployment Insurance due to mass
layoffs or mass closings as a percent of the state's working-age (25-64) population.




                                                                                               32
Table 2 - Summary Statistics: Birth Rates, Characteristics of Teen Mothers, and Sexual
Behaviors
                                                   Whites 15-19 Blacks 15-19
                                                      Mean          Mean
                                                      (SD)          (SD)
North Carolina counties
 Birth Rate per 1,000                                   43.7          73.2
                                                       (36.6)        (72.6)
      Sample size                                     20,475 county-months

     Female population                                 1,842           809
                                                     (2246.9)        (1340.8)
      Sample size                                      1,729 county-years
     Share of births to teen mothers:
      who do not report father characteristics        14.93%         30.95%
                                                      (21.35)        (29.59)
      Sample size                                     17,755         15,165

      who have not made age-appropriate               32.32%         22.19%
                          a
      educational progress                            (27.43)        (24.72)
      Sample size                                     17,750         15,160

U.S. states
Had sexual intercourse in past 3 months              31.12%          39.88%
                                                      (46.3)         (48.97)
     Sample size                                     109,523         20,548

Had sexual intercourse with 2 or more partners       14.02%          17.42%
                b
in past 3 months                                     (34.72)         (37.93)
  Sample size                                        43,472          11,089

                                          b
Used any birth control, last time had sex             81.70%         75.76%
                                                      (38.67)        (42.85)
     Sample size                                     46,697          11,318

a
    Mother has not completed minimum grade that would be expected for her age.
b
    Among those who have ever had sex.



                                                                                         33
Table 3 - Regressions of Birth Rates on Job Loss, Women ages 15-19, by Race: 1991-
2010


                                              White                  Black
         a
Job loss
  0-4 months after conception                  .331                -1.149*
                                              (.331)                 (.546)

    1-9 months prior to conception             .078                -1.736**
                                              (.251)                (.385)

    7-9 months after conception                .267                   .311
                                              (.424)                 (.984)

Number of counties                             91                     91
Sample size (county-months)                  20,475                 20,475

Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the county level to adjust for non-
independence of observations within a county over time, are in parentheses.
Dates refer to dates of conception.
a
 Measured as the total number of workers who lost jobs during the window, as a
percent of the county's working age (25-64) population.

†p <.10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                                              34
Table 4 - Regressions of Birth Rates on Job Loss, Women ages 20-24, by Race:
1991-2010



                                            White                Black
         a
Job loss
  0-4 months after conception                .287                 -.677
                                            (.362)               (.888)

    1-9 months prior to conception           .280                 -.471
                                            (.396)               (.599)

    7-9 months after conception              .500                .408
                                            (.511)              (1.166)

Birth rate
  Mean                                     116.3                144.2
  SD                                      (85.42)              (135.23)

Number of counties                            91                  91
Sample size (county-months)                 20,475              20,475

Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the county level to adjust
for non-independence of observations within a county over time, are in
parentheses.
Dates refer to dates of
conception.
a
 Measured as the total number of workers who lost jobs during the window, as a
percent of the county's working age (25-64) population.

†p <.10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                                     35
Table 5 - Regressions of Logged County Female Population, Age 15-19, on
Job Loss in the Prior Year, by Race: 1991-2010

                                                    White           Black
Job loss in the prior year                          -.0026          -.0007
                                                   (.0034)         (.0037)

Number of counties                                   91               91
Sample size (county-years)                         1,729            1,729


Coefficients represent estimated change in the logged female teenage
population from job losses to 1% of the county's working-age population.


Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the county level to
adjust for non-independence of observations within a county over time, are in
parentheses.

†p <.10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                                36
Table 6 - Regressions of Share of Births Where Father Characteristics Aren't Reported
and Teen Has Not Made Age-Appropriate Educational Progess, by Race: 1991-2010


                                            Has not made age-
                                               appropriate             No father characteristics
                                           educational progressa              reported

                                           White          Black           White           Black
          b
Job loss
  0-4 months after conception               -.0032       .0527**          .0036          .0341*
                                           (.0193)        (.0173)        (.0207)         (.0162)

     1-9 months prior to conception         .0072         -.0184          -.0228         -.0313*
                                           (.0125)       (.0152)         (.0170)         (.0146)

     7-9 months after conception            .0165         -.0411          -.0160          .0204
                                           (.0219)       (.0362)         (.0267)         (.0300)

Sample size                                17,750        15,160          17,755          15,165


Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the county level to adjust for non-
independence of observations within a county over time, are in parentheses. Dependent
variables are logged.
Dates refer to dates of conception.
a
    Mother has not completed minimum grade that would be expected for her age.
b
 Measured as the total number of workers who lost jobs during the window, as a percent of the
county's working age (25-64) population.
†p <.10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                                                  37
Table 7 - Regressions of Female Teens' Sexual Behaviors on Statewide Job Loss, by Race: 1997-2009


                                                               Sex with 2 or          Any birth control
                                                             more partners in         method, last time
Dependent variable:              Sex in last 3 months         last 3 monthsa              had sexa
                                   White        Black        White     Black          White      Black
    Job losses in prior year       .0187        .0118        .0016 -.0615*          .1253** .2438**
                                  (.0189)      (.0508)      (.0154) (.0307)          (.0243)    (.0451)

Sample size                        65,765      17,114       27,137     9,196        28,533      9,357

Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the county level to adjust for non-independence
of observations within a county over time, are in parentheses.
Dates refer to dates of conception.
a
 Among those who have ever had sexual intercourse.
†p <.10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                                              38
Appendix Table A1 - Regressions of Birth Rates on Job Loss, Women ages 15-
19, by Race: 1991-2010

                                            White               Black
         a
Job loss
  0-4 months after conception                .353              -1.109*
                                            (.342)              (.545)

    1-3 months prior to conception           .528              -1.652*
                                            (.432)              (.661)

    4-6 months prior to conception           .121              -2.006*
                                            (.438)              (.903)

    7-9 months prior to conception           -.382             -1.869*
                                            (.386)              (.761)

  10-12 months prior to
conception                                   -.131               -.282
                                            (.458)              (.842)

    7-9 months after conception              .315                .462
                                            (.434)              (.968)

Number of counties                            91                  91
Sample size (county-months)                 20,202              20,202

Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered at the county level to adjust
for non-independence of observations within a county over time, are in
parentheses.
Dates refer to dates of
conception.
a
 Measured as the total number of workers who lost jobs during the window, as a
percent of the county's working age (25-64) population.

†p <.10; *p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001




                                                                                     39
