NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW FINANCIAL INCENTIVES INDUCE DISABILITY INSURANCE RECIPIENTS
TO RETURN TO WORK
Andreas Ravndal Kostøl
Magne Mogstad
Working Paper 19016
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19016

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

Forthcoming in the American Economic Review. We thank three anonymous referees, Rolf Aaberge,
Richard Blundell, Espen Bratberg, Christian Brinch, Paul Devereux, Per Johansson, Tarjei Havnes,
Torfinn Harding, Katrine Løken, Knut Røed, Kjetil Telle, Kjell Vaage, Till Von Wachter, and a number
of seminar and conference participants for useful comments and suggestions. This research was supported
by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #1 DRC12000002-01-00 to the National
Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Disability Research Consortium. The findings and
conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA, any
agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Andreas Ravndal Kostøl and Magne Mogstad. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Financial Incentives Induce Disability Insurance Recipients to Return to Work
Andreas Ravndal Kostøl and Magne Mogstad
NBER Working Paper No. 19016
May 2013
JEL No. H53,H55,I18,J21
ABSTRACT
Disability Insurance (DI) programs have long been criticized by economists for apparent work disincentives.
Some countries have recently modified their programs such that DI recipients are allowed to keep
some of their benefits if they return to work, and other countries are considering similar return-to-work
policies. However, there is little empirical evidence of the effectiveness of programs that incentivize
the return to work by DI recipients. Using a local randomized experiment that arises from a sharp discontinuity
in DI policy in Norway, we provide transparent and credible identification of how financial incentives
induce DI recipients to return to work. We find that many DI recipients have considerable capacity
to work that can be effectively induced by providing financial work incentives. We further show that
providing work incentives to DI recipients may both increase their disposable income and reduce program
costs. Our findings also suggest that targeted policies may be the most effective in encouraging DI
recipients to return to work.

Andreas Ravndal Kostøl
Research Department
Statistics Norway
University of Bergen
andreas.kostol@ssb.no
Magne Mogstad
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT
United Kingdom
magne.mogstad@gmail.com

1

Introduction

Disability Insurance (DI) programs have long been criticized by economists for apparent work disincentives.
Some countries have recently modified their program such that DI recipients are allowed to keep some of
their benefits if they return to work, and other countries are considering similar return-to-work policies. For
example, the United Kingdom recently introduced the Pathways–to–Work program. One component of the
reform was an increase in the financial incentives meant to encourage DI recipients to return to work; they
were allowed to keep approximately 50% of their disability benefits for up to 12 months. Another example
is the proposed change in the U.S. DI program, known as the “$1 for $2 offset”. Under this policy, a DI
recipient’s benefits would be reduced by $1 for every $2 of the person’s earnings above the substantial gainful
activity (SGA) threshold.
Advocates of such return-to-work policies claim that they increase the employment rate among DI recipients and even encourage some to exit the DI rolls entirely; thus, they argue, the welfare of DI recipients can
be enhanced, and the cost of DI programs can be reduced. A counterargument is that allowing DI recipients
the option to return to work and keep a fraction of their benefits makes the program more generous, both
for potential applicants and for current recipients; in theory, therefore, return-to-work policies could reduce
labor supply, lead to fewer exits from DI by current recipients, and encourage more applications for DI.1
The challenge in assessing these arguments is that the evidence base for return-to-work policies for
DI recipients is scarce. In 1999, President Clinton signed a federal law that required the Social Security
Administration to undertake a randomized controlled trial. The study was supposed to determine the
magnitude of the labor supply response that would likely occur if a policy change was made that allowed DI
recipients to keep some portion of their benefits if they returned to work. However, no such experiment was
conducted, and there is little non-experimental evidence to guide policy makers.
This paper helps to close that gap by analyzing the consequences of providing financial incentives to DI
recipients to encourage them to return to work. In January 2005, the Norwegian government introduced such
a program: the benefits of DI recipients would be reduced by approximately $0.6 for every $1 in earnings
that they accumulated above the SGA threshold. However, only recipients who had been awarded DI before
January 1 of 2004 were eligible for the return-to-work program. Because the cut-off date for eligibility was
set retroactively, individuals were unable to gain entry to the program by manipulating the award date. This
1 These arguments are presented in several of the bills that have been brought to the floor of the U.S. Congress, outlining
options for reforming the work incentives of the SSDI program, including the Work Incentive and Self Sufficiency Act of 1996,
the Rehabilitation and Return to Work Opportunity Act of 1996, and the Transition to Work Act of 1997 (see e.g. Stapleton
et al., 2008; Livermore et al., 2009; Autor, 2011).

1

sharp discontinuity in DI policy therefore provides an attractive setting to analyze the impact of financial
incentives using a regression discontinuity (RD) design that compares recipients awarded DI just before
January 1 of 2004 (i.e., the treatment group) and just after that date (i.e., the control group).
The insights from our RD analysis may be summarized with three broad conclusions. First, many DI
recipients have a considerable capacity to work that can be effectively induced by providing financial work
incentives. Three years after implementation, the return-to-work program has increased the labor force
participation of DI recipients aged 18-49 by 8.5 percentage points. In comparison, 3.4 percent of the control
group participated in the labor force, and the labor force participation among rejected DI applicants of the
same age was just above 30 percent. Second, the return-to-work program produced a substantial increase in
the earnings of DI recipients. These gains in earnings were accompanied by a small increase in disposable
income and a substantial reduction in the cost of the program. The reduction in costs is attributable to
a significant decrease in benefits and a small increase in the taxes paid by DI recipients. Third, there is
significant heterogeneity in the responsiveness to financial work incentives, indicating that targeted policies
may be most effective in inducing DI recipients to return to work. Among DI recipients aged 50-61, who are
approaching the retirement age, there is no evidence of any impact of the program. Within the group of DI
recipients aged 18-49, the estimates vary substantially, with the strongest responses to financial incentives
among males, individuals with high education levels or more labor market experience, and people in areas
with low unemployment.
To assess the internal validity of our RD design, we perform a number of specification checks, all of which
support our main results. We also take several steps to shed light on the generalizability of our findings. We
begin by describing similarities and differences between the DI systems in the U.S. and in Norway. Next,
we use the approach proposed by Bound (1989) to assess the work capacity and labor supply elasticity of
DI recipients. Bound uses the labor force participation rate for rejected DI applicants as an upper bound
estimate of the labor force participation rate for DI recipients if the DI program had not existed. When
applying this approach to the Norwegian data, we obtain upper bound estimates that are quite similar to
the recent U.S. evidence. This indicates that the work capacity and labor supply elasticity of DI recipients
in the U.S. are comparable to those in Norway, lending support to the external validity of our analysis of
the return-to-work program.
Because the cut-off date for eligibility to the return-to-work program was set retroactively, we are not
able to estimate the level of induced entry that may occur when DI recipients are given the option to return
to work and keep a fraction of their benefits. We do, however, make a calculation for the size of the induced

2

entry that would have to be generated by the return-to-work policy to lead to an increase in program costs.
Our calculation indicates that the elasticity of entry response to the change in DI benefits needs to be much
higher than what is suggested by the existing literature (see e.g. Gruber, 2000; Campolieti, 2004).
Our paper is primarily related to a fairly small literature on the consequences of providing financial
incentives that encourage DI recipients to return to work. Hoynes and Moffitt (1999) conclude via numerical
simulations that some of the proposed reforms intended to incentivize work among DI recipients are unlikely
to be successful. Benitez-Silva et al. (2010) use a calibrated life-cycle model to forecast the effects of the “$1
for $2 offset” policy. These authors find that depending on the stigma costs associated with DI, the policy
may encourage work by DI recipients but could also induce entry into the DI program. Another related strand
of the literature examines return-to-work reforms that do not (exclusively) involve changes in financial work
incentives. The results are mixed. The medical reassessment of beneficiaries through continuity disability
reviews and trial work periods via the Ticket to Work program does not appear to have encouraged many
people to return to work in the U.S. (Autor and Duggan, 2006). However, several other policies appear to
be quite effective in inducing return to work on the part of disability beneficiaries.2
Our paper is also related to a growing literature on the causes and consequences of the growth in DI
rolls (for a review, see Autor and Duggan (2006)). Such growth poses significant risks to the finances of DI
programs and Social Security systems more generally. It also raises troubling questions regarding whether
the programs are being misused by recipients. We show that many individuals who are deemed totally and
permanently disabled by the Social Security Administration indeed have considerable work capacity and
that their labor supply is fairly elastic with respect to changes in financial work incentives.
Our findings complement the current evidence on the work capacity and labor supply elasticity of DI
recipients. Some of the evidence comes from studies that examine the variation in benefit generosity across
regions and over time to estimate the relationship between disability benefits and labor force participation.
For example, Gruber (2000) studies the policy change conducted in Canada. He estimates the elasticity of
labor force non-participation with respect to DI benefit levels in the range of 0.28 and 0.36. Another example
is Autor and Duggan (2003), who use differential time variation in average benefits across regions to identify
the impact of DI on the labor force participation of low-skilled workers. The authors conclude that the DI
system has provided many low-skilled workers with a viable alternative to unemployment.3
Much of the remaining evidence comes from studies that use the labor supply of rejected disability
2 See

e.g. Adam et al. (2011), Borghans et al. (2012), Campolieti and Riddell (2012), and Moore (2011).
is also a considerable body of evidence of how local labor market conditions and wages affect entry to DI (see e.g.
Black et al., 2002, Bratberg, 1999, Bratsberg et al., 2010, Rege et al., 2009).
3 There

3

applicants to estimate the labor supply of DI recipients if the DI program had not existed. Bound (1989)
finds that the labor force participation rate of DI recipients in the U.S. would have been at most 30 percentage
points higher had they not received disability benefits. Recent studies have extended this analysis, in part
by analyzing different subgroups and different time periods but also with quasi-experimental variation in the
disability determination process to improve the comparability of DI recipients and rejected DI applicants.4
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the key facts regarding the DI program
in Norway, compares the system with that of the U.S., and discusses the return-to-work program and its
expected impact. Section 3 describes the data and discusses the empirical strategy, Section 4 presents the
empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.

2

Background

2.1

The Norwegian DI program

In Norway, DI benefits are designed to provide partial earnings replacement to all workers under the full
retirement age who are unable to engage in substantial gainful activity because of a medically determinable
physical or mental impairment that has lasted for at least a year. The program is part of the broader Social
Security System and is financed by employer- and employee-paid taxes.5

Disability determination process
To apply for DI benefits, an individual must submit an application to a Social Security Administration (SSA)
office. The disability examiners first review the non-medical criteria. Only adults below the (mandatory)
retirement age of 67 years are eligible for DI. If the applicant meets the non-medical criteria, disability
examiners and medical staff assess medical evidence from one or more of the applicant’s health care providers
regarding the applicant’s ability to perform work-related activities. If the applicant has an impairment that is
undoubtedly disabling, a disability award is made. In other cases, the next step is to consider the applicant’s
overall ability to work, taking into account his or her health status, age, education, and work experience as
well as the transferability of the applicant’s skills. If the disability examiner concludes that the applicant
cannot be expected to engage in any substantial gainful activity, a disability award is made.
4 See

Chen and van der Klaauw (2008), French and Song (2009), Maestas et al. (2012), and Von Wachter et al. (2011).
this paper, we focus on the system for individuals who are deemed totally and permanently disabled by the
Social Security Administration. This category includes the majority of DI recipients. We have chosen this focus because the
return-to-work program was not intended to target the partially or temporarily disabled.
5 Throughout

4

The level and duration of DI benefits
The level of DI benefits received is determined using a formula for which the first step is to calculate the
average indexed annual earnings (AIE). Past earnings are indexed to the present value using an inflator that
is equal to the average wage growth in the economy. The years with the lowest earnings are excluded from
these calculations. The proportion of income that is replaced decreases as past earnings increase so that
low-wage workers replace a larger fraction of their earnings as compared to high-wage workers.6
Once a person is enrolled in the DI program, there are three main pathways out of the program. First,
the DI recipient may reach the retirement age, at which point he or she will shift to the old-age pension
program of Social Security. In 2003, 74 percent of those who left DI did so for this reason. Second, the
recipient may die. Death accounted for 19 percent of all program exits in 2003. Third, the recipient may
no longer meet the non-medical or medical criteria for receiving DI benefits. For example, an individual
may return to work and earn more than the permitted maximum amount. In 2003, eligibility-based exits
accounted for only 7 percent of all exits from the program.

2.2

The return-to-work program and its expected effects

In January 2005, the Norwegian government introduced a program to encourage DI recipients to return to
work. However, only recipients who had been awarded DI before January 1 of 2004 were eligible for the
return-to-work program (i.e. the treatment group). Recipients who had been awarded DI after January 1 of
2004 had to abide by the current rules (i.e. the control group). Below, we describe the work incentives in
the two programs and use static labor supply theory to make economic predictions.7

The programs
There is only one difference between the current rules and the return-to-work program: the manner in which
benefits are reduced if earnings exceed the SGA threshold. In both programs, there is a 12-month waiting
period after DI is awarded. If the DI recipient is working during the waiting period, he or she becomes
ineligible for DI benefits. After the waiting period, both programs have a trial working period allowing
the DI recipient to test his or her work capacity without impacting future benefit payments. Specifically, a
6 Consider, for example, the population of individuals awarded DI in 2003. If we divide this population into three equally
sized groups according to their earnings in 2000-2002, the average replacement rate is 90 percent in the bottom tertile, 55
percent in the middle tertile, and 50 percent in the top tertile. See Rege et al. (2009) for a detailed description of the formula
determining the DI benefits.
7 The description of the two programs is based on the Norwegian government’s white paper from 2007 on disability insurance
(NOU, 2007). Throughout this paper, all monetary figures are fixed at 2010 level. For the figures expressed in U.S. dollars
(USD), we have used the following exchange rate: NOK/USD = 6.

5

person is allowed to have earnings above the SGA threshold for up to five consecutive years without risking
reduced benefits should that person’s earnings fall below SGA after these five years. If a person has earnings
above SGA for more than five consecutive years, benefits would no longer be provided in full should the
person’s earnings fall below SGA in the future.
Both programs specify benefits as functions of earnings, and not hours. During the trial working period,
the formulas for annual DI benefits in the return-to-work program (B T ) and the current rules (B C ) depend
on annual earnings (W ) and the maximum annual benefit level (B 0 ) in the following way:






B0
if W ≤ SGA
B0
if W ≤ SGA












where SGA = U SD 12, 450 p.a.
where SGA = U SD 12, 450 p.a.










B 0 − τ W − θ if SGA < W ≤ E
B 0 − τ W if SGA < W ≤ e
BC =

BT =









0







where θ =

SGA 0
B ,τ
AIE

=

B0
AIE









0







if W > E
where E = 0.8 × AIE

where τ =

B0
AIE

if W > e
where e = 0.8 × (SGA + AIE)

Benefits are provided in full if the person’s annual earnings are less than SGA threshold, which is set at
monthly earnings of about USD 1,050. If earnings exceed SGA, the two programs differ. Current rules
create a discontinuous fall θ in benefits at the first dollar earned above SGA; after this notch, there is a τ
reduction in benefits for every dollar in earnings; benefits are provided until earnings exceed the maximum
permitted amount E; this situation implies the absence of disability and therefore signals the individual’s
ineligibility for DI benefits. The return-to-work program eliminates the discontinuous fall in benefits at the
SGA threshold; it also increases the maximum permitted amount to e.
In our analysis, the waiting period implies that members of both the treatment group and the control
group would become ineligible for DI if they were working in 2004. The return-to-work program takes effect
on January 1, 2005. From that date onwards, members of the treatment group are incentivized to work by
allowing them to keep more of their benefits if earnings exceed SGA, as compared to members of the control
group. Our empirical analysis compares the behavior of the treatment group and the control group over
the period 2005-2007. Due to the trial working period, members in both groups could have annual earnings
above SGA in these years without risking reduced benefits should their earnings fall below the SGA in the
future (e.g. 2008 or 2009).

6

The budget constraints
The top graph in Figure 1 illustrates the difference in work incentives across the treatment and the control
group. This figure translates the benefit formulas into stylized budget constraints in the income-leisure space.
We consider the wage and benefit levels associated with a typical DI recipient. To compute the benefit levels,
we use the average work history of recipients awarded DI during the period between July 2003 and February
2004. We set the hourly wage equal to the average hourly wage in a sample of workers who are not on DI
but have observable characteristics similar to those of the DI recipients.8 The line AH (slope equal to the
hourly wage rate) applies in the absence of any DI program. For the sake of simplicity and with minimal
loss of generality about the expected impacts of the return-to-work program, we disregard income taxation
and dependent benefits.
The budget constraint under the current rules is represented by BCDEFH. Benefits are provided in full
at budget segment BC. At 10 hours of work per week, the person’s earnings are above the SGA threshold,
and the marginal tax rate on another hour of work exceeds 600 percent, thus creating a notch in the budget
constraint (represented by the line CD). At the budget segment DE, hours of work range from 10 to 32 per
week, and the person’s benefits are phased out at a rate of approximately $0.6 for every $1 in earnings. At 32
hours of work per week, earnings exceed the maximum permitted amount and the person becomes ineligible
for DI benefits. This creates a second notch that is given by the line EF.
The budget constraint in the return-to-work program is BCef H. The program eliminates the first notch
in the budget constraint under current rules and phases out benefits at budget segment Ce at a rate of
approximately $0.6 for every $1 in earnings. The program also increases the maximum permitted amount
so that the individual can work as much as 43 hours per week before he or she becomes ineligible for DI
benefits. This shifts the second notch to the left; it is now given by the line ef .

The expected impacts
What are the expected effects of the transformation of the budget constraint from the current rules to
the return-to-work program? To answer this question, we consider a static labor supply model where DI
recipients choose hours of work at the given offered wage and offered wages are constant; we assume that
preferences are convex and that leisure and income are normal goods. The idea is to compare the labor
8 To compute the hourly wages, we use information from the Wage Statistics Survey in 2005. On the basis of this sample of
workers (who are not on DI), we regress hourly wages on the covariates included in Table 1 (except diagnoses) and a full set of
indicators for municipality of residence. We allow for a flexible functional form by including a large set of dummies for different
covariate values. Using the estimated wage equation, we predict hourly wages for individuals on DI, and compute the average
wage rate.

7

supply incentives for someone facing the current rules to the counterfactual state in which the person is
assigned to the return-to-work program. As in Figure 1, we consider the wage and benefit levels associated
with a typical DI recipient.9
We first focus on the case in which DI recipients can freely choose hours of work. Consider a DI recipient
who under current rules would locate at point C, working 10 hours and receiving the maximum benefits.
Depending on the individual’s preferences, assignment to the return-to-work program could lead to either of
two outcomes. First, the individual might continue to work 10 hours and receive the maximum benefit with
no change in income. Second, he or she might enter the labor market, moving from C to some point at the
budget segment Ce; benefits are gradually phased out, while income rises. Consider next an individual who
under current rules would locate at points on the budget segment DE that give higher income than at point
C. Then we would expect the increase in benefits accompanying assignment to the return-to-work program
to reduce hours of work and increase total income.10 Now imagine that an individual’s preferences are such
that he or she would locate to the left of e if assigned to current rules. Consider first points like G. Such
points are clearly dominated under assignment to the return-to-work program by point e: the individual
can increase income by reducing hours of work and claiming benefits. Consider next points such as H. If
disutility of labor is sufficiently high, reduced labor hours would compensate for the income lost in moving
from H to e under assignment to the return-to-work program.
We now shift attention to the case in which DI recipients make discrete choices between no work, parttime work, and full time-work (e.g., due to fixed costs associated with working). This is motivated by the
bottom graph in Figure 1, showing the hours of work distribution in 2005 for a sample of workers who are
not on DI. We can see that the vast majority of employees were working either part-time (15 hours per week)
or full-time (37.5 hours per week), indicating that institutional constraints on hours of work choices may be
important.
Consider first an individual who under current rules would locate at point B, working zero hours and
receiving the maximum benefit levels. If the individual can freely choose their working hours, he or she
would continue to work zero hours under assignment to the return-to-work program. If DI recipients make
discrete choices, however, the individual could be induced to enter the labor market and increase income,
moving from B to part-time or full-time work. Now consider an individual who would choose part-time work
9 The work incentives depend on the wage rate the DI recipients face. In particular, if the wage rate is lower (higher) than the
wage of the typical DI recipients, the notches in the budget constraints at C, E and e are associated with more (fewer) hours
of work. Independently of the wage rate, however, the static labor supply model predicts that the return-to-work program will
increase the population share with earnings above SGA.
10 If the individual would locate at point E under current rules, then the positive substitution effect at this notch could
dominate the negative income effect, so that he or she increases hours of work under assignment to the return-to-work program.

8

if assigned to the current rules. Depending on the individual’s preferences, assignment to the return-towork program would lead to either of two outcomes. First, the individual may continue to work part-time,
receiving higher benefits and disposable income. Second, if the disutility of labor is sufficiently low, the
shifting of the second notch may induce an individual to work full-time, increasing disposable income as the
gains in earnings exceed the loss in benefits. Finally, consider a DI recipient who under assignment to the
current rules would work full-time. If the disutility of labor is sufficiently strong, the mechanical induced
eligibility effect could be accompanied by a move to part-time work; otherwise, he or she will continue to
work full-time while receiving DI benefits.
In sum, the expected impacts of the return-to-work program are heterogeneous and may be negative,
zero or positive. The static labor supply model predicts that the return-to-work program will increase the
population share with earnings above SGA, independently of whether DI recipients freely choose hours of
work. There are, however, no unambiguous predictions about the estimated mean impacts of the returnto-work program: the sign and magnitude depend on the size of the different responses weighted by the
relative number of DI recipients along the budget constraint under current rules. As discussed in more detail
below, there are few DI recipients who earn more than SGA under the current rules. It is therefore likely
that the return-to-work program will increase average earnings and income, and that it will reduce average
benefits. We will nevertheless complement the usual mean impact analysis with estimates of the probability
that earnings fall in different segments of the budget constraint.

2.3

Comparison with the U.S. program

The DI programs in Norway and the U.S. are quite similar and feature only three important differences.11
The first difference is that the incidence of receipt of DI benefits is lower in the U.S. than in Norway.
Figure 2 shows this distinction by displaying the evolution of DI in the two countries. Whereas the rate of DI
receipt in a given year is consistently higher in Norway than in the U.S.,12 the time trends are quite similar.
From 1961 to 2005, the rate of receipt increased from 2.2 to 10.4 percent in Norway and from 0.8 to 4.2
11 Our discussion of the U.S. system draws primarily on Autor and Duggan (2006), and pertains only to the SSDI program.
More than 80 percent of non-elderly U.S. adults are insured against the risk of disabling physical or mental illness by SSDI
(Autor and Duggan, 2006).
12 Unlike the Norwegian DI program, the U.S. SSDI program does not offer temporary disability benefits. To improve
comparability, Figure 2 therefore excludes temporarily disabled individuals when computing the number of DI recipients in
Norway. The cross-country difference in coverage by the DI program is unlikely to explain the entire discrepancy in the
incidence of DI: although virtually all non-elderly adults are covered in Norway, more than 80 percent of all non-elderly adults
are covered in the U.S. It is unclear whether the remaining difference is a function of underlying differences in screening
stringency, the frequency with which people apply for disability benefits, or the health of the population. However, Milligan
and Wise (2011) argue that differences in health are unlikely to explain much of the observed differences in rates of DI receipt
across developed countries.

9

percent in the U.S. In both countries, the expansion of the DI rolls in recent decades appears to be driven by
the liberalization of the screening process, which led to a rapid increase in the share of DI recipients suffering
from difficult-to-verify disorders such as mental illness and musculoskeletal disease.13 Because these are
early-onset disorders with low age-specific mortality, DI recipients with such diagnoses tend to participate in
the program for relatively long periods. As a result, the DI exit rates have decreased in the last few decades.
In 1985, the DI exit rate was approximately 12.1 percent in the U.S. and 10.4 percent in Norway. In both
countries, this rate has trended steadily downward since that time and reached approximately 7 percent in
2004. As shown in Figure 2, this decline has been driven both by a decrease in the fraction of DI recipients
who reach the full retirement age and by a decrease in the fraction of DI recipients who die.
The second difference between the two programs is that the U.S. SSDI program is less generous. Appendix
Figure A.1 shows this difference by presenting stylized budget constraints in the income-leisure space for the
two DI programs. To compute the budget constraint for the U.S. program, we use the same work history
and wages as in Figure 1. We see that the maximum benefit level received if one’s earnings are below the
SGA threshold is lower in the U.S. than in Norway; for the worker we consider, the replacement rate would
be 31 percent in the U.S. program and 58 percent in the Norwegian program.14 Although the two programs
have similar SGA thresholds (USD 1,050 per month in Norway and USD 1,000 per month in the U.S.),
the U.S. program takes earnings above the SGA threshold to imply the absence of disability and therefore
ineligibility for DI; this increases the tax rate associated with the first notch and eliminates the second notch,
as compared to the Norwegian program. Figure A.1 also compares the budget constraints associated with
the proposed “$1 for $2 offset” policy with the return-to-work program. It is clear that the “$1 for $2 offset”
policy allows DI recipients who return to work to retain slightly more of their benefits. We also see that the
“$1 for $2 offset” policy does not specify a maximum permitted amount, which created the second notch in
the budget constraints in Norway.
The last difference is that DI recipients in Norway tend to be somewhat older and to have slightly
higher earnings prior to disability award. Appendix Table A.1 shows this distinction by reporting the key
characteristics of DI recipients in the U.S. and in Norway. The differences in the population characteristics
are, however, less pronounced than one might expect given the differences in the generosity of the program.
13 See Autor and Duggan (2006) for a discussion of this phenomenon. In the U.S., the 1984 congressional reforms shifted the
focus of screening from medical to functional criteria. In Norway, the medical eligibility criteria were relaxed earlier and more
gradually.
14 For the sake of simplicity, our calculations for the replacement rates disregard income taxation, dependent benefits, and
health insurance. In both countries, the DI programs provide dependent benefits. In addition, DI recipients in the U.S. receive
health insurance coverage through the federal Medicare program, which increases the replacement rate somewhat. In Norway,
all citizens are eligible for health insurance through the Social Insurance System.

10

For instance, the majority of DI recipients suffer from difficult-to-verify disorders including mental illness
and musculoskeletal disease in both the U.S. (57.4 %) and Norway (61.4 %).

3

Data and empirical strategy

3.1

Data and sample selection

Our analysis employs several data sources that we can link through unique identifiers for each individual.
The data on DI come from social security registers that contain complete records for all individuals who
entered the DI program during the period 2001-2005. The data set contains information on the month when
DI was awarded (or denied), the individual’s medical diagnosis and average indexed earnings, and the level of
DI benefits received. We link this data with administrative registers provided by Statistics Norway, using a
rich longitudinal database that covers every resident from 1967 to 2007. For each year, it contains individual
demographic information (regarding sex, age, and number of children), socio-economic data (regarding years
of education, earnings, cash transfers, taxes, and private vs. public sector employment), and geographical
identifiers that indicate place of residence.
The outcomes that we consider are defined as follows. The first key outcome is labor force participation.
As in Maestas et al. (2012), labor force participation is an indicator variable that is equal to one if annual
earnings exceed the annual SGA threshold, set at approximately USD 12,500 per year. Unfortunately, we
are unable to measure labor supply at the intensive margin because we do not have data on working hours.15
The second key outcome is annual gross earnings, which includes wages and income from self-employment.
We also consider the effect of the program on disposable income, incorporating earnings and benefits net
of taxes. In addition, we examine the impact of the program on DI benefits received and taxes paid. The
last outcome that we consider is exit from the DI program, which occurs if an individual is classified by the
Social Security Administration as no longer eligible for DI.
Our empirical analysis considers individuals aged 18-61 at the time of the DI award. The reason for the
upper age restriction is that Norwegian workers can receive early retirement benefits beginning at age 62;
the lower age restriction is because individuals under 18 are not eligible for DI. Throughout the empirical
analysis, we partition the sample into two groups according to age. One reason is that the cost of working may
be different for younger DI recipients, who more often suffer from difficult-to-verify disorders such as mental
15 Figure 1 uses the Wage Statistics Survey to represent the distribution of working hours for a sample of workers who are
not on DI. Unfortunately, the sample provided by the Wage Statistics Survey is too small for us to analyze the impact of the
return-to-work program on hours of work.

11

illness (Autor and Duggan, 2006; Von Wachter et al., 2011). Another reason is that younger DI recipients
may gain more from returning to the labor force because they have a longer horizon until retirement (Bound
et al., 2003; Von Wachter et al., 2011). In our main analysis, we will focus on individuals who were aged
18-49 when they were awarded DI. In sub-section 4.6, we also report results for older DI recipients, those
who were aged 50-61 when they were awarded DI.
To assess the impact of the return-to-work program, we make two notable sample restrictions. First, we
restrict the sample to individuals who were deemed totally and permanently disabled by the SSA, because
the return-to-work program was not targeted at partially or temporarily disabled individuals. Second, we
exclude individuals who (prior to DI award) resided in a county with a wage-subsidy policy. Five (of nineteen)
counties provided wage subsidies to firms that hired DI recipients. The reason for this sample restriction is to
avoid confounding the effects of the return-to-work program with the impact of the wage policy. This gives a
total of 9,471 individuals aged 18-61 who were awarded DI in 2003 (2,896 individuals were between the ages
of 18 and 49, while 6,575 individuals were age 50-61). In the baseline RD specification, the estimation sample
consists of individuals who were awarded DI between November 2003 and February 2004 (897 individuals
aged 18-49 and 2131 individuals aged 50-61).

3.2

RD design

In our sharp RD design, assignment to the return-to-work program is a deterministic function of the assignment variable, the date of the DI award (X): only recipients who had been awarded DI before January 1 of
2004 were eligible for the return-to-work program. The RD design uses separate regressions on each side of
this cut-off date (c). The regression model for the treatment group is applied to the left side of the cut-off
date (X < c)
Y = αl + fl (c − X) + εl ,

(1)

whereas the regression model for the control group is applied the right side of the cut-off date (X > c)

Y = αr + fr (X − c) + εr ,

(2)

where fr and fl are unknown functional forms. The RD estimate of the return-to-work program is then
given by the difference between the estimated regression intercepts on the two sides of the cut-off date

τ̂ RD = α̂l − α̂r .

12

(3)

To make inferences about the impact of the program, we pool the two regressions and follow Fuji et al.
(2009) in calculating the standard errors robust to heteroscedasticity.
To implement the RD design, we need to specify fr and fl and decide on the window on each side of
the cut-off date. Our first specification uses a local linear regression with triangular kernel density and 2
months of bandwidth on each side of the cut-off date. This choice of bandwidth corresponds to the optimal
bandwidth we obtain when following Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). Our second specification uses a
window of just one month on each side of the cut-off date. Because we have monthly data for DI awards,
the RD model is equivalent to a first-difference (FD) model: the average outcome for recipients who were
awarded DI in December 2003 is compared with the average outcome for recipients who were awarded DI in
January 2004.

3.3

Graphical evidence

A virtue of the RD design is that it provides a transparent way of showing how the program impact is
identified. To this end, we begin with a graphical depiction of how the labor market outcomes, the covariates,
and the density of the assignment variable vary around the cut-off date, before turning to a more detailed
regression-based analysis.
The top panel of Figure 3 shows the mean labor force participation and average earnings for recipients
who were awarded DI between July 2003 and June 2004; the bottom panel of Figure 3 shows the means
for the same labor market outcomes for recipients who were awarded DI between July 2002 and June 2003;
and Figure 4 graphs the covariates for recipients who were awarded DI between July 2003 and June 2004.
In each figure, we plot the unrestricted monthly means and the estimated monthly means using local linear
regression applied to each side of the cut-off dates. Whereas the regression lines better illustrate the trends
in the data and the size of the jumps at the cut-off, the unrestricted means indicate the underlying noise
in the data. In each graph, the scale of the y-axis is set equal to ±.5 standard deviation of the respective
variable. By standardizing the y-axes in this way, it becomes easier to compare the trends in the data and
the sizes of the jumps at the cut-off dates across the graphs.
Figure 3 shows evidence of a discontinuity in each outcome around January 1 of 2004, suggesting that
the return-to-work program had substantial effects on the labor supply of DI recipients. In comparison,
there is no sign of discontinuous changes in labor market outcomes around January 1 of 2003; this finding is
reassuring because there were no changes in assignment to the return-to-work program around this cut-off
date.

13

Note that the gray shaded areas in Figures 3 and 4 mark the months in which DI recipients were affected
by a potentially confounding policy change. To address this issue, we will restrict the control group to the
non-shaded area throughout our empirical analysis: that is, the control group will only include individuals
who were awarded DI in January and February 2004. The policy change of concern was the introduction of
temporary DI benefits in January 2004. However, individuals who had submitted their DI applications before
January 2004 were ineligible for temporary DI. Because it generally takes between 3 and 8 months to process
the application, recipients who were awarded DI before March 2004 were not affected by the introduction of
temporary DI benefits.16 And because the cut-off date for eligibility to temporary DI was set retroactively,
individuals were unable to gain or avoid entry to temporary DI by manipulating the application date.17
As a consequence of the individuals being unable to manipulate the award date, any pre-determined
characteristic should have the same distribution just before and just after January 1 of 2004. Figure 4
supports this conjecture, showing that the sample mean of the (pre-determined) covariates tend to be quite
stable around the cut-off date. One exception is the DI rate of the municipality of residence (prior to DI
benefit award), which fluctuates somewhat over time and decreases around the cut-off date. However, the
decrease in the local DI rate is statistically insignificant at conventional levels; and based on the large number
of covariates and pre-reform outcomes we consider, the probability of observing changes around the cut-off
date by chance alone is quite large. It is, however, reassuring that there is little if any correlation between
the local DI rate and the outcome variables.18 As a consequence, controlling for the local DI rate barely
moves our estimates.
Another implication of local randomization is that the aggregate distribution of the assignment variable,
the date of the DI award, should be continuous around the cut-off date; an increase in the density would indicate sorting around the threshold, calling into question the appropriateness of our RD design. In Appendix
Figure A.2, we examine the density of the assignment variable and perform the statistical test proposed
by McCrary (2008). The left graph plots the unrestricted monthly frequency and the estimated monthly
frequency from a local linear regression applied to each side of the cut-off date for eligibility to temporary
DI, March 2004. This graph shows that the number of recipients awarded DI changes little from September
2003 to February 2004. In particular, there is no evidence of a discontinuous change in the frequency at
16 The guidelines of the SSA state that applicants should expect that it takes 3-8 months (and not more than 12 months)
to process the initial application. For example, for individuals who applied for DI in December 2003, the reported average
processing time was 176 days.
17 Our results are qualitatively the same and quantitatively similar if we extend the control group to include individuals who
were awarded permanent DI after February 2004. The same holds true if we include individuals who were awarded temporary
DI in the control group. The results are available upon request.
18 For example, the correlation between the local DI rate and labor force participation in our sample is -0.0029 in 2005, -0.0105
in 2006, and 0.0022 in 2007.

14

January 2004, as manipulation of the application date would imply: while 220 individuals were awarded DI
in December 2003, 215 individuals were awarded DI in January 2004. As expected, the sample size declines
after February 2004, as the introduction of temporary DI crowds out some of the use of permanent DI
benefits. The right graph displays the estimates behind McCrary’s test. We begin by plotting the monthly
density, and then smooth the histogram using local linear regression, separately on each side of the cut-off.
The formal test is implemented as a Wald test of the null hypothesis that there is no jump in the density
in January 2004. We cannot reject this null hypothesis: for instance, with a bandwidth of 2 months and a
bin-size of 1 month, the estimated jump in the density is -0.00712 with a standard error of 0.151.

4

Empirical results

4.1

Labor force participation and earnings

The first column of Table 1 reports results from the FD model, comparing the outcomes for the recipients
who were awarded DI in December 2003 (the treatment group) and January 2004 (the control group). There
are substantial differences between the labor market outcomes in the two groups. The estimated effect of the
return-to-work program on labor force participation steadily increased from 2-3 percentage points in 2005 to
more than 5 percentage points in 2007. This pattern is consistent with standard search-theoretical models of
the labor market in which it takes time for workers to find jobs and for firms to fill vacancies. By comparison,
only 2-3 percent of the control group participated in the labor force, and labor force participation among
the rejected applicants was approximately 30 percent. We can also see that the program almost doubled the
participants’ average earnings.
The third column of Table 1 reports the RD estimates with 2 months of bandwidth on each side of the
cut-off date. The key difference between the FD model and the RD model is their assumptions regarding
how the potential outcomes change with the assignment variable: that is, the shape of the potential outcome
curves. The FD specification takes the average outcome for the control group as a counterfactual for the
treatment group in the absence of the return-to-work program; the potential outcome curves are assumed
to be flat. If the potential outcome curves instead slope upward, as the graphical evidence indicates, the
FD model will underestimate the effect of the return-to-work program because the average outcome for the
control group will be too large to serve as an appropriate counterfactual for the treatment group. In this
type of “smoothly contaminated” randomized experiment, the RD specification uses the observed trends
in the outcomes on each side of the cut-off to construct an appropriate counterfactual. As is evident from

15

column 3 of Table 1, the RD estimates are somewhat larger than the FD estimates. Again, the estimated
effect of the return-to-work program on labor force participation steadily increased: in 2005, the estimate is
approximately 3 percentage points, while in 2007, it approaches 9 percentage points. We can also see that
the RD model estimates the increase in earnings to be approximately 110 percent.
Columns 2 and 4 of Table 1 add a set of pre-determined covariates to the FD model and the RD model,
respectively. As a consequence of a local randomized experiment, assignment to treatment near the cut-off
should be independent of pre-determined covariates. Thus it is reassuring to see that our results are robust
to the inclusion of the covariates. Throughout the paper, we allow for a flexible functional form by including
a large set of dummies for different values of the covariates. In the remainder of the paper, we use FD and
RD models with covariates as our baseline specifications: including covariates in the RD design reduces the
residual variance and is thus a useful way to gain precision, especially in the subsample analysis where the
sample size is relatively small (see e.g. Froelich, 2007).

4.2

Robustness analysis

To increase the confidence in the RD design, we show that our findings are robust to a number of speficiation
checks. We begin by estimating a difference-in-differences (DiD) specification of both the FD model and
the RD model. The main motivation for this robustness check is that seasonality in applications could
generate (discontinuous) changes in the potential outcomes according to the month in which individuals
were awarded DI. Although neither the award rate nor the observable characteristics of recipients show signs
of seasonality in applications in the window surrounding the reform, we cannot rule out (discontinuous)
changes in unobservables by month of award. The DiD specification exploits the fact that recipients who
were awarded DI just before and just after January 1 of 2003 were assigned to the return-to-work program:
significant differences in the post-assignment outcomes for the two groups would therefore be unrelated to
the return-to-work program and should instead capture changes in outcomes due to the month in which DI
was awarded.
A standard DiD estimate is obtained by estimating the difference in outcomes between individuals
awarded DI in December 2002 and January 2003, and subtract it from the FD estimate of the return-to-work
program. The DiD specification of the RD model is implemented in a similar way: we first re-estimate equations (1) and (2) using data for recipients awarded DI in November-December 2002 and January-February
2003, respectively; we then subtract the difference between the estimated regression intercepts on the two
sides of the cut-off date from the RD estimate of the return-to-work model; and calculate the standard errors

16

by bootstrap with 1,000 replications. Appendix Table A.2 reports estimates from the DiD specification of
both the FD model and the RD model. The results suggest that month of award effects do not confound
the conclusions drawn about whether financial incentives encourage DI recipients to return to work.
The DiD specification identify the impact of the return-to-work program under the assumption that month
of award effects do not vary across years. Appendix Table A.3 challenges this assumption by pretending that
the return-to-work program takes effect on January 1 of 2003 (instead of the true reform date, January 1 of
2004). The placebo test for the standard DiD model is performed by estimating the difference in outcomes
between individuals awarded DI in December 2001 and January 2002, and subtract it from the difference in
outcomes between individuals awarded DI in December 2002 and January 2003. The placebo test for the
DiD specification of the RD model is similar, except that it uses the sample of individuals who were awarded
DI between November 2001 and February 2002 and between November 2002 and February 2003. Both
placebo tests exploit that everyone in the estimation samples were assigned to the return-to-work program:
significant placebo tests are therefore a sign of month of award effects that vary across years, rather than
true program impacts. It is therefore reassuring that the estimates from the placebo tests are small and
insignificant.
Next, Appendix Table A.4 reports results from the usual specification checks of the RD model. Columns
1 and 2 in Panel (a) extend the bandwidth on the left side of the cut-off date by one month: the RD estimates
change little, but our precision increases because the sample size (in the treatment group) increases. Column
3-6 in Panel (a) use a linear functional form of fr and fl . It is reassuring that the parametric regression
produces estimates that are similar to those of the baseline RD specification. Columns 1-6 in Panel (b)
constrain fr and fl to be the same on both sides of the cut-off date. Constraining the slope is in some
sense inconsistent with the spirit of the RD design because the data from the right of the cutoff are used
to estimate αl , which is defined as a limit when approaching from the left of the cutoff, and vice versa.
One possible justification for a common slope is that if the functional form is the same on both sides of the
cutoff, then more efficient estimates of program impact are obtained by imposing that constraint. Indeed,
our results are quite similar when we impose a common linear, quadratic or cubic slope.
In our analysis, we excluded individuals who (prior to DI benefit award) resided in a county with a wagesubsidy policy. The reason for this sample restriction is to avoid confounding the effects of the return-to-work
program with the impact of wage subsidies to firms. Five (of nineteen) counties provided wage subsidies
to firms that hired DI recipients. Subsidies were available if either the firm or the DI recipient resided in
a county with the wage subsidy policy. To explore potential spillover effects between the return-to-work

17

program and the wage subsidies, we have collected information about local labor market regions. The main
criteria used for defining the local labor market regions are commuting patterns and travel times. There
are 161 local labor market regions in Norway. Within five of the regions, there are counties both with and
without the wage subsidy policy. To check for potential spillovers, we re-estimate the FD and RD model
without DI recipients who reside in any of these five regions. The estimates are close to our baseline results,
suggesting that spillover effects are unlikely to drive the estimated effects of the return-to-work program.
Lastly, we assess to what extent the baseline RD estimates are generalizable to DI recipients with longer
spells of DI at the time of the return-to-work program. As shown in Lee and Lemieux (2010), in the presence
of heterogeneous treatment effects, the RD estimate can be interpreted as a weighted average treatment
effect across all individuals in the estimation sample. By extending the bandwidth, the RD estimate assigns
weight to the effects of the return-to-work program also for individuals “away from the threshold”. Appendix
Figure A.3 shows RD estimates where we increase the sample size in the treatment group by expanding
the bandwidth to the left of the threshold. We run 25 RD regressions, where each estimate increases the
bandwidth to the left of the cut-off date by one month. Whether we use a bandwidth of 2 months (November
and December 2003) or 26 months (November 2001 - December 2003), we always find sizeable RD estimates
of the return-to-work program. The estimates decline somewhat with the size of the bandwidth, but remains
substantial even with a window of 26 months; one explanation for this decline is that the costs and benefits
of working may change with the length of time spent on DI, either because of human capital depreciation
or due to deteriorating health. From a policy perspective, these findings complement each other: while the
RD estimate with a narrow bandwidth may be more informative about the expected effects on recent or new
entrants to DI, the RD estimates with wider bandwidths speak to the effects on recipients with longer spells
of DI at the time of the reform.

4.3

Implied elasticity of labor force non-participation

Table 2 demonstrated that many DI recipients have considerable capacity to work that can be effectively
induced by providing financial work incentives. To compare the labor supply responses with the changes in
financial incentives, we calculate the aggregate elasticity of labor force non-participation to the participation
tax rates (P T R).19
19 In situations in which there are notches (or kinks) in the budget constraints, the PTR is generally viewed as more relevant
to behavioral participation responses than the marginal tax rates (see e.g. Eissa et al., 2006; Keane, 2011). We focus on the
elasticity of labor force non-participation because it is less sensitive to small changes in the very low labor force participation
rate of the control group, as compared to the labor force participation elasticity.

18

We define the aggregate elasticity of labor force non-participation as

=

4(1−LF P )/(1−LF Pcontrol )
,
4P T R/P T Rcontrol

(4)

where 4(1 − LF P ) denotes the difference in the labor force non-participation rate between the treatment
group and the control group, (1 − LF Pcontrol ) is the non-participation rate of the control group, 4P T R
denotes the difference between the treatment and the control group in terms of P T R, and P T Rcontrol is
the mean PTR of the control group. To compute , we need to decide how to measure P T R. We begin
by setting the amount of disposable income if one is not working (I0 ) equal to the mean disposable income
among the individuals in the control group who earn less than the SGA threshold and thus are classified as
not working.20 This allows us to compute a measure of PTR at a given earnings level

P T Rk = 1 −

Ik − I0
Wk

,

Wk > SGA.

(5)

where Ik denotes the disposable income with earnings Wk .21 Figure 5 displays the PTR figures by earnings
level. We see that the tax and benefit systems create virtually no financial reward for work in the control
group. The return-to-work program lowers the PTR considerably, especially when an individual’s earnings
are close to the SGA threshold.
We then define

4P T R

=

X

[E(P T Rk | treatment) − E(P T Rk | control)]pk

(6)

k>SGA

where E(P T Rk | treatment) is the average PTR under the return-to-work program rules with W k in
earnings, E(P T Rk | control) is the average PTR under the current rules with W k in earnings, and

pk

=

P r(k ≤ W < k + dk | control)
k>SGA P r(k ≤ W < k + dk | control)

P

where dk is set equal to half of the SGA amount (USD 6,250 per year). This means that 4P T R is the
weighted sum of the differences between the PTRs of the treatment and control groups, with the weights
given by the (conditional) density of the earnings of individuals in the control group who work. Figure 5
20 The

elasticities barely move if we instead set I0 equal to zero.
computation of the participation tax rate incorporates DI benefits, dependent benefits, and taxes. Both earnings and
DI benefits are subject to taxation. Employers are liable for payroll tax on earnings (up to 14 percent), and there is no payroll
tax on benefits. If the payroll tax is passed on to workers in the form of lower wages, then the effective tax rates are higher
than what we compute.
21 The

19

displays the density of earnings (above the SGA threshold) in the control group and the treatment group.
We see that most of the density is quite close to the SGA threshold, which suggests that the differences in
PTR in this area are weighted heavily in 4P T R.
Table 2 shows the elasticities implied by the estimated effects on labor force participation. Consistent
with the impact on labor force participation, the implied elasticities are larger (in absolute value) for the RD
model than for the FD model. The results suggest an average elasticity of labor force non-participation to
PTR between 0.119 (FD model) and 0.186 (RD model) over the period 2005-2007. The elasticity estimates
peak in 2007, at which time the RD model suggests that a 10 percent reduction in PTR decreases labor force
non-participation by 3 percent.

4.4

Distributional effects

So far, we have focused on the mean impacts of the return-to-work program. Since basic labor supply theory
suggests that these mean impacts might average together negative and positive labor supply responses, we
turn attention to the distributional effects of the return-to-work program.22 A quantile treatment effects
analysis is not feasible since few control group members are working. Instead, we explore effects across the
earnings distribution by estimating the probability that earnings fall in different segments of the budget
constraint (see Figure 1 and the discussion in subsection 2.2).
Table 3 reports FD and RD estimates at different parts of the earnings distribution. We can see that the
return-to-work program had the largest impact on the population share with earnings between C and E. In
particular, more than 70 percent of the effect on labor force participation can be attributed to changes in the
probability that earnings fall in this segment. This finding is consistent with the prediction that assignment to
the return-to-work program increases the labor supply of DI recipients who would have located at the budget
segment BC under current rules. There is also suggestive evidence of small increases in the population shares
with earnings between E and e or above e. Although not statistically significant at conventional levels, these
findings indicate that moves toward full-time work among individuals who would have located at segments
BC or DE under current rules dominate any negative labor supply response among (the few) individuals
who under current rules would have located above E.
The graphical evidence displayed in Figure 5 complements the regression results reported in Table 3. This
figure shows the density of earnings in the control group and the treatment group, alongside the PTR under
current rules and in the return-to-work program. The graphical evidence suggests that the return-to-work
22 Bitler et al. (2006) show the usefulness of estimating distributional effects in situations where theory predicts systematic
heterogeneity in the impact of welfare reforms.

20

program had the largest impact on earnings near the SGA threshold (i.e. the budget segment between C
and E) where PTR decreased the most.

4.5

Financial costs and benefits

Advocates of return-to-work policies claim that the welfare of DI recipients would improve and the cost of
DI programs would decrease if DI recipients who returned to work were allowed to keep a significant fraction
of their benefits. To investigate these claims, we examine the impact of the return-to-work program on
disposable income, DI benefits received, taxes paid, and program costs. Table 4 shows the results. Our
estimates suggest that the gains in earnings translated into a significant reduction in the cost of the program
and a small and statistically insignificant increase in disposable income. The estimated reduction in costs
is in the range of 3.5 and 5 percent of the costs associated with DI under current rules, and it reflects a
significant decrease in benefits and a small increase in taxes paid by DI recipients.
Critics of return-to-work policies counter that allowing DI recipients the option to return to work and
keep a fraction of their benefits makes the program more generous, both for potential applicants and for
current recipients; in theory, therefore, return-to-work policies could lead to fewer exits from DI by current
recipients and encourage more applications for DI. Note, however, that there is little room for a reduction
in the exit rate, as few DI recipients exited the DI program under current rules. Indeed, we find no evidence
of any impact of the return-to-work program on the rate of exit from DI during the period 2005-2008.
The point estimates are small and positive (0.01 in FD model and 0.03 in RD model), but too imprecisely
estimated to draw firm conclusions. Unfortunately, our study is not informative about the level of induced
entry that might occur if new DI recipients were made eligible for the return-to-work program. In Appendix
B, however, we make a calculation for the size of the induced entry that would have to be generated by the
return-to-work policy to lead to an increase in program costs. Our calculation suggests that the elasticity
of entry response to the change in DI benefits needs to be much higher than what the existing literature
suggests.23
23 The baseline RD (FD) estimate implies a lower bound of 1.5 (1.1) on the elasticity of induced entry that would lead the
return-to-work policy to increase program costs if new DI recipients were made eligible. In comparison, Gruber (2000) reports
elasticity estimates in the range of 0.28-0.36, whereas Campolieti (2004) finds little, if any, effect on entry rates from an increase
in benefit levels. There is also a sizeable literature that has estimated elasticities of entry response by modeling labor force
participation or DI recipiency as a function of potential DI benefit levels. Using cross-sectional variation in DI benefits, these
studies tend to find elasticities in the range of 0.1-0.2 (see Gruber (2000) for a review of this evidence).

21

4.6

Heterogeneity

Table 1 demonstrated that many DI recipients are elastic to changes in financial incentives. However, these
findings should be interpreted with caution because they pertain only to DI recipients who are between the
ages of 18 and 49. We now investigate the impact of the return-to-work program on older DI recipients.
Furthermore, we examine the degree of heterogeneity of the responses to the return-to-work program among
younger DI recipients.
Appendix Table A.5 reports the regression results from the subsample analysis. As is evident from
columns 3 and 4 of panel (a), much would be missed if we averaged together the labor supply responses of
older and younger DI recipients. Among older DI recipients, there is no evidence of an increase in labor force
participation due to the return-to-work program. One possible explanation for this is that the gains from
returning to the labor force may be greater for younger DI recipients.24 Another possible explanation is that
the cost of working may be lower for younger DI recipients, who more often tend to suffer from difficult-toverify disorders such as mental illness (Autor and Duggan, 2006; Von Wachter et al., 2011). To shed some
light on these explanation, we divide the sample of younger DI recipients into two groups: individuals with
mental illness (40 percent) and those suffering from other disorders (60 percent).25 The estimates reported in
columns 5-8 of panel (b) lend support to the first explanation, as the impact of the return-to-work program
tends to be smaller among DI recipients suffering from mental illness.
We also explore several dimensions of heterogeneity within the group of younger DI recipients. Columns
5-8 of panel (d) show that the return-to-work program had the largest impact on DI recipients living in
areas with low unemployment rates, suggesting an important link between demand side factors and program
incentives. This finding is consistent with existing evidence showing that local labor market conditions have a
significant impact on welfare spells for most demographic groups (see e.g. Hoynes, 2000). Previous research
has also found significant differences in the responsiveness of different groups of welfare recipients to changes
in financial incentives (see e.g. Moffitt, 1992). In particular, supply-side factors such as education and labor
market experience tend to be important. In line with this evidence, the responses to the return-to-work
program are stronger for individuals with high education levels or more labor market experience (measured
by AIE or years of employment).26 We further examine gender differences in the effects of the return-to-work
24 Higher gains from working for younger DI recipients may either come from shorter length of time spent on DI and thus
less human capital depriciation or because they have more years to potentially work and earn retirement benefits (Bound et al.,
2003; Von Wachter et al., 2011).
25 Among individuals with other disorders, the main diagnosis groups are musculoskeletal diseases (37 percent), neurological
disorders (17 percent) and circulatory system disorders (5 percent). Because of small sample sizes, it is not feasible to explore
heterogeneity in the effects by these disorders.
26 Unfortunately, we do not have information on other work-related factors such as previous occupation and industry. Because

22

program. Columns 1-4 of panel (b) demonstrate that males respond considerably stronger to the financial
incentives than females. The relatively weak response to the return-to-work program among women is
worrisome given that the growth of disability receipt in recent decades has been far more pronounced among
women than men (Autor and Duggan, 2006).
Lastly, Table 5 summarizes the heterogeneity in program effects: For each subgroup, it displays the
average effect on labor force participation (4LF P ), the average change in participation tax rate (4P T R),
and the average elasticity of labor force non-participation (), over the period 2005-2007. Table 5 shows
that the heterogeneity in program effects is weakly related to differences in PTR across subgroups. Instead,
we find that some subgroups respond much stronger to similar changes in financial incentives; for example,
women and individuals with low educational levels experience relatively large reductions in participation
tax rates, but still increase their labor force participation less than males and highly educated individuals.
The results in Table 5 also illustrate the problem of using cross-sectional variation in participation tax rates
across groups to estimate the labor supply elasticity of DI recipients.

4.7

Comparison of upper bound estimates

We conclude our empirical analysis with a comparison between the upper bound estimates of the counterfactual labor force participation rates of DI recipients in Norway and the U.S. This comparison puts the
magnitude of the RD estimates into perspective, and sheds light on the external validity of the evidence
from Norway.
We employ the approach suggested by Bound (1989), who uses a sample of rejected DI applicants as
a control group for the DI recipients and considers their labor force participation rate as an upper bound
estimate of the counterfactual labor force participation rate of DI recipients. On the basis of data collected
in 1972 and 1978, Bound finds that the labor force participation rate of DI recipients in the U.S. would
have been at most 30 percentage points higher had they not received disability benefits. Recent studies
have extended this analysis, in part by analyzing different subgroups and different time periods but also
with quasi-experimental variation in the disability determination process to improve the comparability of DI
recipients and rejected DI applicants.27
Although there is some heterogeneity in the U.S. evidence, the estimates are consistently higher than
of small sample sizes, we are unable to examine the effects of supply-side factors in different local labor markets. The differential
effects by supply-side factors could, in theory, therefore reflect that individuals with low education levels and little labor market
experience may be more likely to live in areas with adverse labor markets. However, the correlations between the local
unemployment rate and individuals’ labor market experience and education are weak (-0.05 for AIE and -0.04 for years of
schooling).
27 See Chen and van der Klaauw (2008), French and Song (2009), Maestas et al. (2012), and Von Wachter et al. (2011).

23

the labor force participation rates for our treatment group. There are several possible explanations. One
is that rejected applicants are likely to be in better health; thus, their labor force attachment constitutes
an upper bound for the employment behavior of new recipients. Another possible explanation is that the
counterfactuals differ: in Bound’s approach, the counterfactual is a scenario in which the DI program does
not exist, whereas in our case, the counterfactual is a scenario in which DI recipients are faced with higher
participation tax rates. A third possible explanation is that DI recipients in the U.S. and Norway have
substantially different work capacity and labor supply elasticity. If the latter explanation was empirically
important, it would raise concerns about the external validity of our RD estimates.
To shed light on this issue of external validity, we apply the Bound approach to the Norwegian data.
Appendix Table A.6 displays the mean differences between the rejected applicants and those who were
awarded DI in terms of observable characteristics and labor force participation. The sample contains three
groups: individuals whose DI applications were rejected in December 2003 or January 2004, individuals who
were awarded DI in December of 2003 (treatment group), and individuals who were awarded DI in January
2004 (control group). When we compare the rejected applicants with the control (treatment) group, the
counterfactual is the scenario in which DI under the current rules (the return-to-work program rules) does
not exist. A concern with the Bound approach is that the employment rate of rejected applicants might
in part reflect the fact that some of these individuals were still in the process of appealing the denial (see
e.g. Bound, 1991; Parsons, 1991). Following Von Wachter et al. (2011), we address this issue by excluding
rejected applicants who were subsequently awarded DI benefits over the next five years.28
Appendix Table A.6 shows that the labor force participation rate is 22-26 (24-30) percentage points
higher among rejected applicants than among treatment group (control group). In the Bound approach,
these differences are interpreted as upper bound estimates of the counterfactual labor force participation rate
among DI recipients. However, there are some significant differences in the observable characteristics of the
rejected and awarded DI applicants. When we control for the differences in their observable characteristics,
the upper bound estimates increase by 2-4 percentage points. These estimates are quite similar to the recent
US evidence, and very close to the results for DI recipients of comparable ages reported in Von Wachter
et al. (2011).
The similarity between the upper bound estimates indicates that the work capacity and labor supply
28 When

comparing the Norwegian upper bound estimates to the U.S. evidence, it is therefore reassuring to find that appeals
play a similar role in the two countries. In the U.S., 60 percent of the initially rejected applicants appeal; of these, 70 percent
were subsequently awarded DI benefits over the next five years (Autor et al., 2011). In Norway, 57 percent of the initially
rejected applicants appealed (or quickly re-applied); of these, 77 percent were subsequently awarded DI benefits over the next
five years.

24

elasticity of DI recipients in Norway are comparable to those of DI recipients in the U.S., which lends
support to the external validity of our analysis of the return-to-work program. This suggests that our
findings may have important implications for the proposed “$1 for $2 offset” policy in the U.S. As shown in
Appendix Figure A.1, the U.S. policy proposal strengthens the incentives for labor force participation more
than the return-to-work program. Our findings therefore suggest that the “$1 for $2 offset” policy may be
quite effective in inducing DI recipients in the U.S. to return to work.

5

Conclusion

Autor and Duggan (2006) argue that the liberalization of the screening process and the movement away
from physically exertive work have blurred the divide between the totally and permanently disabled and
those who are disabled but retain some work capacity. In this paper, we have investigated whether many
individuals who are deemed totally and permanently disabled by the Social Security Administration indeed
have considerable work capacity and examined how elastic their labor supply is to changes in financial
incentives.
Using a local randomized experiment that arises from a sharp discontinuity in DI policy in Norway, we
provide transparent and credible identification of how financial incentives induce DI recipients to return to
work. We find that many DI recipients have considerable capacity to work that can be effectively induced by
providing financial work incentives. We also show that encouraging DI recipients to work not only increases
their disposable income but also reduces program costs.
However, these findings should be interpreted with caution: they apply only to DI recipients between the
ages of 18 and 49. Among older DI recipients, we find no response to financial work incentives. However,
because the age of entry into DI has decreased in most developed countries during the last few decades, the
elastic labor supply of younger DI recipients may be quite important from a policy perspective. In particular,
our findings indicate that policies that target younger DI recipients may be most effective in encouraging DI
recipients to return to work.
Another caveat is that our study is not informative about the level of induced entry that might occur if
DI recipients are given the option to return to work and keep a fraction of their benefits. This is because the
cut-off date for eligibility to the return-to-work program was retroactive. We do, however, make a calculation
for the size of the induced entry that would have to be generated by the return-to-work policy to lead to an
increase in program costs. Our calculation indicates that the elasticity of entry response to the change in DI

25

benefits needs to be much higher than what the existing literature suggests.
Lastly, we advise readers to exercise the usual caution in importing our findings to other countries.
Nevertheless, as shown above, the DI programs in Norway and the U.S. are similar in many respects.
Furthermore, when we apply the Bound (1989) approach to the Norwegian data, we find upper bound
estimates of the counterfactual labor force participation rate of DI recipients that are fairly consistent with
recent U.S. evidence. This finding indicates that the work capacity and labor supply elasticity of DI recipients
in Norway are comparable to those of DI recipients in the U.S., which lends some support to the external
validity of our analysis of the return-to-work program.

References
Adam, S., Bozio, A., and Emmerson, C. (2011). Reforming disability insurance in the UK: Evaluation of
the pathways to work programme. Working paper, IFS.
Autor, D. (2011). The unsustainable rise of the disability rolls in the united states: Causes, consequences,
and policy options. Working Paper 17697, NBER.
Autor, D., Maestas, N., Mullen, K., and Strand, A. (2011). Does delay cause decay? the effect of administrative decision time on the labor force participation and earnings of disability applicants. Working Paper
2011-258, University of Michigan Retirement Research Center.
Autor, D. H. and Duggan, M. G. (2003). The rise in the disability rolls and the decline in unemployment.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1):157–205.
Autor, D. H. and Duggan, M. G. (2006). The growth in the social security disability rolls: A fiscal crisis
unfolding. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(3):71–96.
Benitez-Silva, H., Buchinsky, M., and Rust, J. (2010). Induced entry effects of a $1 for $2 offset in SSDI
benefits. Working paper, SUNY-Stony Brook.
Bitler, M. P., Gelbach, J. B., and Hoynes, H. W. (2006). What mean impacts miss: Distributional effects of
welfare reform experiments. American Economic Review, 96(4):988–1012.
Black, D., Daniel, K., and Sanders, S. (2002). The impact of economic conditions on participation in
disability programs: Evidence from the coal boom and bust. American Economic Review, 92(1):27–50.
26

Borghans, L., Gielen, A., and Luttmer, E. (2012). Social support subbstitution and the earnings rebound:
Evidence from a regression discontinuity in disability insurance reform. Working Paper 18261, NBER.
Bound, J. (1989). The health and earnings of rejected disability insurance applicants. American Economic
Review, 79(3):482–503.
Bound, J. (1991). The health and earnings of rejected disability insurance applicants - reply. American
Economic Review, 81(5):1427–1434.
Bound, J., Burkhauser, R., and Nichols, A. (2003). Tracking the household income of ssdi and ssi applicants.
In Polachek, S. W., editor, Research in Labor Economics, volume 22, pages 113–158. Emerald Group
Publishing.
Bratberg, E. (1999). Disability retirement in a welfare state. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 101(1):97–
114.
Bratsberg, B., Fevang, E., and Roed, K. (2010). Disability in the welfare state: An unemployment problem
in disguise? Discussion Paper 4897, IZA.
Campolieti, M. (2004). Disability insurance benefits and labor supply: Some additional evidence. Journal
of Labor Economics, 22(4):863–889.
Campolieti, M. and Riddell, C. (2012). Disability policy and the labor market: Evidence from a natural
experiment in canada, 1998-2006. Journal of Public Economics, 96:306–316.
Chen, S. and van der Klaauw, W. (2008). The work disincentive effects of the disability insurance program
in the 1990s. Journal of Econometrics, 142(2):757–784.
Eissa, N., Kleven, H. J., and Kreiner, C. T. (2006). Welfate effects of tax reform and labor supply at the
intensive and extensive margins. In Agell, J. and Sørensen, P. B., editors, Tax policy and labor market
performance. MIT Press.
French, E. and Song, J. (2009). The effect of disability insurance receipt on labor supply. Working Paper
2009-05, FRB of Chicago.
Froelich, M. (2007). Regression discontinuity design with covariates. Working Paper 2007-32, University of
St. Gallen Department of Economics.

27

Fuji, D., Imbens, G., and Kalyanaraman, K. (2009). Notes for matlab and stata regression discontinuity
software. Technical report, Harvard University.
Gruber, J. (2000). Disability insurance benefits and labor supply. Journal of Political Economy, 108(6):1162–
1183.
Hoynes, H. W. (2000). Local labor markets and welfare spells: Do demand conditions matter? Review of
Economics and Statistics, 82(3):351–368.
Hoynes, H. W. and Moffitt, R. (1999). Tax rates and work incentives in the social security disability insurance
program: Current law and alternative reforms. National Tax Journal, 52(4):623–654.
Imbens, G. and Kalyanaraman, K. (2012). Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity estimator. The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3):933–959.
Keane, M. P. (2011). Labor supply and taxes: A survey. Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4):961–1075.
Lee, D. S. and Lemieux, T. (2010). Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal of Economic
Literature, 48(2):281–355.
Livermore, G., Roche, A., and Prenovitz, S. (2009). SSI and DI beneficiaries with work related goals
and expectations. In Work activity and use of employment supports under the original Ticket to Work
Regulations. Mathematica Policy Research.
Maestas, N., Mullen, K., and Strand, A. (2012). Does disability insurance discourage work?

American

Economic Review, Forthcoming.
McCrary, J. (2008). Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity design: A density
test. Journal of Econometrics, 142:698–714.
Milligan, K. S. and Wise, D. A. (2011). Social security and retirement around the world: Mortality, health,
employment and disability insurance participation and reforms. Working paper, Harvard Kennedy School.
Moffitt, R. (1992). Incentive effects of the u.s. welfare system: A review. Journal of Economic Literature,
30(1):1–61.
Moore, T. J. (2011). The employment effects of terminating disability benefits: Insights from removing drug
addictions as disabling conditions. Working paper, University of Maryland.

28

NOU (2007). Ny uførestønad og ny alderspensjon til uføre. White Paper NOU 2007:4 (In Norwegian).
Parsons, D. O. (1991). The health and earnings of rejected disability insurance applicants: Comment.
American Economic Review, 81(5):1419–1426.
Rege, M., Telle, K., and Votruba, M. (2009). The effect of plant downsizing on disability pension utilization.
Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(4):754–785.
Stapleton, D., Livermore, G., Thornton, C., O’Day, B., Weathers, R., Harrison, K., O’Neil, S., Martin, E. S.,
Wittenburg, D., and Wright, D. (2008). Ticket to work at the crossroads: A solid foundation with an
uncertain future. Report delivered to the Social Security Administration, Washington DC. Matematica
Policy Research.
Von Wachter, T., Song, J., and Manchester, J. (2011). Trends in employment and earnings of allowed
and rejected applicants to the social security disability insurance program. American Economic Review,
Forthcoming.

29

Table 1: Program impact on labor force participation and earnings
Outcome variables:

FD

FD w/c

RD

RD w/c

Comparison means [st. dev]
Jan. & Feb. 04

LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)
Avg. earnings
(2005-2007)
Characteristics:
Age at DI award
Male
Years of Schooling
Experience
AIE
Local unemployment rate
Local DI rate
Number of Children
Musculoskeletal system
Mental disorders
Obs

Rejected applicants

0.022

0.033**

0.028

0.038

0.018

0.26

(0.015)

(0.016)

(0.024)

(0.025)

[0.134]

[0.440]

0.031*

0.033*

0.039

0.042*

0.02

0.316

(0.017)

(0.018)

(0.027)

(0.026)

[0.142]

[0.466]

0.054***

0.053**

0.087***

0.085***

0.034

0.316

(0.02)

(0.022)

(0.031)

(0.031)

[0.182]

[0.466]

1126**

1247**

1630**

1644**

1551

13223

(508)

(535)

(799)

(781)

[5033]

[21314]

FD

RD

Comparison means
Jan. & Feb. 04 Rejected applicants

-0.30

-0.20

38.4

38.6

(0.91)

(1.44)

[9.7]

[7.5]

-0.052
(0.048)
0.32
(0.28)
-0.21
(0.92)

-0.076
(0.075)
0.29
(0.44)
-0.43
(1.45)

0.50
[0.50]
10.5
[3.1]
13.9
[10.0]

0.515
[0.50]
9.9
[3.8]
11.3
[9.0]

-290
(1565)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.004
(0.003)

-1123
(2486)
-0.002
(0.001)
0.005
(0.004)

38013
[17686]
0.024
[0.008]
0.098
[0.024]

34558
[15118]
0.024
[0.009]
0.098
[0.024]

-0.031
(0.11)
0.013
(0.040)
0.041
(0.048)

-0.08
(0.17)
0.026
(0.062)
0.041
(0.075)

0.90
[1.13]
0.22
[0.415]
0.386
[0.487]

0.954
[1.23]
0.332
[0.472]
0.321
[0.468]

435

897

440

196

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity.
Note: This table displays the main results. The first two columns display estimates from the first difference model without covariates
(FD) and with covariates (FD w/c); the sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI in
Dec. 2003 & Jan. 2004. The third and fourth columns display estimates from the regression discontinuity model without covariates
(RD) and with covariates (RD w/c); we use a local linear regression with a triangular kernel density function and 2 months of bandwidth
on each side of the cut-off date; the sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI in Nov.
2003 - Feb. 2004. Labor force participation (LFP) is equal to one if annual earnings exceed SGA. Average earnings are the mean annual
earnings in USD over the period 2005-2007 (NOK/USD ≈6). All individual characteristics are measured prior to disability award.
Experience is the number of years with earnings above SGA. The AIE summarizes the earning history. The local unemployment rate is
the fraction of the adult population (aged 18-66) receiving unemployment benefits in the municipality of residence. The local DI rate
is the fraction of the eligible population receiving DI benefits in the municipality of residence. Number of children is the total number
of children under 18. We also report the proportion of DI recipients with the two main diagnosis groups: musculoskeletal diseases and
mental disorders. We allow for a flexible functional form by including a large set of dummies for different values of the covariates. The
fifth column shows mean and standard deviation (in square brackets) of the outcomes and characteristics for individuals aged 18-49
(at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI in Jan. & Feb. 2004. The last column shows mean and standard deviation (in square
brackets) of the outcomes and characteristics for individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI rejection), whose DI application was rejected
in Dec. 2003 & Jan. 2004 (excluding those who successfully re-apply/appeal during the next five years).

Table 2: Implied elasticity of labor-force non-participation
2005

FD model
2006
2007

Average

2005

RD model
2006
2007

Average

4(1 − LF P )

-0.033

-0.033

-0.053

-0.040

-0.038

-0.042

-0.085

(1 − LF Pcontrol )

0.986

0.981

0.981

0.983

0.981

0.979

0.966

0.976

4P T R

-0.251

-0.294

-0.332

-0.292

-0.244

-0.285

-0.250

-0.260

P T Rcontrol

0.847

0.857

0.865

0.855

0.849

0.857

0.863

0.856

Elasticity()

0.114

0.099

0.141

0.119

0.135

0.130

0.300

0.186

-0.055

Note: This table displays aggregate non-participation elasticities for the sample of individuals aged 18-49 at the date of DI award. The
elasticity formula is given in equation (4). The differences in labor force non-participation between the treatment and the control group
(∆(1 − LF P )) are from the FD and RD model with covariates (see the second and fourth columns of Table 1). The participation tax
rate (P T R) is given by equation (5), and incorporates the DI system, income taxation, and dependent benefits. The differences in PTR
between the treatment and control group (∆P T R) are given by equation (6). (1 − LF Pcontrol ) denotes the non-participation rate of
the control group, while P T Rcontrol is the mean PTR of the control group.

Table 3: Distributional effects

Earnings(2005)
Earnings(2006)
Earnings(2007)
Avg. earnings
(2005-2007)
Obs

Earnings > C
0.033**
(0.016)
0.033*

FD model
C < Earnings ≤ E
E < Earnings ≤ e
0.026
0.011
(0.016)
(0.012)
0.025
0.007

(0.018)
0.053***
(0.022)
0.062***
(0.019)

(0.017)
0.038**
(0.019)
0.053***
(0.018)

435

435

Earnings > e
0
(0.000)
0.009

(0.005)
0.012*
(0.007)
0.016
(0.011)

(0.009)
0.015
(0.011)
0.006
(0.006)

435

435

RD model
Earnings(2005)
Earnings(2006)
Earnings(2007)
Avg. earnings
(2005-2007)
Obs

Earnings > C
0.038
(0.025)
0.042*

C < Earnings ≤ E
0.028
(0.024)
0.031

E < Earnings ≤ e
0.009
(0.018)
0.01

Earnings > e
0.01
(0.008)
0.011

(0.026)
0.085***
(0.031)
0.089***
(0.028)
897

(0.023)
0.062**
(0.027)
0.074***
(0.025)
897

(0.008)
0.019*
(0.010)
0.024*
(0.014)
897

(0.011)
0.022
(0.016)
0.01
(0.009)
897

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity.
Note: This table displays the estimated impact of the return-to-work program on the probability that earnings fall in different segments
of the budget constraint (see figure 1) over the period 2005-2007. The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 at the date of DI award.
The estimates are from the FD and RD model with covariates (see Table 1).

Table 4: Financial costs and benefits
Outcome variables:
Avg. Earnings

Estimates
FD-model
RD-model

Comparison means [st. dev]
Jan. & Feb 04 Rejected Applicants

1247**

1644**

1551

13223

(2005-2007)

(535)

(782)

[5032]

[21314]

Avg. Benefits

-798**

-1155**

33770

N/A

(2005-2007)

(359)

(536)

[8080]

Avg. Tax
(2005-2007)
Avg. Disposable Income

263

5234

4915

(229)

[2790]

[5807]

248

226

30087

24402

(279)

(422)

[6217]

[19606]

-1000**

-1418**

28535

N/A

(396)

(580)

[6169]

435

897

440

(2005-2007)
Avg. Program Cost

201
(156)

Obs

196

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity.
Note: This table displays the estimated impact of the return-to-work program on average earnings, benefits, taxes, disposable income
and program costs (in USD) over the period 2005-2007 (NOK/USD ≈6). The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 at the date of
DI award. The estimates are from the FD and RD model with covariates (see Table 1). Taxes include tax on earnings and benefits.
Program cost equals benefits minus taxes. Disposable income equals earnings plus benefits less taxes. The third column shows mean
and standard deviation (in square brackets) of the outcomes for individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded
DI in Jan. & Feb. 2004. The last column shows mean and standard deviation (in square brackets) of the outcomes for individuals aged
18-49 (at the date of DI rejection), whose DI application was rejected in Dec. 2003 and Jan. 2004 (excluding those who successfully
re-apply/appeal during the following five years).

Table 5: Heterogeneity in program effects
FD model

RD model

4LF P

4P T R

Elasticity()

4LF P

4P T R

Elasticity()

Females

0.017

-0.321

0.046

0.026

-0.291

0.080

Males

0.060

-0.270

0.193

0.079

-0.257

0.268

Low education

0.037

-0.297

0.110

0.041

-0.28

0.131

High education

0.061

-0.279

0.188

0.085

-0.256

0.291

Subgroups:

Low unempl. rate

0.067

-0.285

0.204

0.111

-0.249

0.392

High unempl. rate

0.010

-0.301

0.030

0.008

-0.291

0.024

Low experience

-0.001

-0.264

0.002

0.010

-0.279

0.031

High experience

0.061

-0.317

0.170

0.079

-0.265

0.269

Low AIE
High AIE

0.016
0.067

-0.287
-0.298

0.049
0.194

0.028
0.093

-0.219
-0.281

0.11
0.293

Mental disorders
Other disorders

0.033
0.054

-0.313
-0.265

0.091
0.176

0.039
0.067

-0.296
-0.255

0.111
0.234

Note: This table summarizes the subsample estimates reported in Appendix Table A.5. The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49
at the date of DI award. Columns 1 and 3 report the average effect on labor force participation (4LF P ), columns 2 and 4 report the
average change in participation tax rate (4P T R), and columns 3 and 6 report the average elasticity of labor force non-participation (),
over the period 2005-2007. The elasticity formula is given in equation (4). Columns 1-3 use the baseline FD model, while columns 4-6
use the baseline RD model. The elasiticity and its components are computed separately for each subgroup (see Table 2 for a description
of how the elasticity is computed). Low (high) experience is defined as years of experience below (above) the sample median. Low
(high) AIE is defined as average indexed earnings below (above) the sample median. Low (high) unemployment rate is defined as living
in a municipality in which the unemployment rate is below (above) the sample median. High (low) education is defined as (not) having
completed high school.

Figure 1: Work incentives

(a) Budget constraints
Current rules

1400

Return to Work Program
H

e
G

E
C
F

560

D
B

Full−Time

0

Total Weekly Income

f

50

40

Part−Time

30

20

SGA

10

A

0

Hours of work per week

0

10

Percent

20

30

(b) Hours of work distribution of employees (not on DI)

50

40

30

20

10

0

Hours of work per week
Note: Graph (a): The black solid lines represent the budget set for individuals under current rules and the dashed lines
represent the change in the budget constraint due to the return-to-work program. We use the wage and benefit levels associated
with a typical DI recipient. To compute the benefit levels, we use the average work history of recipients awarded DI during the
period July 2003 - Feb. 2004. We further set the hourly wage equal to the average hourly wage in a sample of workers who are
not on DI but have similar observable characteristics as the DI recipients (see footnote 8). For simplicity, we disregard income
taxation and dependent benefits: Total weekly income is thus equal to earnings plus DI benefits.
Graph (b): Displays the hours of work distribution of employees who are not receiving DI benefits. We use information from
the Wage Statistics Survey in 2005. This survey covers all employees in the public sector. For employees in the private sector,
the data is based on an annual stratified random sampling of all enterprises. Hours of work represent contractual number of
working hours per week, excluding meal breaks.

Figure 2: DI Trends in Norway and the U.S.
(a) Incidence of DI receipt
United States

3

8

2

6

0

0

2

1

4

Incidence of DI receipt (%)

10

4

Norway

1957 1961 1965 1969 1973 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005

1957

1961

1965

1969

1973

1977

1981

1985

1989

1993

1997

2001

2005

(b) Award and Exit Rates
Norway

16

2

8
4

Exit rate (%)

12

1.5
1
.5

6

Exit rate (%)

3

Award rate per population (%)

9

2.5
2
1.5
1
1963

1969

1975

1987

1993

1999

2005

0

0

Total Exits (%)

1981

0

.5

Total Awards (%)

0

Award rate per population (%)

3

12

United States

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

1993

1999

2005

(c) Exit rates by reason
10

United States

10

Norway

6
4
0

0

2

4

6

8

Others

8

Deaths

2

Exit rate by reason (%)

Retirements

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

1993

1999

2005

1963

1969

1975

1981

1987

1993

1999

2005

Note: The U.S. SSDI trends are based on Autor and Duggan (2006), while the Norwegian trends are collected from various
issues of the Social Security Annual Statistical Supplement. Unlike the Norwegian DI program, the U.S. SSDI program does
not offer temporary disability benefits. To improve comparability, Figure 2 therefore excludes temporarily disabled individuals
when computing the number of DI recipients in Norway. Panel (a): Incidence of DI recipiency, defined as the percent receiving
DI benefits in the adult population (aged 18 - 67 years in Norway; aged 25-64 years in the US). Panel (b): Award rate in the
adult population (left axis), and exit rate from the population of DI recipients (right axis). Panel (c): Exit rates because of
death, retirement, or other reasons (including eligibility-based exits).

.104

.025

−.053

−6

−6

0

3

LFP(2004)

−3

LFP(2005)

6

6

−6

−6

3

6

−6

−3

6

−6

3

LFP(2006)

0

LFP(2007)

July 2002 − June 2003

0

LFP(2005)

−3

LFP(2006)

July 2003 − June 2004

Figure 3: Labor market outcomes by award date

6

6

0

3

−3

0

3

−3

0

3

−6

−6

0

3

−3

0

3

Average Earnings

−3

Average Earnings

The dashed lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval of the estimated monthly means. The gray shaded areas mark the months in which individuals awarded
DI were affected by a potentially confounding policy change. In each graph, the scale of the y-axis is set equal to ±.5 standard deviation of the respective variable.

Note: The figure displays labor force participation (LFP) and mean earnings by month of DI award, six months before and after the cut-off date (denoted 0). LFP is
equal to one if annual earnings exceed the SGA threshold. Average earnings (in USD) is the mean annual earnings over the period 2005-2007. The top panel consist of
individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI benefits during the period July 2003 to June 2004. The bottom panel consist of individuals aged
18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI benefits during the period July 2002 to June 2003. In each graph, we plot the unrestricted monthly means and
the estimated monthly means from a local linear regression applied to each side of the cut-off date (denoted 0: Jan. 1, 2004 in top panel; Jan. 1, 2003 in bottom panel).

−3

.021

−.051

.092

.128
.035
−.057
.031
−.056

.117

.148
.045
−.059
.043
−.058

.144

4911.2
1885.6
−1140
4260.2
1648
−964.2

6

6

43

38

33

.028

.024

−6

−6

0

3

−3

0

3

Local Unemployment Rate

−3

Age at DI Award

6

6

−6

−6

−3

−3

0

Local DI Rate

0

Male

3

3

6

6

−6

−6

0

3

−3

0

3

Number of Children

−3

Years of Schooling

6

6

July 2003 − June 2004

Figure 4: Characteristics by award date

−6

−6

0

3

−3

0

3

Musculoskeletal Disease

−3

Experience

6

6

−6

−6

0

3

−3

0

areas mark the months in which individuals awarded DI were affected by a potentially confounding policy change. In each graph, the scale of the y-axis is set equal to
±.5 standard deviation of the respective variable.

awarded DI benefits during the period July 2003 to June 2004. In each graph, we plot the unrestricted monthly means and the estimated monthly means from a local
linear regression applied to each side of the cut-off date. The dashed lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval of the estimated regression lines. The gray shaded

3

Mental Disorders

−3

Average Indexed Earnings

Note: The figure displays individual characteristics by month of DI award, six months before and after the cut-off date, Jan. 1, 2004 (denoted 0). All individual
characteristics are measured prior to disability award, and described in Table 1. The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were

.02

.749
.499
.249
.113
.101
.088

11.9
10.5
9
.9
.3

1.5

18.8
13.8
8.8
.201
0

.401

46357.8
37764.7
29171.7
.677
.429
.181

6

6

e

.025

E

.03

SGA

0

0

.005

.2

Participation Tax
.4
.6

.01
.015
.02
Density of earnings

.8

1

Figure 5: Distribution of earnings and participation tax rates

12450

24900

Control PTR

37350
49800
Annual Earnings
Control density

Treatment PTR

62250

74700

Treatment density

Note: This figure displays the the density of annual earnings (right axis) and the participation tax rate (left axis) for earnings
above SGA, under current rules (control group) and in the return-to-work program (treatment group). The x-axis represents
annual earnings in USD (NOK/USD ≈6). The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were
awarded DI benefits in Dec. 2003 & Jan. 2004. The vertical lines mark the maximum permitted annual earnings under current
rules (E) and under the return-to-work program (e) (see figure 1). The participation tax rate (PTR) is given by equation (5),
and incorporates the DI system, income taxation, and dependent benefits. The earnings densities are calculated with a bin size
of 0.5 SGA. The dots represent the unrestricted density in each bin, while the lines represent the estimated densities from local
linear regressions.

Web Appendix A: Tables and Figures
Table A.1: Characteristics of DI recipients in Norway and the U.S.
Characteristics

Norway

US

Age at award decision
Avg. earnings, 3-5 years before (USD)
Musculoskeletal diseases (%)
Mental disorders (%)
Cardiovascular system (%)
Other diagnosis (%)

51.69
27 143
32.8
28.6
9.8
28.8

47.38
25 503
35.1
22.3
8.9
33.7

Note: The Norwegian statistics cover individuals aged 18-66 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI benefits in 2003. The
U.S. statistics come from Maestas et al. (2012), and cover individuals aged 18-64 (at the date of DI award), who applied for and were
awarded DI benefits during the period 2005-2006. Maestas et al. (2012) define average earnings in the U.S. as mean earnings over the
last 3-5 years before DI award. We define average earnings in Norway as mean earnings over the last 4 years before DI award.

Figure A.1: Budget sets in Norway and the U.S.

1000

1000

1500

U.S. (SSDI)

0

0

290

560

Total Weekly Income (USD)

1500

Norway

50

40

30

20

Hours of work per week

10

0

50

40

30

20

10

0

Hours of work per week

Note: The black solid lines represent the budget set for individuals under current rules in Norway (left graph) and the U.S. (right
graph), and the dashed lines represent the change in the budget constraint due to the return-to-work program (left graph) and the ’$1
for $2 offset’ policy (right graph). In each graph, we use the wage and benefit levels associated with a typical Norwegian DI recipient.
To compute the benefit levels, we use the average work history of recipients awarded DI during the period July 2003 to February 2004.
We further set the hourly wage equal to the average hourly wage in the sample of workers who are not on DI but have similar observable
characteristics as the DI recipients. For simplicity, we ignore income taxation, dependent benefits, and health insurance: Total weekly
income is thus equal to earnings plus DI benefits. The SSDI budget set under the ’$1 for $2 offset’ policy is constructed by calculating
the AIE and subsequently the corresponding PIA-amount, according to the standard SSDI formula.

Figure A.2: Distribution of the Assignment Variable and the McCrary Test
McCrary’s Density Test

.03

Density

0

.01

100

.02

200

Frequency

300

.04

.05

400

Award Date (Assignment variable)

−24

−18

−12

−6

Award date

0

6

12

−24

−18

−12

−6

0

6

12

Award date

Note: The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI benefits during the period Jan.
2002 to Dec. 2004. The left graph shows the frequency of DI recipients by month of DI award: It plots the unrestricted monthly means,
and the estimated monthly means from a local linear regression applied to each side of the cut-off date for eligibility to temporary DI,
March 2004. The right graph shows the density of DI recipients by month of DI award: It plots the monthly density, and then smooths
the histogram using a local linear regression (with 2 months of bandwidth) applied to each side of the cut-off date for eligibility to the
return-to-work program, Jan. 2004. The dashed lines represent the 95 percent confidence interval of the estimated monthly means.
In the x-axis, 0 represents Jan. 2004. The gray shaded areas mark the months in which individuals awarded DI were affected by a
potentially confounding policy change.

Table A.2: Difference-in-Difference Specification of FD and RD model
Outcome variables:
LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)

DiD

RD-DiD

Comparison means [st. dev]
Jan. & Feb. 04 Rejected applicants

0.020

0.025

0.018

0.26

(0.021)

(0.032)

[0.134]

[0.440]

0.029

0.03

0.02

0.316

(0.022)

(0.035)

[0.142]

[0.466]

0.056**

0.08**

0.034

0.316

(0.026)

(0.041)

[0.182]

[0.466]

Avg. earnings

1195*

1832*

1551

13223

(2005-2007)

(669)

(1080)

[5033]

[21314]

Characteristics:

DiD

RD-DiD

Age at DI award
Male
Years of Schooling
Experience
AIE
Local unemployment rate
Local DI rate
Number of Children
Musculosceletal system
Mental disorders

Obs

Comparison means
Jan. & Feb. 04 Rejected applicants

0.89

1.52

38.4

38.6

(1.27)
-0.003
(0.06)
0.41
(0.38)
2.0

(2.00)
-0.01
(0.10)
0.22
(0.60)
2.79

[9.7]
0.50
[0.50]
10.5
[3.1]
13.9

[7.5]
0.515
[0.50]
9.9
[3.8]
11.3

(1.30)
1726
(2178)
0.000
(0.001)
0.006*

(2.00)
1810
(3435)
-0.0004
(0.0014)
0.0079

[10.0]
38013
[17686]
0.024
[0.008]
0.098

[9.0]
34558
[15118]
0.024
[0.009]
0.098

(0.003)
-0.028
(0.15)
-0.015
(0.054)
-0.03

(0.005)
-0.020
(0.23)
-0.001
(0.084)
-0.116

[0.024]
0.90
[1.13]
0.22
[0.415]
0.386

[0.024]
0.954
[1.23]
0.332
[0.472]
0.321

(0.065)

(0.102)

[0.487]

[0.468]

937

1930

440

196

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity. RD-DiD reports bootstrap standard errors with 1,000 replications.
Note: This table displays estimates from difference-in-differences specification of the first difference model (DiD) and the regression
discontinuity model (RD-DiD). Labor force participation (LFP) is equal to one if annual earnings exceed the SGA threshold. Average
earnings (in USD) are the mean annual earnings over the period 2005-2007 (NOK/USD ≈6). DiD uses the sample of individuals aged
18-49 (at the date of DI award) who were awarded DI between Dec 2002 - Jan. 2003 or between Dec. 2003 - Jan. 2004. RD-DiD
uses the sample of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award) who were awarded DI between Nov. 2003 - Feb. 2004 or between
Nov. 2002 - Feb. 2003. The third column shows mean and standard deviation (in square brackets) of the outcomes and characteristics
for individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award), who were awarded DI in Jan. and Feb. 2004. The last column shows mean and
standard deviation (in square brackets) of the outcomes and characteristics for individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI rejection),
whose DI application was rejected in Dec. 2003 and Jan. 2004 (excluding those who successfully re-apply/appeal during the next five
years).

Table A.3: Placebo tests
Sample:

FD

DiD

RD

RD-DiD

Dec. 02 - Jan. 03

Dec. 02 - Jan. 03

Nov. 02 - Feb. 03

Nov. 02 - Feb. 03

Dec. 01 - Jan. 02

LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)
Avg. Earnings
(2005-2007)
Obs

Nov. 01 - Feb. 02

0.003

0.0052

0.003

0.011

(0.014)

(0.0221)

(0.022)

(0.035)

0.003

0.0103

0.009

0.012

(0.013)

(0.0257)

(0.022)

(0.042)

-0.002

-0.007

0.006

0.006

(0.017)

(0.028)

(0.026)

(0.044)

-68

-167

-202

-354

(440)

(770)

(727)

(1268)

502

970

1033

1968

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity; RD-DiD reports bootstrap standard errors with 1,000 replications.
Note: This table displays estimates from the FD and the RD model when we move the cut-off date from Jan. 2004 to Jan. 2003.
Labor force participation (LFP) is equal to one if annual earnings exceed the SGA threshold. Average earnings (in USD) are the mean
annual earnings over the period 2005-2007 (NOK/USD ≈6). The FD model uses the sample of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of
DI award), who were awarded DI in Dec. 2002 and Jan. 2003. DiD uses the sample of individuals aged 18-49 (at the date of DI award)
who were awarded DI in Dec. 2001, Jan. 2002, Dec. 2002 and Jan. 2003. The RD model uses the sample of individuals aged 18-49 (at
the date of DI award), who were awarded DI between Nov. 2002 and Feb. 2003. RD-DiD uses the sample of individuals aged 18-49 (at
the date of DI award) who were awarded DI between Nov. 2002 and Feb. 2003 or between Nov. 2001 and Feb. 2002.

Table A.4: Specification checks of RD model
Panel (a)

LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)

Local linear regressions
Oct. 2003-Feb. 2004

Separate linear parametric trends
Nov. 2003-Feb. 2004
Oct. 2003-Feb. 2004

0.031

0.035

0.028

0.043*

0.033

0.040*

(0.021)

(0.021)

(0.024)

(0.025)

(0.021)

(0.022)

0.039

0.037*

0.039

0.042

0.038

0.042*

(0.024)

(0.022)

(0.027)

(0.027)

(0.024)

(0.024)

0.079***

0.071***

0.087***

0.079**

0.074***

0.064**

(0.027)

(0.026)

(0.031)

(0.032)

(0.027)

(0.028)

1551**

1372**

1630**

1728**

1494**

1466*

(712)

(676)

(814)

(828)

(745)

(755)

Controls

NO

YES

NO

YES

NO

YES

Obs

1106

1106

897

897

1106

1106

LFP(2007)
Avg. earnings
(2005-2007)

Common parametric trends (Oct. 2003 - Feb. 2004)
Linear
Quadratic
Cubic

Panel (B)

LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)
Avg. earnings
(2005-2007)
Controls
Obs

0.033*
(0.019)
0.042*
(0.022)
0.069***

0.039**
(0.020)
0.040*
(0.022)
0.058**

0.032
(0.022)
0.037
(0.025)
0.079***

0.041*
(0.023)
0.043*
(0.025)
0.069**

0.023
(0.029)
0.042
(0.033)
0.097***

0.041
(0.030)
0.04
(0.033)
0.085**

(0.025)
1310*
(683)
NO

(0.025)
1218*
(691)
YES

(0.029)
1575**
(783)
NO

(0.029)
1586**
(795)
YES

(0.038)
1704*
(1033)
NO

(0.039)
1814*
(1049)
YES

1106

1106

1106

1106

1106

1106

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity.
Note: This table displays results from specification checks of the RD model. Labor force participation (LFP) is equal to one if annual
earnings exceed the SGA threshold. Average earnings (in USD) are the mean annual earnings over the period 2005-2007 (NOK/USD
≈6). All covariates are measured prior to disability award, and described in Table 1. When including covariates, we allow for a flexible
functional form by including a large set of dummies for different values of the covariates. The sample is restricted to individuals aged
18-49 at the date of DI award, during the period described in the columns. Panel (A) allows for separate trends on each side of the
cut-off date: The first two columns use local linear regressions with a triangular kernel density function; the four next columns use
linear trends in the assignment variable. Panel (B) restricts the trends to be the same on both sides of the cut-off date: The first two
columns use a linear trend in the assignment variable; the two next columns use a quadratic trend in the assignment variable; the last
two columns use a cubic trend in the assignment variable.

Figure A.3: Increasing the Bandwidth

0

Average effect on LFP (2005−2007)
.02
.04
.06

.08

RD model

2

4

6

8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Bandwidth to the left of the cut−off (in months)

24

26

Note: This figure displays estimates from 25 separate RD regressions, where each specification increases the the bandwidth to the left
of the cut-off date by one month. The y-axis represents the estimated effect of the return-to-work on average labor force participation
over the period 2005-2007; the x-axis represents the bandwidth to the left of the cut-off date in months; the minimum bandwidth is 2
months (individuals awarded DI between Nov. 2003-Dec. 2003) and the maximum bandwidth is 26 months (individuals awarded DI
between Nov. 2001-Dec. 2003). In each RD regression, we use a local linear regression with a triangular kernel density and 2 months
of bandwidth to the right of the cut-off date.

Table A.5: Subsample Analysis
Age groups

Panel (a)
Dependent variable:

Aged 18-49
RD model

FD model

0.033**

0.038

-0.0004

-0.007

(0.016)

(0.025)

(0.011)

(0.016)

LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)

0.033*

0.042*

-0.003

-0.004

(0.026)

(0.010)

(0.015)

0.053**

0.085***

-0.016

-0.031*

(0.022)

(0.031)

(0.011)

(0.017)

435

897

972

2131

Gender

Panel (b)
Dependent variable:

LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)
Obs

RD model

(0.018)

Obs

LFP(2005)

Aged 50-61

FD model

Males

Females

Diagnosis groups
Mental disorders
Other disorders

FD

RD

FD

RD

FD

RD

FD

RD

0.055*
(0.031)
0.054*

0.073*
(0.039)
0.072*

0.0003
(0.013)
0.014

-0.011
(0.026)
0.025

0.028
(0.031)
0.035

0.058
(0.047)
0.036

0.034*
(0.020)
0.043

0.027
(0.027)
0.051

(0.032)
0.074**
(0.033)
205

(0.042)
0.095**
(0.044)
439

(0.021)
0.038
(0.030)
230

(0.028)
0.063*
(0.038)
458

(0.030)
0.035
(0.037)
185

(0.033)
0.022
(0.045)
364

(0.030)
0.083***
(0.031)
250

(0.038)
0.122***
(0.042)
533

Experience

Panel (C)

Average Indexed Earnings

Dependent variable:

Low Experience

High Experience

LFP(2005)

FD
-0.012

RD
-0.014

FD
0.043

RD
0.042

FD
-0.009

RD
0.004

FD
0.049*

RD
0.038

(0.018)
-0.007
(0.018)
0.017
(0.024)
217

(0.023)
0.004
(0.026)
0.04
(0.034)
420

(0.026)
0.068**
(0.032)
0.072**
(0.033)
218

(0.032)
0.086**
(0.038)
0.110***
(0.042)
477

(0.015)
0.014
(0.020)
0.043
(0.032)
218

(0.017)
0.016
(0.022)
0.063*
(0.035)
442

(0.029)
0.068*
(0.035)
0.084***
(0.033)
217

(0.038)
0.109***
(0.042)
0.131***
(0.043)
455

LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)
Obs
Panel (D)
Dependent variable:

Education groups
High Education

Low Education

Low AIE

High AIE

Local labor market conditions
High Unemployment

Low Unemployment

LFP(2007)

FD
0.031
(0.019)
0.018
(0.027)
0.057**

RD
0.021
(0.034)
0.021
(0.039)
0.081**

FD
0.045
(0.029)
0.050*
(0.028)
0.076**

RD
0.086**
(0.041)
0.067**
(0.030)
0.100**

FD
0.059**
(0.027)
0.062**
(0.031)
0.100***

RD
0.097**
(0.038)
0.087**
(0.038)
0.153***

FD
0.003
(0.021)
0.002
(0.023)
0.032

RD
-0.011
(0.023)
-0.011
(0.024)
0.040

Obs

(0.029)
248

(0.039)
502

(0.037)
187

(0.042)
395

(0.033)
221

(0.046)
448

(0.032)
214

(0.035)
449

LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity.
Note: This table displays the effect of the return-to-work program on labor force participation (LFP) for different subgroups. LFP
is equal to one if annual earnings exceed the SGA threshold. Except for DI recipients aged 50-61, the subgroups are based on on the
sample of individuals aged 18-49 at the date of DI award. The estimates are based on the baseline FD and RD model. All covariates
are measured prior to disability award and are described in Table 4.1. In the FD model (described in Table 1), the sample is restricted
to individuals awarded DI benefits during the period Dec. 2003 - Jan. 2004. In the RD model (described in Table 1), the sample is
restricted to individuals awarded DI benefits during the period Nov. 2003 - Feb. 2004. Low (high) experience is defined as years of
experience below (above) the sample median. Low (high) AIE is defined as average indexed earnings below (above) the sample median.
Low (high) unemployment rate is defined as living in a municipality in which the unemployment rate is below (above) the sample
median. High (low) education is defined as (not) having completed high school.

Table A.6: Awarded and rejected applicants: Labor force participation and characteristics

Rejected/Awarded DI:
LFP(2005)
LFP(2006)
LFP(2007)

LFP:

Mean difference in LFP:

Rejected Applicants
Dec. 03 & Jan. 04

Rejected Applicants - Awarded Applicants)
Dec. 03
Jan. 04

0.26

0.224***

0.258***

0.246***

[0.440]

(0.033)

(0.035)

(0.031)

(0.034)

0.316

0.266***

0.305***

0.298***

0.318***

[0.466]

(0.035)

(0.038)

(0.033)

(0.036)

0.316

0.244***

0.288***

0.298***

0.334***

[0.466]

(0.037)

(0.040)

(0.033)

(0.037)

NO

YES

NO

YES

Controls
Characteristics:
Rejected Applicants
Rejected/Awarded DI:
Age at DI award
Male
Years of Schooling
Experience
AIE
Local unemployment rate
Local DI rate
Number of Children
Musculosceletal system
Mental disorders

Obs

0.264***

Mean difference in characteristics:
Rejected Applicants - Awarded Applicants

Dec. 03 & Jan. 04

Dec. 03

Jan. 04

38.6
[7.5]
0.515
[0.50]
9.9

0.402
(0.833)
0.070
(0.049)
-0.830***

0.100
(0.863)
0.018
(0.049)
-0.513

[3.8]
11.3
[9.0]
34558
[15118]
0.024

(0.299)
-2.6***
(0.883)
-3720**
(1465)
0.001**

(0.359)
-2.8***
(0.944)
-4010**
(1637)
0.001

[0.009]
0.098
[0.024]
0.954
[1.23]
0.332

(0.001)
-0.005**
(0.002)
0.018
(0.114)
0.109**

(0.001)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.013
(0.117)
0.122***

[0.472]
0.321
[0.468]

(0.044)
-0.124***
(0.048)

(0.043)
-0.083*
(0.047)

196

416

411

*** significant at 1% level, ** significant at 5% level, *significant at 10% level.
Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroscedasticity.
Note: This table displays differencess in labor force participation (LFP) and characteristics between rejected and awarded applicants
(see Table 1 for definitions). The sample consists of individuals aged 18-49 at the time they were awarded/rejected DI. The first
column shows mean and standard deviation (in square brackets) of LFP and characteristics for individuals whose DI application was
rejected in Dec. 2003 & Jan. 2004; rejected applicants who successfully reapply during the next five years are excluded. The second
column shows the mean difference in LFP and characteristics between the rejected applicants and individuals awarded DI in Dec. 2003
(treatment group). The third third column shows the mean differences in LFP between the two groups, conditional on the observable
characteristics. The fourth column shows the mean difference in LFP and characteristics between the rejected applicants and individuals
awarded DI in Jan. 2003 (control group). When computing the conditional mean differences, we allow for a flexible functional form by
including a large set of dummies for different values of the covariates .

Web Appendix B: Induced Entry
In this appendix, we make a calculation for the size of the induced entry that would have to be generated
by the return-to-work policy to lead to an increase in program costs.
Consider first our baseline RD estimate, suggesting that the return-to-work policy reduces the program
costs by 5 percent per existing recipient. However, some individuals may be induced to apply for DI because
of the program. We assume that any induced entrants are earning more than the substantial gainful activitiy
level (otherwise, the program gives no incentive to enter DI). We further assume that induced entrants have
the same distribution of earnings (and thus the same program costs) as DI recipients in the treatment group
who work.1 Under these assumptions, the return-to-work policy may finance 15 new entrants per 100 existing
recipients without increasing the program costs.
We define the elasticity of entry response as the percentage increase in the the number of DI recipients
relative to the percentage change in the disposable income (I) as a DI recipient. This elasticity can be
expressed as
ε=

0.15
P r(Award = 1) · E(4I | Award = 1)

where2

E(4I | Award = 1) =

E(I | return − to − work, W > SGA) − E(I | current rules, W > SGA)
.
E(I | current rules, W > SGA)

To calculate ε, we need to measure P r(Award = 1) and E(4I | Award = 1). Under the above
assumptions, E(I | return − to − work, W > SGA) equals E(I | treatment, W > SGA); we observe the
latter in the data. To obtain E(I | current rules, W > SGA), we use the observed distribution of earnings
for DI recipients in the treatment group who work and compute what their disposable income would have
been under current rules. As individuals induced to apply for DI because of the return-to-work policy are
likely to be of better health than the applicants under current rules, we take the DI award rate of applicants
under current rules in 2003 (i.e. 65 percent) as an upper bound of P r(Award = 1). This gives a lower bound
of 1.5 on the elasticity of induced entry that lead the return-to-work policy to increase program costs. If we
instead use the estimate from baseline FD model, we get a lower bound of 1.1.3
The lower bound estimates far exceed the elasticities of induced entry reported in previous studies. Gruber
1 This

assumption may generate a downward bias in the implied elasticity of entry response. The reason is that the induced
entrants are likely to be of better health; thus, the earnings of existing recipients may be viewed as a lower bound for the
earnings of induced entrants (see Bound, 1989).
2 Because the return-to-work-policy does not change the disposable income of non-recipients, E(4I | Award = 0) = 0.
3 Specifically, the baseline RD model gives

(2000) reports elasticity estimates in the range of 0.28-0.36, whereas Campolieti (2004) finds little, if any,
effect on entry rates from an increase in benefit levels. There is also a sizeable literature that has estimated
elasticities of entry response by modeling labor force participation or DI recipiency as a function of potential
DI benefit levels. Using cross-sectional variation in DI benefits, these studies tend to find elasticities in the
range of 0.1-0.2 (see Gruber (2000) for a review of this evidence).

ε≥

0.1526
= 1.5,
0.65 · 0.161

ε≥

0.119
= 1.1.
0.65 · 0.165

while the baseline FD model gives

