                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  EXPLORING REALLOCATION’S APPARENT WEAK CONTRIBUTION TO GROWTHˆ

                                          Mitsukuni Nishida
                                             Amil Petrin
                                            Sašo Polanec

                                        Working Paper 19012
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19012


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We would like to thank Jordi Jaumandreu and seminar participants at the 2009 Edinburgh workshop
on firms in transition and developing economies, the 2009 CAED conference, and the 2011 IIOC for
helpful suggestions. We are grateful for numerous comments and suggestions from the Editor, Associate
Editor, and three anonymous referees. Machiko Narita provided splendid research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Mitsukuni Nishida, Amil Petrin, and Sašo Polanec. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Exploring Reallocation’s Apparent Weak Contribution to Growthˆ
Mitsukuni Nishida, Amil Petrin, and Sašo Polanec
NBER Working Paper No. 19012
May 2013
JEL No. J24,L60,O47

                                             ABSTRACT

Two recent meta-analyses use variants of the Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) (BHC) decompositions
to ask whether recent robust growth in Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) across twenty-five countries
is due to lower barriers to input reallocation. They find weak gains from measured reallocation and
strong within-plant productivity gains. We show these findings may be because BHC indices decompose
ALP growth using plant-level output-per-labor (OL) as a proxy for the marginal product of labor and
changes in OL as a proxy for changes in plant-level productivity. We provide simple examples to show
that 1) reallocation growth from labor should track marginal changes in labor weighted by the marginal
product of labor, 2) BHC reallocation growth can be positively correlated, negatively correlated, or
uncorrelated with actual growth arising from the reallocation of inputs, and that 3) BHC indices can
mistake growth from reallocation as growth from productivity, principally because OL is neither a
perfect index of marginal products nor plant-level productivity. We then turn to micro-level data from
Chile, Colombia, and Slovenia, and we find for the first two that BHC indices report weak or negative
growth from labor reallocation. Using the reallocation definition based on marginal products we find
a positive and robust role for labor reallocation in all three countries and a reduced role of plant-level
technical efficiency in growth. We close by exploring potential corrections to the BHC decompositions
but here we have limited success.


Mitsukuni Nishida                                   Sašo Polanec
The Johns Hopkins Carey Business School             Faculty of Economics
100 International Dr.                               University of Ljubljana
Baltimore, MD 21202                                 Kardeljeva pl. 17 1000
nishida@jhu.edu                                     Ljubljana, Slovenia
                                                    saso.polanec@ef.uni-lj.si
Amil Petrin
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
4-101 Hanson Hall
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
petrin@umn.edu
1        Introduction

Recent empirical work by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Petrin and Sivadasan (2013) …nds
that there are large di¤erences between inputs’ marginal products across plants in China,
India, and Chile, suggesting the existence of barriers to the reallocation of inputs. Policy-
makers have speculated that the elimination of these barriers should lead to economic growth
from reallocation and in the last few decades this presumption has led to reforms in many
countries targeted at reducing them.
        Two recent meta-analyses - one by Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta (2004) (BHS)
and one by Pages, Pierre, and Scarpetta (2009) (PPS) - together examine twenty-…ve countries
across Europe, the Americas, and East Asia, many of which have recently adopted reforms
aimed at facilitating the freer movement of inputs across plants. They show that there has
been strong growth in aggregate labor productivity (ALP) - de…ned as aggregate value-added
divided by total labor - across most of these countries.1 In order to examine the sources of
this growth both studies decompose ALP into “real productivity” and “reallocation” com-
ponents using the approaches from Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) (BHC) and Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) (FHK). These decompositions include three terms, a “within”
growth term which increases when establishment-level value-added-per-labor increases, a “be-
tween”growth term which increases when labor shares increase at establishments with higher
value-added-per-labor, and a “cross”or “covariance”term that increases when there is a con-
temporaneous increase in labor shares and value-added-per-labor. The …rst term is regarded
as the contribution of real productivity to growth, the second term is regarded as the con-
tribution of the reallocation of inputs to growth, and the …nal term includes a mix of both
sources of growth.
        Contrary to the folk-wisdom of reallocation following deregulation, the main …ndings from
both papers are that most of the growth has been driven by within-plant productivity growth.2

    1
    The complete list from BHS is Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Estonia, Finland, France, Korea, Latvia,
Netherlands, Portugal, Slovenia, Taiwan, UK, USA, and West Germany. The complete list from PPS is
Venezuela, Nicaragua, Peru, Paraguay, Brazil, Mexico, El Salvador, Colombia, Panama, Costa Rica, Argentina,
Dominican Republic, and Chile.
  2
    See Figure 4.8 in PPS and Figure 9 in BHS.



                                                    2
Nine of the twenty-…ve countries have negative between-plant reallocation and four more have
weak positive between-plant reallocation. Twenty-three of the twenty-…ve countries have a
covariance term that is negative. The United States, for example, had both a negative between
term and a negative covariance term over the years 1987-1997, suggesting inputs were moving
from high-value to low-value activities during a period when GDP growth averaged a robust
3% per annum.
   In this paper we explore possible reasons for this apparent weak or negative contribution
of input reallocation to growth during prosperous times. We start by showing that both the
within and the between components of ALP growth can lead to mistaken inferences in terms
of characterizing the sources of growth. Consider a single-good economy with two plants that
convert the single input labor into output via the production functions


                                         Qi = ! i l l ; i = 1; 2


with ! i denoting plant-level technical e¢ ciency and                 l   < 1: At the output-maximizing allo-
cation of labor (l1 ; l2 ) marginal products are equated across plants

                                             @Q1 (l1 )   @Q2 (l2 )
                                                       =
                                               @l          @l

as are output-to-labor ratios,
                                                 Q1 (l1 )   Q2 (l2 )
                                                          =          :
                                                   l1         l2

Now suppose     l of labor is reallocated from plant 2 to plant 1. The marginal products are
such that
                                 @Q1 (l1 + l)   @Q2 (l2              l)
                                              <                           8l > 0;
                                     @l             @l

so aggregate output falls by      Q, the integral over the di¤erences in these marginal products:

                                    Z    l
                                                 @Q2 (l2       l)   @Q1 (l1 + l)
                            Q=               (                                   )dl;
                                     0               @l                 @l

which is the di¤erence between the lost output at plant 2 and the gained output at plant 1.



                                                           3
   How do BHC and FHK behave? If we let                     si denote the change in share then the
BHC/FHK between terms are given as

                                          Q1 (l1 )          Q2 (l2 )
                                     s1            +   s2            ;
                                            l1                l2

so despite output falling due to labor reallocation both the BHC and FHK between terms are
zero because the output-per-labor ratios are equal before labor is reallocated and     s1 =        s2 .
On productivity growth the BHC/FHK within-terms sum the product of the base-period share
                                                                                              Q1
times the change in output-per-labor across …rms. It is straightforward to show that          l1   <0
      Q2
and   l2   > 0 so the within term is non-zero even though there is no change in the technical
e¢ ciency term ! i . The example illustrates that the use of the base period output-per-labor as
an index for reallocation can be problematic because it is not equal to the marginal product
of labor at either plant once labor starts reallocating. Similarly, on productivity growth the
use of the change in output-per-labor as an index of the change in plant-level productivity is
problematic because, except for the special case of constant returns to scale, output-per-labor
changes in response to changes in input levels without any change in technical e¢ ciency.
   In Section 2 we generalize this example in two ways. We show that 1) BHC/FHK reallo-
cation can be positively correlated, negatively correlated, or uncorrelated with actual growth
arising from the reallocation of inputs, and that 2) consistent with the empirical …ndings of
BHS/PPS, it is easy to construct examples where with strong ALP growth that is entirely
due to reallocation BHC/FHK …nd that within growth is strong, between growth is weak,
and the covariance term is strongly negative.
   In Sections 3 and 4 we turn to micro-level data from Chile, Colombia, and Slovenia to try
to understand whether the …ndings in BHS and PPS may be due to the use of output-per-labor
as an index of both changes in technical e¢ ciency and changes in marginal products. These
three countries went through periods of deregulation prior to or during our sample periods
and they all experienced strong ALP growth over the balance of these periods. In addition to
calculating BHC/FHK on all three data sets, we use the framework from Petrin and Levinsohn
(2012), where the aggregation of establishment-level changes of technical e¢ ciency and input
reallocations add up exactly to changes in aggregate value added, holding primary input

                                                  4
use constant.3 This de…nition leads to a decomposition that calculates labor reallocation
by tracking marginal changes in labor weighted by the marginal product of labor instead of
output-per-labor, just as in the calculation of            Q above.4
       We show that the …ndings of BHS and PPS are qualitatively the same as what we …nd in
our data. In Slovenia we …nd reasonably strong between reallocation using BHC/FHK, but in
Chile and Colombia there is weak between growth. We also …nd that the covariance term is
negative in all 40 country-year pairs in our data. In contrast, when we use the de…nition of la-
bor reallocation based on marginal products we …nd labor’s reallocation contributes positively
and meaningfully to growth in 31 of the 40 country-year pairs in our data, More generally,
aggregate input reallocation is positive in 36 of the 40 country-year pairs and it accounts for
most of the economic growth that takes place relative to technical e¢ ciency growth.5
       There are other measurement issues that arise with the BHC/FHK de…nition of realloca-
tion and we spend the …nal sections of the paper investigating whether correcting for these
measurement issues changes the outcomes of the BHC/FHK decompositions. In Section 6
we show that the aggregate labor productivity between term can be decomposed into a term
related to reallocation and a term related to the change in the total number of establishments,
the latter of which often works to reduce the total between term in our data. In Chile and
Colombia separating out the number of establishments term leads to a small but positive
increase in between reallocation while in Slovenia it leads to a dramatic increase in between
reallocation.
       In Section 7 we then look to see whether the decompositions change when we control
for capital and labor heterogeneity across establishments by using total factor productivity
instead of ALP. We also try to control for unobserved prices and unobserved levels of capac-
ity utilization, and we look at …ve year di¤erences for all three countries instead of annual

   3
     Applications include Petrin, White, and Reiter (2011), Cubas et al. (2011), and Kwon et al. (2009).
   4
     It is straightforward to show that the reallocation gains calculated in Restuccia and Rogerson (2008), Hsieh
and Klenow (2009), and Petrin and Sivadasan (2013) are special cases of the reallocation framework in Petrin
and Levinsohn (2012), and that their setup nests measured growth and reallocation in any theory model that
de…nes aggregate productivity growth as they do. For example, this includes the models of reallocation by
Aghion and Howitt (1992), Aghion and Howitt (1994), Caballero and Hammour (1994), Ericson and Pakes
(1995), Melitz (2003), or Lentz and Mortensen (2008).
   5
     The numbers do not exactly match with BHS’s or PPS’s numbers for these three countries due to several
di¤erences, including sample years.


                                                       5
observations. None of these corrections changes the substance of the BHC/FHK …ndings. We
now turn to the discussion of the ALP decompositions.


2      Decompositions of Aggregate Labor Productivity Growth

We review the most popular decompositions of ALP and then provide two examples that
illustrate how the these decompositions can be misleading in their assessment of the sources
of growth.


2.1    Continuous Time ALP and Discrete Time Approximations

We denote the amount of labor input and value added of plant i, at time t by Lit and V Ait
respectively. For a given plant, V Lit = VLAitit is value added per laborer, or plant-level labor
                     P                                                                 Lit
productivity, Lt =     i Lit is aggregate labor input in the economy, and sit = Lt is the

employment share of plant i at time t. Aggregate labor productivity (ALP) at time t - V Lt -
is then de…ned as                            P
                                                V Ait
                                      V Lt = Pi       :
                                                i Lit
                             P              P
We can then express V Lt = i LLitt VLAitit = i sit V Lit ; so the change in V Lt in continuous
                                                              P              P
time is the sum of the following two components: d(V Lt ) = i sit dV Lit + i dsit V Lit :
    Data are not reported in continuous time so practitioners use discrete time approximations
to continuous time growth. We employ the two most popular approximations, one from Baily,
Hulten, and Campbell (1992) and one from Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), each of
which decomposes ALP into a real productivity growth and a reallocation component. Both
of these decompositions add up to
                                         V Lt V L t   1
                                                                                                (1)
                                            V Lt 1

but di¤er in the ways they decompose the numerator A           V Lt    V Lt   1.   In what follows,
we compare how each method decomposes the numerator of the growth rate in equation (1),
V Lt    V Lt   1.

    The most commonly used form of ALP decomposition, which is used in Pages, Pierre, and



                                               6
Scarpetta (2009), is Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) and given by



                            X                                 X                               X
                  A1                sit   1      V Lit +            V Lit        1   sit +           V Lit       sit
                            i2C                               i2C                             i2C
                            |             {z         }        |             {z            }   |        {z         }
                                    Within e¤ect              BHC between e¤ect                     Cross term
                                X                        X
                            +         sit V Lit                   sit   1   V Lit    1;                                        (2)
                                i2E                      i2X
                                |                        {z                          }
                                                BHC Net Entry


where    V Lit = V Lit V Lit         1,       sit = sit sit         1,   and C; E; and X denote the set of continuing,
entering, and exiting establishments at time t.6 The …rst term is the sum of establishment-
level changes in value added-per-laborer and is referred to as the within-continuing-plant
productivity growth term, or simply the “within e¤ect.” The second term is the sum of
changes in employment share times the establishment-level value added-per-laborer at time
t   1 and is referred to as the reallocation term for continuing establishments, or the “between
e¤ect.” The between term contributes positively to ALP when the labor market share of
higher value added-per-laborer plants at time t                                  1 increases from t              1 to t. The cross
term or “covariance” contributes positively when plants with increasing labor shares are also
plants that have increases in value added-per-worker. The between term is viewed as the
“clean” reallocation term because it holds real productivity constant while the covariance
term contains both growth from real productivity and reallocation. The last two terms re‡ect
the impact of net entry on ALP.7

    6
      We follow the convention in the literature by using time t 1 weights for the within and between terms in
both BHC and FHK decomposition. Appendix D discusses alternative representations of the BHC decompo-
sition using other weights.
    7
      The only di¤erence between Pages, Pierre, and Scarpetta (2009) our decomposition is that we include
entrants and exiters and they focus only on continuing plants. This di¤erence does not a¤ect the substance of
our …ndings.




                                                                    7
       The FHK decomposition is given by

                        X                                X                                              X
                A2              sit   1       V Lit +          (V Lit   1     V Lt     1)       sit +           V Lit      sit
                        i2C                              i2C                                            i2C
                        |             {z            }    |                  {z                   }      |           {z      }
                                Within e¤ect                     FHK Between e¤ect                            Cross term
                            X                                       X
                        +         sit (V Lit            V Lt   1)           sit   1    (V Lit   1    V Lt      1 ):              (3)
                            i2E                                     i2X
                            |                                       {z                                          }
                                                               FHK Net Entry


The FHK within term and the covariance term are identical to those of BHC decomposition
in equation (2). The FHK between term di¤ers from the BHC between term in that it is
positive if establishments with above-average productivity increase their shares sit . Because
BHC and FHK sum to the same quantity by construction, the di¤erence in the FHK between
term and the BHC between term exactly equals the di¤erence in the BHC net entry term and
the FHK net entry term. We now explore the ALP decomposition in two simple examples.


2.2      Decomposing Growth: Example One

We consider a single-good economy with the single input labor in which there are N producers
that di¤er in their elasticities of output with respect to labor (or productivity in this setup):


                                                               Qi = ! l i ;


with      i   < 1 i = 1; : : : ; N .8 The consumption good price is normalized to 1 and labor is
supplied at constant wage w. Plants solve


                                                          maxl Qi (l)             wl


and in the competitive equilibrium, which is also the welfare maximizing equilibrium, plants
                                          @Qi (l)
will choose labor such that                @l           w = 0. Thus in equilibrium plants that have higher                       i ’s


   8
    For a setting with heterogeneous consumers, di¤erentiated products, and imperfect competition see Petrin
and Levinsohn (2012).




                                                                    8
will use more labor and have lower output-to-labor ratios given by

                                                          Qi  w
                                                             = :
                                                          li   i


         As in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) we introduce taxes or subsidies                            i   i = 1; : : : ; N on the
output of each plant, which leads plants to solve the new problem:

                                                           1
                                                maxl                  Qi (l)     wl
                                                          1+     i


and thus choose labor such that

                                                @Qi (l)
                                                               (1 +    i )w    = 0:
                                                 @l

Aggregate output falls because labor reallocates from the taxed to the subsidized plants. If
li (ti ) denotes the chosen labor level at plant i for any given level of tax ti then the cost in
terms of lost output of each tax            i   can be expressed as the integral over the di¤erence between
the marginal product and the wage from li0 = li (0) to li1 = li ( i ):

                                        Z   li1                                       2
                                                   @Qi (l)                            i
                                                                 w dl =                   w                              (4)
                                          li0       @l                            2

                                                  PN       2
for each i so total welfare falls by                       i
                                                       i=1 2   w.
         Depending upon how the taxes/subsidies correlate with the                            i ’s,   the BHC and FHK
between terms can be negative, zero, or positive. If taxes/subsidies are independent of the

 i ’s     then the plant-level changes in shares will be independent of the initial output-per-labor
ratios. Since the sum of the changes in shares always equals zero, the expected value of
BHC/FHK between terms equals zero.9 If the taxes/subsidies are positively correlated with

 i   - so more productive plants are taxed and less productive plants are subsidized - labor will
move in the direction of the low            i   plants, labor shares will increase at the plants that initially
have higher output-per-labor plants and decrease at plants that initially have lower output-

     9
         As the number of plants increases the between term converges to zero.



                                                                9
per-labor plants, leading to positive measured reallocation. Similarly, if the taxes/subsidies are
such that the more productive plants are subsidized and the less productive plants are taxed
then labor shares will increase (decrease) at the lower (higher) output-per-labor plants, leading
to negative measured reallocation. Thus the between term can be uncorrelated, negatively
correlated, or positively correlated with the actual change in output because initial output-per-
labor ratios do not re‡ect the changes in marginal products that occur as labor is reallocated.
    On measured aggregate productivity growth the …nding is similar, as changes in output-
per-labor do not re‡ect changes in technical e¢ ciency. While there has been no change in the

 i ’s,   one can show plants’output-per-labor ratios change by

                                              Qi          w
                                                 =    i       ;
                                              li          i


so the BHC/FHK aggregate real productivity growth terms will generally be non-zero. For
example, in general there will be positive aggregate real productivity growth if the high                   i

plants are taxed and the low       i   plants are subsidized as the high labor-share plants have
increasing output-per-labor ratios and the low labor-share plants have decreasing output-per-
labor ratios.


2.3       Decomposing Growth: Example Two

Here we provide a simple numerical example that illustrates it is easy to mimic the general
…ndings in the BHS/PPS studies of strong positive measured within growth, negative but small
between growth, and strong negative covariance term when there is no change in technical
e¢ ciency but when barriers to the movements of inputs are eliminated. We use the production
function from the previous section and set N = 2,         1       = 0:8,   2   = 0:5, ! = 2, and let there be
2.515 units of labor. In the output maximizing setting marginal products are equated with
2 units of labor at plant 1 and 0.515 units of labor at plant 2. Now suppose the economy
is in a state where there are 1.5 units at plant 1 and 1.015 units at plant 2 with barriers
preventing reallocation. If these barriers are removed so the inputs are reallocated to the
output maximizing setting then one can show that ALP increases by 0.054 (5.4%). Even



                                                 10
though all growth is due to reallocation the ALP decomposition has a within component that
is 0.262, a between component that is -0.028, and a covariance component that is -0.179.10


3     Aggregate Productivity Growth and Reallocation

We start by illustrating the Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) decomposition of aggregate produc-
tivity growth (APG) in a setting with no intermediate inputs or capital and in Section 3.2
we generalize the setup. In both cases APG is de…ned such that aggregation of plant-level
changes in technical e¢ ciency and input reallocations add up to changes in …nal demand,
holding capital and labor use constant.


3.1    One-input Economy

There are N plants in the economy each producing a single good with a single input labor l.
Production technologies are given by
                                                 Qi (li ; ! i );

with ! i denoting the level of plant i’s technical e¢ ciency. With no intermediate inputs total
output at plant i that goes to …nal demand is just Qi . Assuming a common wage W and
letting Pi denote the price of plant i’s output APG is then given as the di¤erence between
the change in aggregate …nal demand and the change in aggregate costs:

                                               X                   X
                                     AP G            Pi dQi            W dli ;                             (5)
                                                 i                 i


  10
     Speci…cally, the production functions are given as Q1 = 2 l0:8 and Q2 = 2 l 0:5 so at the distorted/non-
distorted levels of labor allocation …rm 1 produces 2.766/3.482 and …rm 2 produces 2.014/1.435 units of output,
so total output increase with the removal of the distortions from 4.781 to 4.917, or 0.136, giving an increase
in ALP of 0.136/2.515 = 0.054. Output-per-labor for …rm 1 decreases by -0.103 from 1.844 to 1.741 and
for …rm 2 increases by 0.801 from 1.985 to 2.786. The share of labor at …rm 1 increases by 0.198 (from
0.596 to 0.795) and decreases at …rm 2 by -0.198 (from 0.403 to 0.204). The within term is then given by
-0.103*0.596+0.801*0.403 = 0.262, the between term is 1.844*0.198-1.985*0.198=-0.028, and the covariance
term is -0.103*0.198-0.801*0.198=-0.179.




                                                      11
     By totally di¤erentiating Qi (li ; ! i ) one can see that (5) decomposes as:

                                   X              @Qi                     X          @Qi
                                            (Pi               W )dli +          Pi        d! i :                  (6)
                                                   @l                                @! i
                                      i                                    i

P        @Qi
    i Pi @! i d! i   are the total gains from technical e¢ ciency changes and are equal to the sum
over i of the value of the extra output …rm i is able to produce given d! i . Reallocation growth
is given by
                                                    X          @Qi
                                                         (Pi              W )dli
                                                                @l
                                                     i

so if dli of labor that was previously unemployed is reallocated to plant i then the value of
aggregate output changes by (Pi @Q
                                 @l
                                    i
                                                         W ), the di¤erence between the value of the marginal
product and the input price. In the case where a small amount of labor reallocates from j to
i so dli =      dlj aggregate output would change by di¤erence in the value of marginal products
between i and j:
                                                          @Qi             @Qj
                                                     Pi              Pj       :
                                                           @l              @l
                                                                                                        P
In the case that labor reallocates across plants but total labor is held constant (                     i dli   = 0),
the change in aggregate output from reallocation is given by

                                                         X          @Qi
                                                               Pi       dli :
                                                                     @l
                                                          i


     We return to the theory examples where we have changes in labor that are not in…nitesimal,
so the value of the marginal products must be integrated over the changes in labor to calculate
labor reallocation. In example one with a common output price Pi = 1 and common wage
Wi = w for all i, the aggregate change in output due to labor reallocation would be given as
noted earlier:
                                N Z
                                X           li1                                        N
                                                                                       X      2
                                                  @Qi (l; ! i )                               i
                                                                       w dl =                      w:             (7)
                                          li0        @l                                       2
                                i=1                                                     i=1

In example two it is straightforward to show integration over the changes in marginal products




                                                                  12
yields growth from labor reallocation (divided by total labor) exactly equal to 5.4%.11 In
both cases the changes in aggregate output due to reallocation equal what the Petrin and
Levinsohn (2012) decomposition reports for labor reallocation because that is how they de…ne
reallocation.


3.2       General Setup

The production technology is now given by Qi (Xi ; Mi ; ! i ); where Xi = (Xi1 ; : : : ; XiK ) is
the vector of K primary input amounts (types of labor and capital) used at plant i and
Mi = (Mi1 ; : : : ; MiJ ) is the vector giving the amount of each plant j’s output used as an
intermediate input at plant i.12 The total amount of output from plant i that goes to …nal
demand Yi is then
                                                                   X
                                                 Yi = Qi                       Mji ;
                                                                       j
          P
where        j   Mji is the total amount of i’s output that serves as intermediate input within plant
i and across other plants j 6= i. The amount of i’s output that goes to …nal demand is then
                      P
given as dYi = dQi       j dMij : APG is again given as the di¤erence between the change in

aggregate …nal demand and the change in aggregate costs, and in this generalized setup is
equal to:
                                                X                      XX
                                     AP G             Pi dYi                            Wik dXik ;                      (8)
                                                  i                        i        k

where Wik equals the unit cost to i of the k th primary input and dXik is the change in the
use of that primary input at plant i.13

  11
       The di¤erence in the integrals is given by
                                              Z 2                              Z   1:015
                                Q        1                  0:2                                0:5
                                   =                1:6 l         dl                       l         dl   = 5:4%:
                             2:515    2:515     1:5                            0:515:



  12
     Here we suppress their …xed cost term for transparency.
  13
     In the general setup from Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) the path of primary and intermediate inputs and
productivity shocks for plant i is given as Zit = (Xit ; Mit ; ! it ), t 2 [0; 1]. For the entire economy they
write Zt = (Z1t ; Z2t ; : : : ; ZN t ). Given Zt , output quantities are determined by the production technologies
and Qt = (Q1t (Z1t ); : : : ; QN t (ZN t )). Prices are assumed to be uniquely determined by Qt , given as Pt =
(P1t (Qt ); : : : ; PN t (Qt )), and similarly for primary input costs Wt = (W1t (Zt ); : : : ; WKt (Zt ))). Yit can then be
directly calculated for all i and t 2 [0; 1].



                                                             13
   (8) decomposes as:

             XX                    @Qi                       XX                   @Qi                         X        @Qi
                         (Pi               Wik )dXik +                     (Pi                 Pj )dMij +         Pi        d! i ;    (9)
                                   @Xk                                            @Mj                                  @! i
               i     k                                        i       j                                       i


         @Qi             @Qi
where    @Xk   and       @Mj       are the partial derivatives of the output production function with respect
to the kth primary input and the jth intermediate input respectively, dMij is the change
                                    P     @Qi
in intermediate input j at plant i.  i Pi @! i d! i is again the gains from technical e¢ ciency

changes and reallocation is now given as

                           XX                  @Qi                           XX                  @Qi
                                         (Pi             Wik )dXik +                       (Pi          Pj )dMij :
                                               @Xk                                               @Mj
                               i     k                                        i        j


where the reallocation terms include a value of marginal product term and an input cost term
for each plant and every primary and intermediate input. We now turn to estimation.


3.3     Estimation

For estimation we work with the value-added production function. In growth rates APG by
this de…nition can be expressed as the weighted sum of establishment-level growth rates in
value added minus the establishment-level growth rates in primary inputs and is given as

                                                     X                            XX
                                         AP G =           Div dlnV Ai                          sik dlnXik ;                          (10)
                                                     i                             i       k


with Div =     PV Ai (the            Domar weight) and the cost share for the kth primary input given as
                i V Ai
        Wik Xik
        P
sik =            .   We write the value-added production function as
          i V Ai


                                                                  X
                                                ln(V Ai ) =               "vik lnXik + ln! vi ;                                      (11)
                                                                  k


with "vik denoting the elasticity of (value-added) output with respect to the primary inputs,
and the establishment-level value-added technical e¢ ciency given as ln! vi . APG can then be




                                                                      14
decomposed as

             X             X                           X             X                              X
                     Div       ("vik   sik )dlnXik +           Div        ("vij   sij )dlnMij +             Div dln! vi :          (12)
                 i         k                               i          j                                 i
             |                    {z            }      |                     {z            }        |        {z       }
             Reallocation of Labor and Capital                 Reallocation of Materials          Technical E¢ ciency

                                                                                                                  P    v
                                                                                                                            P       v
Aggregate growth arising from the reallocation of primary inputs is given by                                        i Di        k ("ik

sik )dlnXik and growth from aggregate technical e¢ ciency - the analog to the within term
                       P
from ALP - is given by i Div dln! vi :
       Equation (10) can be estimated directly from the discrete data using Tornquist-Divisia
approximations.14 We estimate production function parameters in equation (11) separately
for each SIC 3-digit industry code for Chile and Colombia and NACE 2-digit industry code
for Slovenia using the proxy method from Wooldridge (2009) that modi…es Levinsohn and
Petrin (2003) to address the simultaneous determination of inputs and productivity.15 The
estimate of establishment-level technical e¢ ciency is then


                      [v it = ln(V Ait )
                      ln!                           bv jP lnLPit + bv jN P lnLN P bv
                                                                              it + jK lnKit ;



where bv j denote the estimated elasticities of value added with respect to the inputs in in-
dustry j. We use Tornquist-Divisia approximations for each term in equation (12).16 We
use three primary inputs as regressors: production (blue-collar) workers LPit , non-production
(white-collar) workers LN P
                        it , and capital Kit and aggregate the two labor inputs in our reallo-

cation results.

  14
      We chain-weightP to vupdate pricesPon an      annual basis (they are included in the Domar weights). For
                                                    P
                                               v         v                    v
example, AP G =         i D it lnV A it    i D   it   k sikt lnXikt where D it is the average of establishment i’s
value-added share weights from period t 1 to period t,          is the …rst di¤erence operator from period t 1 to
period t, sikt is the average across the two periods of establishment i’s expenditures for the kth primary input
as a share of establishment-level value-added.
   15
      The approach is robust to the comment by Ackerberg, Caves, and Frazer (2008) and is one line of code in
Stata.
   16                                                          P v P                              P v P
      For the reallocation terms we use the approximations i Dit k ("vik sikt ) lnXikt and i Dit j ("vij
                                                                             P v
sijt ) lnMijt . For the within growth (technical e¢ ciency) term we use i Dit ln! vit .




                                                                     15
4         Data and Results

This section describes our plant-level manufacturing data from Chile and Colombia, and …rm-
level data from Slovenia and our …ndings.


         Chilean and Colombian Manufacturing Data                       The Chilean and Colombian data
are annual and span the periods of 1979-95 and 1977-91, respectively. Here we provide a
brief overview of these data. Numerous other productivity studies use them, and we refer
interested readers to those papers for a more detailed data description.17
         The Chilean data, provided by Chile’s Instituto Nacional de Estadistica (INE), are unbal-
anced panels and cover all manufacturing plants with at least 10 employees. The Colombian
data from the Annual Manufacturing Survey, provided by Colombia’s Departamento Admin-
istrativo Nacional de Estadistica (DANE), are also unbalanced panels and cover all plants for
the years 1977-82 and the plants with at least 10 employees for the years 1983-91. In both
data sets, plants are observed annually and they include a measure of nominal gross output,
two types of labor, capital, and intermediate inputs, including fuels and electricity. Labor
is the number of man-years hired for production, and plants distinguish between their blue-
and white-collar workers. Liu (1991) documents the method for constructing the real value of
capital for the Chilean data, and we use the same method for the Colombian data.18 We use
double-de‡ated value added for Chilean results and single-de‡ated value added for Colombia
because intermediate input de‡ators are not available there.19


         Slovenian Manufacturing Data For Slovenian data, we use the annual accounting
data provided by the Slovenian Statistical O¢ ce and other sources from 1994 through 2004.

    17
     See Liu (1991), Liu (1993), Liu and Tybout (1996), and Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) for the Chilean data
and Roberts (1996) for the Colombian data.
  18
     For the Chilean data, the real value of capital is a weighted average of the peso value of depreciated
buildings, machinery, and vehicles. We assume each has a depreciation rate of 5%, 10%, and 20%, respectively.
Some plants don’t report initial capital stock, although they record investment. When possible, we used a
capital series that they report for a subsequent base year. For a small number of plants, they don’t report capital
stock in any year. We estimated a projected initial capital stock based on other reported plant observables for
these plants. We then used the investment data to …ll out the capital stock data.
  19
     See Appendix C for the details of the construction of double-de‡ated value-added.




                                                        16
Our data are an unbalanced panel and covers all manufacturing …rms.20 We use single-
de‡ated value added because no intermediate input de‡ator is available. The Slovenian data
are distinct from Chilean and Colombian data in that it is …rm-level data and not plant-level
data and there exists both a …rm-level de‡ator and a capacity utilization rate for a subset of
…rms.
       As an ex-socialist country Slovenia went through extensive changes in its economic system
starting in 1988. The deregulation of entry in 1988 allowed the setup of privately owned …rms
and resulted in expansion of private businesses. In addition, price and wage liberalization
took place during the period of 1987-93. The process of privatization of state-owned …rms
started in 1994 and continued throughout the 1990s. For this reason, several empirical studies
of productivity dynamics have used Slovenian data.21


4.1      ALP and APG Decompositions for Chile, Colombia, and Slovenia

We show the same weak patterns for ALP reallocation raised elsewhere exist for our manufac-
turing data from Chile and Colombia. We also show that when we decompose growth using
APG we …nd a much smaller role for within-…rm growth and a stronger role for reallocation
relative to ALP.
       Tables 1 and 2 document these facts for Chile. The second column in Table 1 is the
annualized growth rate of aggregate value added and the third column is the growth rate of
aggregate labor productivity. Most of the Pinochet market-based reforms were put into place
by 1980 and aggregate value added increased on average by 4:16% over the sample period.
While ALP increased by somewhat less over the entire sample period - 0:73% per year - if
one focuses on the more recent history of 1988 to 1995 ALP is over 3% per year.
       Columns 4 through 9 in Table 1 report the BHC and FHK decomposition of ALP into
its real productivity growth, reallocation of employment for continuing establishments, and
entry and exit components. For BHC columns 4 and 5 show that within plant growth of
aggregate labor productivity clearly dominates the between reallocation term as it is over 10

  20
    In Appendix A-1, we discuss how we construct the Slovenian data set from four distinct sources.
  21
    See, for example, Konings and de Loecker (2006), Polanec (2006), and Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and
Scarpetta (2010).


                                                 17
times the magnitude on average (3:42% vs. 0:26%). Column 6 is the between term for the
FHK decomposition and it is a third of within-…rm growth averaging 1:04%. The contribution
of the cross-term in column 7 to the aggregate labor productivity is negative in every year
and the mean of the contribution over time is     3:86%.
   Table 2 reports APG which averaged 3.40% over the sample period. The within-…rm
growth is less than a third of APG, averaging 0:95%, while labor reallocation’s contribution
over the same time period is almost equal to within-…rm growth at 0:76%. Overall growth
from the reallocation of inputs at continuing …rms averages 1:60% and thus total reallocation
in Chile plays a bigger role in growth than technical e¢ ciency growth.
   Tables 3 and 4 present the results from Colombia over a similar time period. They largely
echo the …ndings from Chile although the results are even stronger. Between 1978 and 1991
ALP increases on average by 3:94% per year and APG averaged 3:22% per year. The BHC
and FHK between term’s average contribution to the aggregate labor productivity is 1:10%
and 1:34% when the within term’s average contribution is over …ve times larger at 6:04%. The
covariance term is again negative in every year and the sample average is   3:44%. In contrast
Table 4 shows that APG labor reallocation is twice the contribution of technical e¢ ciency
growth (0:52% versus 0:25%), and input reallocation is almost entirely responsible for growth
over the period at 3:63%.
   Tables 5 and 6 show that over the 1995 to 2004 period Slovenia records even stronger
growth than both Chile and Colombia. ALP and APG increase on average by 6:53% and
5:17% respectively. The contribution of the between reallocation term is signi…cantly stronger
in Slovenia than in Chile and Colombia - 3:34% for BHC and 3.11% for FHK - but it still
makes a smaller contribution to the ALP than the within term of 4:96%. The covariance
term is again negative in every year and contributes on average      2:65% to growth. From
Table 6 we see of the 5:17% growth in APG less than half comes from within-…rm growth
(2:17%). Labor reallocation contributes 1:15% to growth and total reallocation across all
inputs averages 3:42% per year, again suggesting most growth over this period is due to the
realignment of inputs.
   We also explored the so-called FHK method 2 decomposition, which is closely related to


                                             18
Griliches and Regev (1995) decomposition.22 The story does not change on reallocation as we
…nd the FHK method 2’s between term for continuing plants are signi…cantly smaller than
the BHC between term for all three countries. In particular, in Chile and Colombia, the FHK
method 2’s between term is negative on average across sample years.


5         The ALP Between Term and the Number of Establishments

In this section we show that the ALP between term can be decomposed into a term related
to reallocation and a term related to the change in the total number of establishments. The
latter term can work to reduce the total between term when an economy is expanding.23
         Letting Nt denote the number of establishments in the economy, the average share of
                                                                                        P
                                                                                            sit          1
labor at an establishment at time t is equal to st =                                       Nt        =   Nt ;   the individual establishment’s
relative share of labor is given as s~it = sit                           st , and the change in relative share from t                                  1 to
t is       s~it = s~it   s~i;t   1.   The between term then decomposes as follows:

                                        P
    (BHC Between) =                            V Li;t      1       sit
                                        i2Ct
                                        P                                                                                              P
                                  =            V Li;t      1 f(sit           st )     (sit       1       st   1 )g   + (st   st   1)          V Li;t   1
                                        i2Ct                                                                                           i2Ct
                                        X                                    1          1            X
                                  =                 s~it V Li;t     1   +(                       )          V Li;t   1;                                (13)
                                                                             Nt       Nt     1
                                        i2Ct                                                         i2Ct
                                        |            {z             }    |                   {z                      }
                                            First component                         Second component


where Ct is the set of continuing establishments at time t. The …rst component is positive
when relative labor shares in the industry move in the direction of higher productivity es-
tablishments. The second component is equal to the sum of value-added per labor across
                                               1           1
establishments multiplied by                   Nt         Nt   1
                                                                   . It is unrelated to the reallocation of inputs. Because
the sum of value-added per labor is always positive the second term confounds the …rst com-
ponent in the negative direction when the number of establishments increases and the positive

    22                                                          P                  P
    The decomposition method 2 in FHK (2001) is given by A = i2C sit V Lit + i2C (V Lit V Lt ) sit +
P                        P
  i2E sit (V Lit V Lt )    i2X sit 1 (V Lit 1 V Lt ), where a bar over a variable denotes the period average
t 1 and t.
 23
    Exactly the same argument can be made for the between term in a multi-factor productivity decomposition.



                                                                             19
direction when the number of establishments decreases.
         Table 7 presents the decomposition of the between term for Chile. Over the early period
of the data when Chile is going through a recession there is a decrease in the number of
plants and the second term confounds the …rst component in the positive direction. After the
economy fully recovers and there is growth in the number of plants starting in 1987 as shown
in Figure 1-a, the second component works to lower the overall between term. Comparing the
…rst term to the overall BHC term we see that on average it is 0:44% higher over the sample
period, that is, overall the second term has confounded between growth down. In Colombia
the story is similar as the second term works to reduce the overall BHC term in eight of the
fourteen years and the …rst component is on average 0:27% higher than the between term (see
Table A1).
         The Chilean and Colombian data only cover plants with at least 10 employees, so the fact
that small plants are missing in the data may partly drive the results for Chile and Colombia.
The Slovenian data allow us to examine this issue as they record all …rms in the economy.
Table 8 shows this confounding e¤ect is most pronounced in Slovenia where the growth rate
of number of …rms is positive in every year, as shown in Figure 1-b. In every year the second
component works to reduce measured reallocation, and over the entire sample period the
average e¤ect is        5:80%. Overall, separating this component out changes the reallocation
message substantially in one country and to a smaller degree in the other two countries.24


6         Other Measurement Corrections

In this section we explore whether controlling for unobserved prices, for heterogeneity in
capital and labor levels, and for unobserved capacity utilization has an impact on the ALP
between and covariance terms. We also explore the longer di¤erences for the decompositions
and contrast the results with the year-to-year results.

    24
    The unit of observation is a …rm for Slovenian data and the sample includes both single- and multi-product
…rms. To examine how the results in Table 8 are sensitive to how we measure the unit of observations, we
restrict our sample to single-product …rms. Table A6 shows that for this limited sample, the second component
in BHC Between term is negatively correlated with the growth rate of the number of …rms in every year. This
pattern echoes with the …nding from Table 8, suggesting that the results in Table 8 are robust to the de…nition
of the unit of observations in the context of single- vs. multi-product …rms.


                                                      20
6.1      Controlling for Unobserved Prices

The estimated productivity residual is a¤ected by the fact that the typical measure of gross
output used in establishment-level data is not Qit but instead is the nominal value of total
shipments Pit Qit de‡ated by an industry price de‡ator Pt :

                                         Pit Qit
                                    ln           = ln Qit + ln Pit   ln Pt :
                                           Pt

In terms of estimated growth rates, the size of the price measurement error added to V Lit is
ln Pit     ln Pt   (ln Pit   1   ln Pt   1)   =   ln Pit     ln Pt . A negative covariance between em-
ployment share and V Lit could be caused by increasing quantities and decreasing prices, that
is, a movement down the demand curve for the establishment’s products as the establishment
increases output and decreases prices to sell that extra output. If labor inputs increase to
increase output, then labor share might increase when V Lit falls.
       We use the Slovenian …rm-level data to explore this possibility. 24% of the observations in
the Slovenian data are on establishments for which product-speci…c quantities and revenues
are collected. We use these quantities to construct unit prices for each of the establishment’s
products and then use the quantity-weighted average of these prices as the …rm-level price
de‡ator. We then return to the original data and replace the industry-level output de‡ator
with the …rm-level output de‡ator for these 24% of observations. We then recalculate the
BHC and FHK decompositions on the full sample which has been partially corrected for the
price measurement error.2526
       Table 9 presents the results of aggregate labor productivity decomposition by the BHC
and FHK using the new sample. If the measurement error in price is indeed a cause of the
negative covariance/cross term, we should expect the level of covariance to be higher when we
use the sample with the mix of a …rm-level de‡ator and an industry-level de‡ator. Column
7 in Table 9 shows that the covariance is virtually unchanged from the uncorrected results

  25
     We use the full sample so results are comparable to Table 5.
  26
     Our attempt is related to Foster, Haltiwanger, and Syverson (2008) in that both employ a plant-level price
information. We do not, however, take their route- i.e., deriving physical productivity and estimating the level
of idiosyncratic demand at the plant level- due to the severe limitation in the number of observations in our
sample.


                                                       21
in Table 5. While the information on prices is limited to only one-quarter of the sample, the
results are suggestive that the price measurement error story is not the cause of the negative
covariance term.27


6.2    Controlling for Capital and Labor Heterogeneity by Using Multi-Factor
       Productivity (TFP)

There are at least two possible factors why not controlling for capital and labor heterogeneity
in levels can generate the puzzling pattern in ALP. First, if establishments are substituting
capital for labor then establishments with increasing ALP - because they are increasing cap-
ital and reducing labor - are also establishments that are reducing their labor share. Second,
as discussed in Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), measurement error in labor can gen-
erate the spuriously negative covariance between labor productivity growth and labor share
growth. To see whether these stories hold in the data we return to the estimates of the value-
                                                    v
                                               d
added production functionand use the estimates ln ! it as the measure of establishment-level
productivity. This measure controls for heterogeneity in both capital levels and for two types
of labor. The multi-factor measure of aggregate productivity and its growth rate are given as

                                                       X             v
                                         ln ! vt =              d
                                                            sit ln ! it
                                                        i
                                         ln ! vt   = ln ! vt     ln ! vt 1 :


Table 10 presents the results for Chile. Conditioning on di¤erent labor types and capital
causes the average BHC between term to change from being slightly positive (in Table 1) to
  6:24%. The covariance terms remain negative in all years but two. Table A2 presents the
results for Colombia and the …ndings are largely the same as the positive but weak between
term becomes mostly negative and every covariance term remains negative. In contrast, the

  27
    The results in Tables 5 and 9 may be driven by the presence of measurement error, which may not work in
one direction when products are di¤erentiated in vertical and horizontal dimensions. To address this point, we
restrict our attention to Metal industry (NACE 2digit code 28), which we believe produces more homogeneous
products on average than those in other industries. Tables A4 and A5, which corresponds to Tables 5 and
9, respectively, calculate the BHC/FHK decompositions using industry-level and establishment-level price
de‡ator, respectively. Again we did not …nd any signi…cant di¤erences in the cross term across Tables A4 and
A5, con…rming that the price measurement error is not driving the signi…cantly negative cross term in Slovenia.


                                                      22
results from Table 11 for Slovenia do change. The BHC between turn increases and the
covariance terms become positive for every year except one. Distinguishing between value-
added per laborer and multi-factor productivity growth can change the covariance term and
increase the between term relative to ALP but apparently is not the general source of the
problem.28


6.3      Controlling for Capacity Utilization

Let capacity utilization be denoted as utilit , so that the true capital input is ln(Kit utilit ) =
ln Kit + ln utilit „ where Kit is the observed capital input. Increases in unobserved capacity
utilization appear as an increase in technical e¢ ciency in the value-added production function:

                                            v
                                       d
                                       ln ! it =   ln ! vit + "viK utilit :


       If unobserved capital utilization were negatively correlated with labor, it could generate
the negative covariance. For example, within-establishment substitution between hiring new
bodies and increasing utilization rates could lead to a negative covariance term.
       A separate survey for the Slovenian data is collected and it asks about utilization. This
allows us to correct 11% of the observations in the Slovenian data for unobserved utilization.
Once the capital terms have been corrected for this subset, these observations are added back
to the full Slovenian data set. We compare these results to the multi-factor productivity
results from Table A3 and …nd that the results are virtually unchanged. While the sample of
plants for which we can correct for utilization is a small fraction of the total …rms, unobserved
capacity appears to not a¤ect either the between terms or the covariance terms.


6.4      Longer Di¤erences for Decompositions

Our results so far are based on annual data, but the BHC/FHK decompositions can depend
heavily on the time horizon of the calculations because year-to-year observations can be more

  28
    Measurement error in output will not explain the negative covariance term for the multi-factor productivity
measure, because the measurement error generates a positive covariance. See Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan
(2001) for details.


                                                      23
volatile, especially in the entry and exit term. We explore this possibility by pretending
that we only observe data at …ve-year or ten-year di¤erences. For instance, for the …ve-
year di¤erences in the Chilean manufacturing data spanning from 1979 through 1995, we
assume that we observe data from years 1979, 1984, 1989, and 1994, and we rerun the whole
decomposition, including the production function estimation for the multifactor productivity.
         Tables 12 and 13 present the decomposition results for ALP and multi-factor productivity,
respectively, for Chilean Manufacturing data with …ve-year di¤erences. Overall, these two
tables con…rm no clear improvement over the annual data in terms of explaining the weak
reallocation and cross term for continuing establishments. Two tables show the negative
between term and negative covariance still exist for the …ve year di¤erences decomposition.
The magnitudes of these terms do not seem much di¤erent either, from the ones we calculate
by simply adding up the annual growth rates for …ve years. The results for ten-year di¤erences
for Chile and …ve-year and ten-year di¤erences for Colombia and Slovenia exhibit a similar
pattern.29


7         Conclusions

We have shown that the recent …ndings reported in Bartelsman, Haltiwanger, and Scarpetta
(2004) and Pages, Pierre, and Scarpetta (2009) of a weak or negative contribution of input
reallocation to growth coupled with strong within-plant productivity gains may in part be
an artifact of the way the BHC and FHK decompositions de…ne these terms. These decom-
positions use plant-level output-per-labor as a proxy for the marginal product of labor and
changes in output-per-labor as a proxy for changes in plant-level productivity. Our examples
illustrate that BHC indices can mistake growth from reallocation as growth from productiv-
ity because output-per-labor is neither a perfect index of marginal products nor plant-level
productivity. They also illustrate that reallocation growth from labor should track marginal
changes in labor weighted by the marginal product of labor.
         Our empirical work looks at Chile, Colombia, and Slovenia, and a comparison of reallo-

    29
         Due to space limitations, we do not show those tables, which are available upon request.



                                                          24
cation and real productivity growth across methodologies suggests there may be merit to the
points raised in our theoretical examples. We …nd for Chile and Colombia BHC indices report
weak or negative growth from labor reallocation during periods of overall economic growth,
whereas using the reallocation de…nition based on marginal products we …nd a positive and
robust role for labor reallocation in all three countries and a signi…cantly reduced role of
plant-level technical e¢ ciency in growth.
    We close with a note of caution on the generality of our empirical …ndings. While we do
…nd an increased role for reallocation and a reduced role for technical e¢ ciency in all three
countries, we have only looked at those countries and their manufacturing sectors.30 Further
work needs to be done on other micro-level data to see if the patterns we …nd are prevalent
in most micro-level data sets.

  30
     Recent studies have begun to examine the relationship between productivity growth and resource reallo-
cation across all sectors (see, e.g., Menezes-Filho and Muendler 2011; IADB 2010; McMillan and Rodrik 2011;
de Vries et al. 2012).




                                                    25
Appendix

A-1 Construction of Slovenian dataset

To construct the data set, we merge annual data sets from four distinct sources. The …rst
source is the Agency of the Republic of Slovenia for Public Legal Records and Related Services
(AJPES), which compiles the annual accounting data for all …rms and for sole proprietors in
manufacturing with at least 30 workers. The data set is comprised of …rm-level data, although
the accounting data are not consolidated. It is an unbalanced panel that includes a measure
of nominal output, capital, and intermediate inputs. The second source is the Slovenian
Statistical O¢ ce (SORS) that maintains the Slovenian Employment Registry (SER), which
records employment durations of all workers in the economy and contains information on
the employer’s identity and employees’educational attainment, all of which are then used to
determine the numbers of skilled and unskilled workers. The third source is the Slovenian
Tax O¢ ce (TORS). The data contain information on annual labor income for each employee,
which is used to calculate the annual cost of skilled and unskilled labor. The fourth data
set is the industrial production (IP) survey of …rms with at least 10 employees, performed
annually by the SORS. It contains information on nominal output and physical quantities,
disaggregated by products that are de…ned according to the 8-digit combined nomenclature
(CN) product classi…cation. From these, the prices of products are calculated and the price
indices at the …rm-level are constructed.


A-2 Construction of Firm-level Price De‡ator

The …rm-level price index is calculated using the annual industrial production (manufacturing
and mining) survey for a set of Slovenian …rms. The survey contains information on quantities
and values sold by product, de…ned according to PRODCOM 8-digit code. The 2002-2009
provides information on non-response, which ranges between 9% and 15%. For example, in
2002, the number of surveyed establishments is 2; 366, out of which 12% (285) did not respond.
Additional surveyed units are mis-classi…ed; for example, a unit is classi…ed as manufacturing
or mining but performs other activities. We eliminated these units. For example, the address


                                             26
book contained 2; 484 cases, of which 118 were mis-classi…ed.
   The data set is not a survey but should contain all establishments. The source of infor-
mation is: http://www.stat.si/doc/metod_porocila/21_LPK_IND_L_2009.pdf
   The product classi…cations used have changed over time. The SORS used a 9-digit national
variety of NACE during 1989-1993, which distinguishes between 3; 469 products. During 1994-
2008, SORS used an 8-digit NACE, which distinguishes 5; 666 product codes in 1994 and 1995;
5; 622 product codes during 1996-2001; 5; 153 during 2002-2003; 5; 142 in 2004; etc. In 2004,
a subset of 4; 600 products were in manufacturing industries.
   We use concordance …les between di¤erent product classi…cations to create a time invariant
product classi…cation.
   To calculate the …rm-level price index, we have to deal with several issues. The ideal
Fischer price index formula for …rm i between periods t                    1 and t is:

                                                     X               pjit
                                 F P Iit;t   1   =          wjit           ;
                                                                    pjit 1
                                                     j2Ji


                                                        wjit +wjit     1
                                                                                                    P
where Ji is the set of output goods, wjit =                   2            and wjit = pjit qjit =       j2Ji   pjit qjit :
Alternatively, one may use lagged or current weights. The Statistical O¢ ce uses lagged
weights, as it does not possess the information on the revenue shares:

                                                 X                   pjit
                                 F P Iitlag =           wjit    1          :
                                                                    pjit 1
                                                 j2Ji


C Construction of Double-De‡ated Value Added

Establishment i’s price and quantity at time t are given by Pit and Qit . As with most
establishment-level data, we do not observe establishment-level prices, so we de‡ate establishment-
level revenues Pit Qit with 3-digit industry gross output de‡ators, with Pst denoting the price
index for industry s at time t. We de…ne double-de‡ated value added as
                                                            P
                                        Pit Qit                 j   Pjt Mijt
                                V Ait =                                        ;
                                          Pt                        PtM




                                                     27
where Pjt is the price of input j at time t and Mijt is the amount of j used as an intermediate
input in i’s production, and we de‡ate expenditures on intermediate inputs using a 3-digit
industry price index for materials, which we denote PtM . We use double-de‡ated value added
for Chilean results. For Colombian and Slovenian results, since intermediate input de‡ators
are not available, we use single-de‡ated value added using only the industry gross output
price de‡ators Pst :                                 P
                                          Pit Qit      j   Pjt Mijt
                                V Ait =                               :
                                                     Pst

Finally, we use the consumer price index as a common de‡ator across all establishments in
any year to calculate an alternative measure of single-de‡ated value added. Qualitatively, the
results across these di¤erent value-added speci…cations are similar, so we primarily discuss
the double-de‡ated value-added results.


D Alternative Representation of Labor Productivity Growth Decomposition

Using the di¤erent periods of weights, we can construct the sum of the within and between
                                                                       P sit +sit 1
terms in several ways. For instance, we can decompose the sum into            2     V Lit +
                                                                       i
P V Lit +V Lit 1                                  P            P
         2       sit (Tornquist approximation) or   sit V Lit + V Lit 1 sit :
i                                                      i                  i



References

Ackerberg, D., K. Caves, and G. Frazer (2008): “Structural Identi…cation of Produc-
    tion Functions,” Working Paper.

Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1992): “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction,”
    Econometrica, 60(2), 323–351.

          (1994): “Growth and Unemployment,”Review of Economic Studies, 61(3), 477–494.

Baily, M., C. Hulten, and D. Campbell (1992): “The Distribution of Productivity,”
    Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1, 187–267.




                                                28
Bank, I.-A. D. (2010): The Age of Productivity: Transforming Economies from the Bottom
  Up. Palgrave Macmillan.

Bartelsman, E., J. Haltiwanger, and S. Scarpetta (2004): “Microeconomic Evidence
  of Creative Destruction in Industrial and Developing Countries,” World Bank Policy Re-
  search Working Paper 3464.

         (2010): “Cross-country and Within-country Di¤erences in the Business Climate,”
  International Journal of Industrial Organization, 28(4), 368–371.

Caballero, R., and M. Hammour (1994): “The Cleansing E¤ect of Recessions,”American
  Economic Review, 84(5), 1350–1368.

Cubas, G., A. Ho, K. Huynh, and D. Jacho-Chavez (2011): “Reallocation, Productivity,
  and the Ecuadorian Economic Crisis: Evidence from Firm-Level Data,” Discussion paper,
  Bank of Canada.

De Loecker, J., and J. Konings (2006): “Job Reallocation and Productivity Growth in
  a Post-socialist Economy: Evidence from Slovenian Manufacturing,” European Journal of
  Political Economy, 22(2), 388–408.

de Vries, G. J., A. A. Erumban, M. P. Timmer, I. Voskoboynikov, and H. X. Wu
  (2012): “Deconstructing the BRICs: Structural Transformation and Aggregate Productiv-
  ity Growth,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 40(2).

Ericson, R., and A. Pakes (1995): “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for
  Empirical Work,” Review of Economic Studies, 62(1), 53–82.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Krizan (2001): “Aggregate Productivity Growth.
  Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence,” NBER Chapters, pp. 303–372.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2008): “Reallocation, Firm Turnover,
  and E¢ ciency: Selection on Productivity or Pro…tability?,” American Economic Review,
  98(1), 394–425.



                                            29
Griliches, Z., and H. Regev (1995): “Firm Productivity in Israeli Industry 1979–1988,”
  Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), 175–203.

Hsieh, C., and P. Klenow (2009): “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and
  India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), 1403.

Kwon, H., F. Narita, and M. Narita (2009): “New Evidence on Japan’s Aggregate
  Productivity Growth in the 1990s,”Discussion paper, Research Institute of Economy, Trade
  and Industry.

Lentz, R., and D. Mortensen (2008): “An Empirical Model of Growth Through Product
  Innovation,” Econometrica, 76(6), 1317–1373.

Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin (2003): “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
  Control for Unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70(2), 341–372.

Liu, L. (1991): “Entry-Exit and Productivity Changes: An Empirical Analysis of E¢ ciency
  Frontiers,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Michigan.

          (1993): “Entry, Exit, and Learning in the Chilean Manufacturing Sector,” Journal
  of Development Economics, 42, 217–242.

Liu, L., and J. Tybout (1996): “Productivity growth in Colombia and Chile: Panel-based
  evidence on the role of entry, exit and learning,”in Producer Heterogeneity and Performance
  in the Semi-Industrialized Countries, ed. by M. Roberts, and J. Tybout, chap. 4. World
  Bank.

McMillan, M. S., and D. Rodrik (2011): “Globalization, Structural Change and Produc-
  tivity Growth,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Melitz, M. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
  Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695–1725.

Menezes-Filho, N. A., and M.-A. Muendler (2011): “Labor Reallocation in Response
  to Trade Reform,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                             30
Pages, C., G. Pierre, and S. Scarpetta (2009): Job Creation in Latin America and the
  Caribbean: Recent Trends and the Policy Challenges. Macmillan.

Petrin, A., and J. Levinsohn (2012): “Measuring Aggregate Productivity Growth Using
  Plant-Level Data,” Rand Journal of Economics.

Petrin, A., and J. Sivadasan (2013): “Estimating Lost Output from Allocative Ine¢ ciency,
  with Application to Chile and Firing Costs,” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Petrin, A., T. White, and J. Reiter (2011): “The Impact of Plant-level Resource Re-
  allocations and Technical Progress on US macroeconomic Growth,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, 14(1), 3–26.

Polanec, S. (2006): “On the Evolution of Size and Productivity in Transition: Evidence
  from Slovenian Manufacturing Firms,” in Competitiveness, Social Responsibility and Eco-
  nomic Growth, ed. by J. Prasnikar, pp. 167–176. Nova Science Publishers Inc.

Restuccia, D., and R. Rogerson (2008): “Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity
  with Heterogeneous Establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4), 707–720.

Roberts, M. (1996): “Colombia, 1977-85: Producer Turnover, Margins, and Trade Ex-
  posure,” in Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro Patterns of Turnover,
  productivity, and Market Structure, pp. 227–259. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Wooldridge, J. (2009): “On Estimating Firm-level Production Functions Using Proxy
  Variables to Control for Unobservables,” Economics Letters, 104(3), 112–114.




                                            31
            5500
                   6000
                          6500
                                 7000
                                        7500
                                                                                              1500
                                                                                                     2000
                                                                                                            2500
                                                                                                                   3000
                                                                                                                          3500
                                                                                                                                                                               3000
                                                                                                                                                                                      3500
                                                                                                                                                                                             4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                    4500
                                                                                                                                                                                                           5000



     1977
                                                                                       1994                                                                             1979

     1978                                                                                                                                                               1980

                                                                                       1995
     1979                                                                                                                                                               1981


                                                                                                                                                                        1982
     1980                                                                              1996

                                                                                                                                                                        1983
     1981
                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                                                                        1984
     1982
                                                                                                                                                                        1985
                                                                                       1998
     1983
                                                                                                                                                                        1986

     1984                                                                              1999                                                                             1987




32
     1985                                                                                                                                                               1988
                                                                                       2000

     1986                                                                                                                                                               1989
                                                                                                                                 Figure 1-b Number of Firms, Slovenia




                                               Figure 1-c Number of Plants, Colombia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 1-a Number of Plants, Chile




                                                                                       2001                                                                             1990
     1987

                                                                                                                                                                        1991
     1988                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                                                        1992
     1989
                                                                                       2003                                                                             1993

     1990
                                                                                                                                                                        1994

                                                                                       2004
     1991                                                                                                                                                               1995
                                                          Table 1
                       Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Chilean Manufacturing 1980-95
                                     BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition
   Year            Value            (0) Labor                         BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                   Added          Prod. Growth           (1) Within               (2) Between              (3) Cross             (4) Net Entry
                                                                               BHC           FHK                             BHC               FHK
  1980               -3.28            -7.15                -5.18                2.57           2.26          -4.22           -0.31              0.00
  1981                1.37             5.63                8.14                -0.55           0.06          -2.11            0.15             -0.46
  1982              -21.76            -4.81                -9.44                8.04           3.76          -2.15           -1.27              3.01
  1983               -0.27            -1.80                -0.12                1.11          -0.18          -2.13           -0.66              0.64
  1984                9.94             2.90                10.02               -3.75          -2.07          -4.63            1.26             -0.42
  1985                3.72            -4.01                -0.73                0.76          -0.05          -3.22           -0.82             -0.01
  1986                8.43             1.19                6.61                -0.31          -2.03          -3.88           -1.23              0.49
  1987                7.34            -5.54                -1.72               -4.31          -0.80          -3.22            3.70              0.20
  1988                6.55            -1.81                0.61                -1.30          -0.85          -2.55            1.43              0.98
  1989              11.02              0.64                4.40                -1.47           1.00          -4.35            2.07             -0.40
  1990                3.74             2.57                7.01                 0.14           1.25          -5.73            1.15              0.04
  1991                7.03             3.28                6.50                 1.20           4.79          -6.86            2.44             -1.14
  1992              14.55              5.07                7.98                -3.22           0.86          -3.78            4.08              0.00
  1993                5.58             4.21                7.41                 1.39           3.06          -5.71            1.12             -0.55
  1994                2.39             1.69                2.51                 2.81           3.30          -3.64            0.01             -0.48
  1995              10.19              9.61                10.79                0.97           2.30          -3.50            1.34              0.02
 Average              4.16             0.73                3.42                 0.26           1.04          -3.86            0.90              0.12
 St. Dev.             8.28             4.60                5.74                 2.96           2.06          1.38             1.63              0.93
Notes: Percentage growth rates. Labor productivity is defined as the ratio of value added over employment. "Value Added" is the growth rate of
aggregate value added, which is constructed by summing the establishment-level double-deflated value added across establishments and then taking
the annual growth rate. "Labor Productivity Growth" represents the aggregate labor productivity growth with entry and exit. Labor Productivity
Growth is decomposed into four components: (1) within, (2) between, (3) cross, and (4) net entry term, using equation 2 in text for BHC (1992) and
equation 3 in text for FHK (2001). We use employment share for the share weights. Both (1) within and (2) between terms use base-period share for
the weights.



                                          Table 2
      Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Chilean Manufacturing 1980-95
     Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) Aggregate Productivity Growth (APG) Decomposition
   Year            Value               (0)                 APG Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3)
                   Added              APG                                   Reallocation
                                                       (1) Technical   (2) Total                              (3)
                                                         Efficiency  Reallocation        Labor             Net Entry
                                                                                          Reallocation
  1980               -3.28            -5.18                 -3.50              -0.31          -0.10          -1.37
  1981                1.37            -3.61                 1.43                0.65          -0.78          -5.70
  1982              -21.76           -11.68                -16.47              -2.82          -2.20          7.62
  1983               -0.27             3.81                 -0.39               1.59          -0.59          2.60
  1984                9.94           10.19                  7.94                1.56           1.46          0.69
  1985                3.72             5.65                 3.29                0.64           1.57          1.71
  1986                8.43             5.14                 6.75                0.86           1.15          -2.47
  1987                7.34             7.24                 -3.88               3.22           1.53          7.90
  1988                6.55             5.59                 3.31                0.51           1.49          1.78
  1989              11.02              8.53                 0.96                6.22           2.41          1.35
  1990                3.74             1.03                 -0.56               2.42           1.26          -0.82
  1991                7.03             3.76                 1.68                2.19           1.60          -0.11
  1992              14.55            10.61                  6.66                2.28           1.79          1.67
  1993                5.58             3.56                 -0.75               4.34           1.52          -0.03
  1994                2.39             0.06                 -0.08               2.32           0.63          -2.18
  1995              10.19              9.70                 8.74               -0.01          -0.50          0.97
 Average              4.16             3.40                 0.95                1.60           0.76          0.85
 St. Dev.             8.28             6.10                 6.01                2.05           1.24          3.40

Notes: Percentage growth rates. The plant-level multifactor productivity is calculated by using production function
parameters that vary across 3-digit ISIC. We obtain the estimates by using Wooldridge (2009). APG represents the
aggregate productivity growth with entry and exit, which is defined as aggregate change in final demand, holding
input constant. We use value-added share for weights. APG is decomposed into four components: (1) technical
efficiency, (2) reallocation, and (3) net entry term, using equation 12 in text.


                                                                       33
                                                         Table 3
                     Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Colombian Manufacturing 1978-91
                                     BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition
  Year             Value           (0) Labor                         BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                   Added         Prod. Growth           (1) Within               (2) Between              (3) Cross             (4) Net Entry
                                                                              BHC           FHK                             BHC               FHK
  1978             11.93              8.56                9.84                 1.77           2.36          -4.17            1.13              0.54
  1979               9.89             6.78                6.72                 2.50           2.94          -2.84            0.41             -0.03
  1980               6.92             6.55                7.14                 0.94           1.75          -1.94            0.42             -0.40
  1981             -10.11            -8.68                -6.56                1.49           2.26          -2.62           -1.00             -1.77
  1982               0.30             2.47                3.95                 1.99           3.11          -3.77            0.30             -0.82
  1983               0.05             3.75                4.44                 2.32           1.46          -2.78           -0.24              0.62
  1984               6.69             8.58                8.32                 1.95           1.26          -2.17            0.48              1.17
  1985               7.35            10.85                17.18                1.12          -0.05          -7.17           -0.28              0.89
  1986             10.76              0.91                5.83                -1.96           0.15          -3.74            0.77             -1.33
  1987              -1.55            -1.80                2.63                -3.77          -1.45          -2.11            1.45             -0.87
  1988               9.48            10.51                14.79                3.20           2.10          -7.88            0.40              1.50
  1989               3.39             1.99                4.43                 0.00           0.65          -2.67            0.23             -0.43
  1990               4.55             3.95                4.08                 1.93           1.62          -2.21            0.14              0.45
  1991               0.26             0.78                1.75                 1.95           0.61          -2.14           -0.78              0.57
 Average             4.28             3.94                6.04                 1.10           1.34          -3.44            0.24              0.01
 St. Dev.            6.03             5.31                5.71                 1.87           1.26          1.87             0.67              0.97



Notes: "Value Added" is the growth rate of aggregate value added, which is constructed by summing the establishment-level single-deflated value
added across establishments and then taking the annual growth rate. For other technical details, see notes to Table 1.




                                         Table 4
    Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Colombian Manufacturing 1978-91
    Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) Aggregate Productivity Growth (APG) Decomposition
  Year             Value              (0)                 APG Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3)
                   Added             APG                                   Reallocation
                                                      (1) Technical   (2) Total                              (3)
                                                        Efficiency  Reallocation        Labor             Net Entry
                                                                                         Reallocation
  1978             11.93              5.59                -1.11                9.79           2.76          -3.09
  1979               9.89             9.03                -0.48                8.84           1.91          0.67
  1980               6.92             5.85                2.87                 3.25           1.14          -0.27
  1981             -10.11           -11.19               -14.13                4.76           0.15          -1.83
  1982               0.30            -2.44                -2.86                3.94           0.02          -3.53
  1983               0.05            -0.98                -0.20                1.71          -1.05          -2.49
  1984               6.69             6.45                4.76                 2.10          -0.08          -0.42
  1985               7.35             9.24                11.30               -2.05          -2.89          -0.01
  1986             10.76            10.37                 12.83                1.02          -0.34          -3.48
  1987              -1.55            -1.83               -13.15                4.37           1.18          6.95
  1988               9.48             9.56                5.58                 3.56           1.44          0.41
  1989               3.39             2.40                0.22                 2.48           0.18          -0.30
  1990               4.55             3.53                0.03                 4.07           2.02          -0.57
  1991               0.26            -0.50                -2.19                2.98           0.84          -1.29
 Average             4.28             3.22                0.25                 3.63           0.52          -0.66
 St. Dev.            6.03             6.09                7.55                 2.96           1.43          2.61



Notes: The production function parameters that vary across 3-digit ISIC are estimated using Wooldridge (2009). For
other technical details, see notes to Table 2.




                                                                      34
                                                    Table 5
             Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                              BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition
                                         Industry-level Price Deflator


   Year          Value       (0) Labor                         BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                 Added     Prod. Growth         (1) Within                 (2) Between                (3) Cross          (4) Net Entry
                                                                        BHC          FHK                               BHC         FHK
  1995           4.01           5.51               -0.82                7.68         5.79               -4.92          3.58        5.47
  1996           7.39           8.40               5.47                 5.65         5.25               -3.61          0.89        1.29
  1997           14.60         15.05               12.72                5.69         6.30               -5.74          2.37        1.76
  1998           2.90           0.07               -1.98                4.53         4.90               -3.94          1.46        1.08
  1999           8.35           6.56               7.21                 -0.82        0.55               -0.84          1.00        -0.37
  2000           8.27           6.42               6.00                 1.78         1.23               -1.75          0.39        0.94
  2001           4.28           4.25               3.98                 2.38         1.57               -1.34          -0.77       0.05
  2002           9.04           6.44               6.42                 -0.75        1.32               -1.31          2.08        0.01
  2003           6.54           8.09               6.80                 4.54         2.57               -1.92          -1.34       0.64
  2004           4.62           4.54               3.84                 2.69         1.63               -1.13          -0.85       0.21
 Average         7.00           6.53               4.96                 3.34         3.11               -2.65          0.88        1.11
 St. Dev.        3.41           3.81               4.16                 2.80         2.19               1.75           1.57        1.67

Notes: "Value Added" is the growth rate of aggregate value added, which is constructed by summing the establishment-level single-
deflated value added across establishments and then taking the annual growth rate.We use a 2-digit industry-level price deflator to obtain
deflated value added. We use employment share for the share weights. Both (1) within and (2) between terms use base-period share for
the weights. For other technical details, see notes to Table 1.




                                                               35
                                                        Table 6
                  Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                   Petrin and Levinsohn (2012) Aggregate Productivity Growth (APG) Decomposition
                                             Industry-level Price Deflator


     Year                Value               (0)                        APG Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3)
                         Added              APG                                                 Reallocation                                                     P

                                                            (1) Technical             (2) Total                                 (3)
                                                             Efficiency              Reallocation      Labor Reallocation    Net Entry
    1995                 4.01              2.68                 -3.01                    3.21                  2.07              2.48
    1996                 7.39              5.95                  3.70                    2.41                  1.72             -0.16
    1997                 14.60             12.60                 5.00                    6.83                  1.32              0.77
    1998                 2.90              0.63                 -3.95                    4.47                  1.91             0.11
    1999                 8.35              6.05                  3.96                    2.75                  0.61             -0.66
    2000                 8.27              6.10                  3.42                    3.57                  0.96             -0.90
    2001                 4.28              3.14                  2.02                    2.71                  0.74             -1.58
    2002                 9.04              6.51                  3.92                    2.42                  0.66             0.17
    2003                 6.54              4.81                  4.24                    3.19                  0.61             -2.62
    2004                 4.62              3.22                  2.35                    2.67                  0.86             -1.81
   Average               7.00              5.17                  2.17                    3.42                  1.15             -0.42
   St. Dev.              3.41              3.23                 3.11                     1.35                  0.57             1.45

Notes: The plant-level multifactor productivity is calculated by using production function parameters that vary across 2-digit NACE. We use
a 2-digit industry-level price deflator to obtain deflated value added. For other technical details, see notes to Table 2.




                                                                           Table 7
                              Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Chilean Manufacturing 1980-95
                                                BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition

     Year                 BHC                              BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2)                             Number of Plants
                   (0): Between Term                     (1) First component                         (2) Second component

     1980                2.57                               3.51                                        -0.95                                      1.76
     1981                -0.55                             -1.48                                         0.93                                      -1.84
     1982                8.04                               3.56                                         4.49                                      -7.96
     1983                1.11                              -2.23                                         3.34                                      -6.91
     1984                -3.75                             -2.70                                        -1.04                                      2.35
     1985                0.76                               0.11                                         0.64                                      -1.33
     1986                -0.31                             -1.99                                         1.68                                      -3.54
     1987                -4.31                             -0.83                                        -3.48                                      7.50
     1988                -1.30                             -1.38                                         0.08                                      -0.15
     1989                -1.47                             -0.12                                        -1.34                                      2.50
     1990                0.14                               2.32                                        -2.17                                      3.91
     1991                1.20                               4.18                                        -2.98                                      5.27
     1992                -3.22                              0.50                                        -3.72                                      6.60
     1993                1.39                               2.98                                        -1.60                                      2.69
     1994                2.81                               3.32                                        -0.51                                      0.85
     1995                0.97                               1.39                                        -0.42                                      0.70
   Average               0.26                               0.70                                        -0.44                                      0.78
   St. Dev.              2.96                               2.36                                         2.29                                      4.36
Notes: Percentage growth rates. BHC Between Term is decomposed into two terms using equation 13 in the text.




                                                                              36
                                                              Table 8
                        Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                            BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition

   Year                    BHC                            BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2)                   Number of Firms
                    (0): Between Term                  (1) First component           (2) Second component

   1995                    7.68                               27.33                          -19.65                                     17.44
   1996                    5.65                               15.61                           -9.96                                      9.55
   1997                    5.69                               12.73                           -7.04                                      7.06
   1998                    4.53                               10.80                           -6.27                                      6.56
   1999                    -0.82                               1.97                           -2.79                                      2.90
   2000                    1.78                                4.63                           -2.85                                      2.97
   2001                    2.38                                4.40                           -2.02                                      2.13
   2002                    -0.75                               3.67                           -4.42                                      5.05
   2003                    4.54                                6.01                           -1.47                                      1.65
   2004                    2.69                                4.26                           -1.57                                      1.82
 Average                   3.34                           9.14                        -5.80                                             5.71
 St. Dev.                  2.80                           7.79                        5.59                                              4.89
Notes: Percentage growth rates. BHC Between Term is decomposed into two terms using equation 13 in the text.




                                                               Table 9
                         Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                          BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition
                                             Firm-level and Industry-level Price Deflator


   Year                   Value           (0) Labor                   BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                          Added         Prod. Growth        (1) Within               (2) Between           (3) Cross         (4) Net Entry
                                                                                   BHC       FHK                           BHC          FHK
  1995                      7.20            9.96               3.19                8.78       5.89           -4.35         2.35         5.24
  1996                      4.32            7.59               2.83                7.35       4.93           -2.42         -0.18        2.24
  1997                     12.94           12.64              11.26                5.06       6.10           -5.86         2.18         1.14
  1998                      8.23            5.99               6.60                3.53       3.70           -4.25         0.11         -0.06
  1999                     10.27            7.36               7.22                -1.55      0.48           -1.03         2.72         0.69
  2000                      9.13            8.50               7.66                3.11       1.51           -1.63         -0.64        0.96
  2001                      4.77            4.57               7.39                1.84       1.45           -1.25         -3.40        -3.02
  2002                      9.78            8.32               8.01                -0.06      1.24           -1.40         1.78         0.48
  2003                      2.94            4.75               3.84                4.18       2.33           -1.85         -1.43        0.43
  2004                      7.63            9.87               5.13                3.94       1.13           -0.93         1.74         4.54
 Average                    7.72            7.96               6.31                3.62       2.88           -2.50         0.52         1.27
 St. Dev.                   3.05            2.50               2.60                3.10       2.11           1.71          1.98         2.34

Notes: The number of observations with an establishment-level price deflator accounts for 24% of the total number of observations. For these
observations, we use an establishment-level price deflator to obtain deflated value added. Otherwise, we use a 2-digit industry-level price
deflator to obtain deflated value added. For other technical details, see notes to Table 5.




                                                                              37
                                                           Table 10
                        Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Chilean Manufacturing 1980-95
                                         BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) Decomposition
   Year               Value        (0) Multifactor                    BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                      Added         Prod. Growth         (1) Within             (2) Between              (3) Cross            (4) Net Entry
                                                                             BHC          FHK                               BHC            FHK
  1980                 -3.28            -19.86             -13.72            1.07         -1.45            0.04             -7.25          -4.73
  1981                 1.37              4.02               3.47             -9.38        -4.55            1.00             8.94           4.11
  1982                -21.76            -11.33             -21.87           38.17         4.24             -1.17           -26.46          7.47
  1983                 -0.27             -3.46              -6.08           10.05         -0.06            -0.08            -7.36          2.75
  1984                 9.94              4.27              11.69            -19.51        -6.46            -0.41           12.49           -0.56
  1985                 3.72              -5.38              1.03             5.81         -0.50            -0.80           -11.43          -5.12
  1986                 8.43              8.12               9.54            12.06         -1.30            -3.01           -10.47          2.88
  1987                 7.34              -7.10              -3.87           -29.29        -1.78            -1.36           27.43           -0.09
  1988                 6.55              4.26               4.07             -3.71        -0.19            -0.13            4.03           0.51
  1989                11.02              0.05               -0.50           -18.34        0.97             -2.22           21.11           1.80
  1990                 3.74              4.21               6.89             -7.78        0.90             -2.18            7.27           -1.41
  1991                 7.03              7.46               7.52            -24.90        3.32             -2.64           27.49           -0.73
  1992                14.55              7.98              10.12            -33.14        -0.77            -1.41           32.41           0.04
  1993                 5.58              0.42               2.77            -11.30        2.06             -2.68           11.64           -1.73
  1994                 2.39              0.28               -1.08            -1.20        2.71             -0.89            3.45           -0.45
  1995                10.19              5.54               4.07             -8.42        2.18             -1.73           11.61           1.01
 Average               4.16              -0.03              0.88             -6.24        -0.04            -1.23            6.56           0.36
 St. Dev.              8.28              7.75               8.93            17.84         2.80             1.14            16.23           3.12

Notes: Percentage growth rates. The plant-level multifactor productivity is calculated using production function parameters that vary across 3-
digit ISIC estimates using Wooldridge (2009). "Value Added" is the growth rate of aggregate value added, which is constructed by summing
the establishment-level double-deflated value added across establishments and then taking the annual growth rate. "Multifactor Prod. Growth"
represents the aggregate multifactor productivity growth with entry and exit, which is the weighted sum of plant-level multifactor productivity
across establishments. We use employment share for the share weights. Multifactor Prod. Growth is decomposed into four components: (1)
within, (2) between, (3) cross, and (4) net entry term, using equation 2 in text for BHC (1992) and equation 3 in text for FHK (2001). Both (1)
within and (2) between terms use base-period share for the weights.




                                                           Table 11
                      Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                         BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) Decomposition
                                                 Industry-level Price Deflator

   Year               Value        (0) Multifactor                    BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                      Added         Prod. Growth         (1) Within             (2) Between              (3) Cross            (4) Net Entry
                                                                             BHC          FHK                               BHC            FHK
   1995                4.01              2.22               -1.85           33.57         1.94             -0.35           -29.15          2.48
   1996                7.39              6.25               3.00             8.42         1.67             0.35             -5.52          1.23
   1997               14.60             13.37               6.63             -8.80        1.46             0.31            15.23           4.97
   1998                2.90              1.41               -2.09            -4.01        2.32             0.22             7.28           0.96
   1999                8.35              2.10               2.96            -24.84        -1.59            1.34            22.64           -0.61
   2000                8.27              4.70               3.13             9.76         0.44             0.69             -8.87          0.44
   2001                4.28              4.10               2.46            14.95         1.10             0.27            -13.58          0.27
   2002                9.04              5.30               3.40            -34.14        1.24             0.31            35.73           0.35
   2003                6.54              3.76               1.79            34.40         0.55             1.08            -33.51          0.34
   2004                4.62              3.12               1.76            19.85         1.55             0.16            -18.65          -0.35
 Average               7.00              4.63               2.12              4.92         1.07             0.44           -2.84           1.01
 St. Dev.              3.41              3.42               2.55             22.92         1.10             0.48           22.63           1.64

Notes: The plant-level multifactor productivity is calculated using production function parameters that vary across 2-digit NACE estimates
using Wooldridge (2009). "Value Added" is the growth rate of aggregate value added, which is constructed by summing the establishment-level
single-deflated value added across establishments and then taking the annual growth rate. We use a 2-digit industry-level price deflator to
obtain deflated value added. For other technical details, see notes to Table 10.



                                                                      38
                                              Table 12
Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Chilean Manufacturing, Five-Year Differences in 1984-94
                            BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition


     Year          Value         (0) Labor             BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                   Added       Prod. Growth       (1) Within         (2) Between         (3) Cross           (4) Net Entry
                                                                     BHC         FHK                        BHC         FHK
     1984          -15.89         -5.67             2.27              8.52       4.05          -14.66       -1.80       2.67
     1989          42.79          -9.45              2.98            -10.23      -5.94          -7.77       5.57        1.28
     1994          37.49          18.24             23.92             -7.57      2.43           -7.50       9.38        -0.61
   Average          21.46          1.04              9.72            -3.09       0.18          -9.98        4.38        1.11
   St. Dev.         32.46         15.02             12.30            10.15       5.36          4.06         5.68        1.65

  Notes: Percentage growth rates. We use Chilean data from years 1979, 1984, 1989, and 1994.




                                               Table 13
Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Chilean Manufacturing, Five-Year Differences in 1984-94
                              BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) Decomposition


     Year          Value      (0) Multifactor            BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                   Added       Prod. Growth       (1) Within         (2) Between          (3) Cross           (4) Net Entry
                                                                     BHC         FHK                        BHC         FHK

     1984          -15.89         -22.51           -19.84            30.13       -2.55         -3.39       -29.40       3.27
     1989           42.79          -2.65            3.07             -41.74     -11.38         2.15         33.87       3.51
     1994           37.49         20.64             23.01            -68.21      2.26          -3.58        69.42       -1.05
   Average          21.46         -1.51              2.08            -26.61      -3.89         -1.61        24.63       1.91
   St. Dev.         32.46         21.60             21.44            50.89       6.92          3.25         50.05       2.57

  Notes: Percentage growth rates. We use Chilean data from years 1979, 1984, 1989, and 1994.




                                                                39
                                                                 Table A1
                             Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Colombian Manufacturing 1978-91
                                                 BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition

   Year               BHC                                 BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2)       Number of Plants
               (0): Between Term                       (1) First component                      (2) Second component


  1978               1.77                                      1.66                                      0.11               -0.22
  1979               2.50                                      3.70                                     -1.20               2.25
  1980               0.94                                      1.86                                     -0.93               1.84
  1981               1.49                                      1.23                                      0.26               -0.48
  1982               1.99                                      3.91                                     -1.91               3.84
  1983               2.32                                     -3.39                                      5.71              -11.02
  1984               1.95                                      2.03                                     -0.08               0.15
  1985               1.12                                     -0.02                                      1.14               -2.20
  1986               -1.96                                     1.94                                     -3.89               7.91
  1987               -3.77                                    -1.54                                     -2.22               4.12
  1988               3.20                                      4.43                                     -1.23               2.29
  1989               0.00                                      2.04                                     -2.05               3.88
  1990               1.93                                      1.46                                      0.47               -0.86
  1991               1.95                                     -0.02                                      1.98               -3.61
 Average             1.10                                      1.38                                     -0.27               0.56
 St. Dev.            1.87                                      2.11                                      2.30               4.46
Notes: Percentage growth rates. BHC Between Term is decomposed into two terms using equation 13 in the text.




                                                                             40
                                                              Table A2
                         Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Colombian Manufacturing 1978-91
                                            BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) Decomposition

    Year                Value         (0) Multifactor                     BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                        Added          Prod. Growth         (1) Within              (2) Between              (3) Cross              (4) Net Entry
                                                                                 BHC          FHK                                BHC           FHK
    1978                11.93               0.69               2.83              -2.66         1.92            -3.12              3.64         -0.94
    1979                 9.89               0.93               0.96              -1.90         1.51            -2.06              3.94         0.52
    1980                 6.92               3.76               4.60              -6.00         0.33            -1.70              6.87         0.53
    1981                -10.11             -13.53             -12.90             -4.68         1.33            -1.45              5.50         -0.51
    1982                 0.30               -2.92              -1.96             -7.83         0.72            -1.30              8.18         -0.38
    1983                 0.05               0.05               -0.79             7.18          0.55            -1.35             -4.99         1.64
    1984                 6.69               5.07               4.35              6.17          0.89            -1.44             -4.01         1.27
    1985                 7.35               2.74               3.80              9.10          0.09            -2.85             -7.32         1.69
    1986                10.76               1.94               1.77             -16.11         0.14            -1.97             18.25         2.00
    1987                 -1.55             -10.26              1.22             -18.39         -0.47           -7.04             13.95         -3.97
    1988                 9.48              11.94               6.64             15.78          7.42            -8.63             -1.86         6.50
    1989                 3.39               2.11               1.91              -3.37         1.72            -1.93              5.49         0.40
    1990                 4.55               3.88               3.32              4.26          1.88            -1.59             -2.11         0.27
    1991                 0.26               2.09               0.28             12.13          1.61            -1.77             -8.55         1.97
   Average               4.28               0.61               1.14              -0.45         1.40            -2.73              2.64         0.79
   St. Dev.              6.03               6.27               4.64             10.09          1.89            2.25               7.89         2.26

Notes: Percentage growth rates. The plant-level multifactor productivity is calculated using production function parameters that vary across 3-digit
ISIC estimates using Wooldridge (2009). "Value Added" is the growth rate of aggregate value added, which is constructed by summing the
establishment-level single-deflated value added across establishments and then taking the annual growth rate. For other details, see notes to Table 10.




                                                             Table A3
                        Aggregate Multifactor Productivity Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                           BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) Decomposition
                              Industry-level Deflator, Capital Input Adjusted by Capacity Utilization Rate

    Year                Value         (0) Multifactor                 BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                        Added          Prod. Growth         (1) Within          (2) Between           (3) Cross               (4) Net Entry
                                                                                 BHC          FHK                                BHC           FHK
    1995                  4.01              9.74               4.45             34.05          2.20            -0.39            -28.37         3.49
    1996                  7.39              7.48               4.22              8.06          1.23            0.38              -5.17         1.65
    1997                 14.60             11.84               6.36              -9.53         0.86            0.30             14.70          4.32
    1998                  2.90              1.09               -1.49             -4.86         1.54            0.16              7.28          0.88
    1999                  8.35              2.87               3.24             -25.34         -1.84           1.26             23.71          0.21
    2000                  8.27              4.42               2.80              9.75          0.33            0.72              -8.85         0.57
    2001                  4.28              4.44               3.39             15.24          1.22            0.28             -14.47         -0.45
    2002                  9.04              5.11               3.66             -35.12         0.66            0.25             36.32          0.55
    2003                  6.54              3.42               2.33             34.83          0.61            1.10             -34.84         -0.61
    2004                  4.62              3.85               1.93             20.07          1.58            0.15             -18.30         0.20
   Average                7.00              5.43               3.09              4.72          0.84            0.42              -2.80         1.08
   St. Dev.               3.41              3.30               2.03             23.42          1.09            0.48             22.95          1.63

Notes: We replace the capital input with the capital input multiplied by the capacity utilization rate whenever possible, and end up replacing 11% of
the total number of observations.




                                                                         41
                                                            Table A4
                        Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                         BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition
                                      Metal Industry (NACE 28), Industry-level Price Deflator


   Year                   Value          (0) Labor                  BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                          Added        Prod. Growth         (1) Within            (2) Between            (3) Cross         (4) Net Entry
                                                                                BHC        FHK                           BHC          FHK
  1995                    12.80            12.49              16.07            3.14         3.24          -17.46        10.74        10.64
  1996                     5.89             8.24               2.06            11.86        7.72           -4.30        -1.38        2.75
  1997                    21.53            19.01              14.75            -2.38        3.08           -2.68        9.32         3.86
  1998                     7.05             3.47              -0.22            4.11         3.88           -2.70        2.28         2.51
  1999                    18.37             5.54               9.30            -5.33        0.91           -1.45        3.03         -3.22
  2000                    15.99             9.42               6.31            1.63         2.45           -1.71        3.18         2.36
  2001                    14.06             9.46               8.47             0.41        1.92           -1.48         2.06         0.55
  2002                     9.70             5.68               4.70            -2.34        0.90           -1.04         4.36         1.12
  2003                    14.45            12.03              10.50             0.05        1.24           -1.45         2.94         1.75
  2004                    -0.93            -0.73              -1.94             4.87        1.47           -0.92        -2.74        0.66
 Average                  11.89             8.46               7.00             1.60        2.68           -3.52         3.38         2.30
 St. Dev.                  6.60             5.46               6.00            4.81         2.05           5.00         4.13         3.50


Notes: We use a 2-digit industry-level price deflator to obtain deflated value added. We use employment share for the share weights. Both (1)
within and (2) between terms use base-period share for the weights. For other technical details, see notes to Table 1.




                                                            Table A5
                        Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                         BHC (1992) and FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition
                               Metal Industry (NACE 28), Industry-level and Firm-level Price Deflator


   Year                   Value          (0) Labor                  BHC (1992) / FHK (2001) ALP Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2) + (3) + (4)
                          Added        Prod. Growth         (1) Within            (2) Between            (3) Cross         (4) Net Entry
                                                                                BHC        FHK                           BHC          FHK
  1995                    18.85            18.72              21.96            3.26         3.25          -17.42        10.92        10.92
  1996                     9.51            11.93               5.66            11.49        7.38           -4.00        -1.23        2.89
  1997                    17.39            15.18              15.36            -3.19        2.11           -1.86        4.88         -0.43
  1998                    13.51            10.92               7.48            4.12         3.18           -2.09        1.40         2.34
  1999                    20.69             6.08              10.71            -7.23        0.32           -1.78        4.37         -3.18
  2000                     6.88             6.25               3.15            5.91         1.81           -1.33        -1.49        2.61
  2001                    11.29             6.82               7.02            -0.65        0.95           -1.39         1.85         0.25
  2002                    10.67             1.83               3.18            -6.93        0.41           -0.81         6.39        -0.95
  2003                    14.73            12.12              10.29            -0.21        1.16           -1.00         3.04         1.67
  2004                     1.99             2.85               1.93             4.99        1.02           -0.66        -3.42        0.55
 Average                  12.55             9.27               8.67             1.16        2.16           -3.23         2.67         1.67
 St. Dev.                  5.71             5.41               6.21             5.94        2.10           5.07          4.24         3.75

Notes: The number of observations with an establishment-level price deflator accounts for 23% of the total number of observations in metal
industry. For these observations, we use an establishment-level price deflator to obtain deflated value added. Otherwise, we use a 2-digit
industry-level price deflator to obtain deflated value added. For other technical details, see notes to Table 5.




                                                                         42
                                                     Table A6
                Aggregate Labor Productivity (ALP) Growth Rate, Slovenian Manufacturing 1995-2004
                                    BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition
                                               Single-Product Firms

   Year              BHC                  BHC (1992) Between Term Decomposition: (0) = (1) + (2)         Number of Firms
              (0): Between Term               (1): First component     (2) Second component

   1995               -13.46                         0.38                   -13.84                            15.00
   1996                5.54                          7.74                    -2.19                             2.48
   1997                2.90                         12.65                    -9.75                            11.52
   1998                -9.14                        -1.36                    -7.78                             8.70
   1999                -1.60                         3.40                    -5.01                             5.00
   2000                4.88                         10.95                    -6.08                             7.62
   2001                2.03                          0.50                    1.53                             -1.77
   2002                1.50                          5.08                    -3.58                             4.50
   2003                10.80                         4.52                    6.29                             -7.33
   2004                1.16                          0.14                    1.02                             -1.40
  Average              0.46                          4.40                    -3.94                             4.43
  St. Dev.             7.09                          4.79                    5.91                              6.71
Notes: Percentage growth rates. BHC Between Term is decomposed into two terms using equation 13 in the text. The sample is
single-product firms.




                                                               43
