                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DO STRICT CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS RAISE THE COST OF CAPITAL? BANKING
                REGULATION AND THE LOW RISK ANOMALY

                                           Malcolm Baker
                                           Jeffrey Wurgler

                                        Working Paper 19018
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19018


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




 For helpful comments we thank Yakov Amihud, Jon Bernstein, Robin Greenwood, Alec Guzov, Victoria
Ivashina, Thomas McGuire, Hamid Mehran, Antony Saunders, David Scharfstein, Amit Seru, Adi
Sunderam, Jeremy Stein, Robert Turley, Sir John Vickers, seminar participants at Harvard Business
School and NYU Stern School of Business, and especially Sam Hanson. We thank Alex Guzov and
Robert Turley for excellent research assistance. In addition to their academic affiliations, Baker and
Wurgler serve as consultants to Acadian Asset Management. Baker gratefully acknowledges financial
support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. In addition to their academic
affiliations, Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler serve as consultants to Acadian Asset Management.
Baker gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Division of Research of the Harvard Business
School. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Do Strict Capital Requirements Raise the Cost of Capital? Banking Regulation and the Low
Risk Anomaly
Malcolm Baker and Jeffrey Wurgler
NBER Working Paper No. 19018
May 2013
JEL No. G02,G14,G21,G32

                                               ABSTRACT

Minimum capital requirements are a central tool of banking regulation. Setting them balances a number
of factors, including any effects on the cost of capital and in turn the rates available to borrowers. Standard
theory predicts that, in perfect and efficient capital markets, reducing banks’ leverage reduces the risk
and cost of equity but leaves the overall weighted average cost of capital unchanged. We test these
two predictions using U.S. data. We confirm that the equity of better-capitalized banks has lower systematic
risk (beta) and lower idiosyncratic risk. However, over the last 40 years, lower risk banks have higher
stock returns on a risk-adjusted or even a raw basis, consistent with a stock market anomaly previously
documented in other samples. The size of the low risk anomaly within banks suggests that the cost
of capital effects of capital requirements may be considerable. Assuming competitive lending markets,
banks’ low asset betas implied an average risk premium of only 40 basis points above Treasury yields
in our sample period; a calibration suggests that a ten percentage-point increase in Tier 1 capital to
risk-weighted assets may have increased this to between 100 and 130 basis points per year. In summary,
the low risk anomaly in the stock market produces a potentially significant cost of capital requirements.


Malcolm Baker
Baker Library 261
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mbaker@hbs.edu

Jeffrey Wurgler
Stern School of Business, Suite 9-190
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
jwurgler@stern.nyu.edu
I.      Introduction

        The instability of banks in the financial crisis of 2008 has stoked the enduring debate

about optimal capital requirements. The issue is multidimensional, involving agency problems in

banks, asymmetric information, international coordination and arbitrage, bank governance, tax

benefits of debt, government subsidies, systemic risks and externalities beyond the financial

sector, shadow banking, political pressures and regulatory capture, and so on. But one of the

central concerns has long been the possibility that capital requirements affect banks’ overall cost

of capital, and therefore lending rates and economic activity.2

        Many bankers appear to prefer lower capital requirements. They argue that because

equity is more expensive than debt, more of it raises the overall cost of capital. For example,

according to a former managing director of JP Morgan turned policy analyst, “the first-order

effect of increasing the ratio of common equity to total assets for banks from 5% to 30% would

clearly be very high. Assume that the annual cost of bank equity is 5 percentage points higher

than the after-tax cost of bank deposits and debt…” (Elliott (2013)). The CEO of Deutsche Bank

states that heightened capital requirements “would restrict [banks’] ability to provide loans to the

rest of the economy. This reduces growth and has negative effects for all” (Admati and Hellwig

(2013), p. 5).

        Many economists, on the other hand, view the weighted average cost of capital as

roughly invariant to capital structure. They consider the argument above a fallacy. Admati,

DeMarzo, Hellwig, and Pfleiderer (2011) sum up the textbook Modigliani-Miller logic:

“[B]ecause the increase in capital provides downside protection that reduces shareholders’ risk,

2
 See Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994), Philippon (2009), Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (2012) and citations therein
for evidence on the effect of costs of capital on business investment. Broader studies of the real effects of bank
capital requirements include Van den Heuvel (2008), Macroeconomic Assessment Group of the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision (2010), Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), Elliott (2009, 2010), and Santos and
Elliott (2012).



                                                        1
shareholders will require a lower expected return to invest in a better capitalized bank” (p. 16,

italics in original). In an efficient and integrated capital market—absent taxes and other

distortions—the reduced cost of equity offsets its increased weight in the capital structure and

leaves the overall cost of capital unchanged. Assuming that the cost of capital effect is indeed

negligible, Admati and Hellwig (2013) argue that the other benefits of capital requirements

suggest raising the minimum equity to assets ratio to between 20% and 30% from its current

single digits.

         Given that real capital markets contain frictions and inefficiencies that challenge many

Modigliani-Miller assumptions, however, the validity of the capital structure irrelevance

argument is not so clear, and direct empirical evidence is lacking.3 In this paper, we estimate

how leverage affects the risk and cost of bank equity and the overall cost of capital in practice.

         We are especially motivated by the potential interaction of capital requirements and the

“low risk anomaly” within the stock market. That is, while stocks have on average earned higher

returns than less risky asset classes like corporate bonds, which in turn have earned more than

Treasury bonds, it is less appreciated that the basic risk-return relationship within the stock

market has historically been flat—if not inverted. Haugen and Heins (1975), Fama and French

(1992), Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler (2011), and Baker, Bradley, and Taliaferro (2013) find a

flat or negative relationship between a stock’s systematic risk, as measured by its stock market

beta, and its subsequent returns. Ang, Hodrick, Ying, and Zhang (2006, 2009) find a negative

relationship between idiosyncratic risk and returns in the U.S. and many international stock

markets. As we discuss in the literature review, a combination of behavioral theories and limits

on arbitrage have been nominated as driving these patterns.

3
 Admati et al., for instance, cite seven theoretical papers in the relevant section but only one empirical paper,
Kashyap, Stein, and Hanson (2010), which does not estimate the cost of equity directly.



                                                           2
           These studies suggest that there is a low risk anomaly on average within the stock market.

The relevant question for capital requirements is whether this holds within banks specifically.

Does the cost of equity fall with equity as the Modigliani-Miller logic predicts? Or does it not

fall by enough, or actually increase, as bankers and the low risk anomaly would imply? Indeed,

the low risk anomaly might not be present in banks at all. Relative to nonfinancial firms, their

financial structure and risk are tracked in considerably greater detail by regulators and investors.

           Our empirical evaluation uses a large sample of historical U.S. data and proceeds in two

steps. First, we relate bank equity betas estimated from CRSP to leverage ratios from quarterly

reports. Second, we relate realized returns on equity to bank equity betas. We also replace beta

with idiosyncratic risk. The two steps together then allow us to calibrate the effect of increased

capital requirements on the cost of equity and, under certain assumptions, the overall cost of

capital.

           We confirm that bank equity risk is sharply increasing in leverage. This is not surprising,

and our work here complements and extends that of Kashyap, Stein, and Hanson (2010). When

capital is measured by the Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets ratio, the portfolio beta of the

least-capitalized banks is 0.93 while the portfolio beta of the most-capitalized banks is 0.50.

Higher capital ratios also predict lower idiosyncratic risk. Even this relatively large difference in

beta is likely attenuated by two factors. Banks with riskier assets may choose to have larger

capital cushions. This endogenous selection tends to reduce the slope between capital ratios and

beta. Indeed, within the largest banks, where the asset mix also includes investment banking,

asset management, and other operations, the difference is smaller and less robust. Also, to the

extent that debt is risky, some of the asset risk is borne by debt and not equity for the most




                                                    3
leveraged banks. This type of risk sharing between debt and equity also flattens the empirical

relationship. Overall, the first step of the textbook argument holds.

       Does a reduction in beta translate to a reduction in the cost of equity? The answer

contained in 40 years of U.S. stock returns—including more than a quarter of a million bank-

months—is no. The low risk anomaly is actually a bit stronger within banks than other firms.

High-beta banks returned less than low-beta banks, even on a raw basis, and even in a period of

mostly rising equity markets. Value-weighted returns are on average 16 basis points per month

higher for a portfolio of the lowest three beta deciles than for a portfolio of the highest three beta

deciles. The spread between low and high idiosyncratic risk portfolios is 6 basis points per

month. These effects do not appear to be mediated by capitalization. Controlling for a size factor

increases the risk-adjusted differences, especially for idiosyncratic risk portfolios. More simply,

beta is positively correlated with capitalization while idiosyncratic risk is negatively correlated,

yet both risk types are negatively related to average returns.

       We focus on the last 40 years of data because earlier stock returns data include only a

small number of banks, rendering portfolio returns much less diversified and conclusions more

tenuous. Nonetheless, results using the last 80 years of data are at least as strong. The bottom line

is that high-risk U.S. banks, like high-risk nonfinancial firms in the U.S. and other developed

markets, have delivered equal or lower returns to shareholders than low-risk U.S. banks.

Together with the pattern that more conservative capital structures reduce the risk of equity, this

suggests a cost of heightened capital requirements in the form of costlier equity.

       To understand magnitudes, we focus on the beta anomaly and estimate how the overall

cost of capital for a bank would have changed over this period given the hypothetical ten

percentage-point increase in Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets experiment considered in




                                                  4
Kashyap et al. (2010). A benchmark estimate of the pretax weighted average cost of capital for a

typical bank implied by the Capital Asset Pricing Model over the same 40-year period is 40 basis

points per year above the risk-free rate. By reducing equity betas, banks with a full ten

percentage point increase in Tier 1 capital would have added between 60 and 90 basis points to

this spread—more than doubling the weighted average cost of capital over the risk-free rate to

between 100 and 130 basis points. In a competitive lending market this would have translated to

a similar increase in average bank lending rates. To the extent that the shadow banking system

was not similarly constrained, lending would have moved more rapidly from banks to flexible

and less regulated parts of the capital market.

       The critical assumption in the simple calibration is that the linear, historical relationship

between risk and return would have held, as banks were required to shift their risk profile. A less

important assumption is that bank debt was approximately risk-free. We also consider the

sensitivity of this calibration to the assumption of risky debt, the extension of a low risk anomaly

to debt as well as equity markets, and the impact of government insurance of bank debt. We

conclude that as long as the debt and equity markets were not perfectly integrated—the

underpinning of Modigliani-Miller logic—the simple calibration with riskless debt remains a

reasonable estimate.

       There are presumably limits to these effects. A deeply undercapitalized bank with

extraordinarily risky equity (and somehow granted a reprieve from FDIC seizure) has a cost of

equity that is hard to measure and may or may not be extremely low. At the other end of the

spectrum, the equity of an otherwise typical bank with no debt at all will be so transparently low

risk that investors may be successful in recategorizing it as similar to low cost, high-grade debt.




                                                  5
Since our sample does not include banks with no debt or with no equity, our evidence speaks

only to an empirically relevant (yet fairly wide) range.

       Our summary conclusion is that the low risk anomaly within banks may represent an

unrecognized and possibly substantial downside of heightened capital requirements. It is separate

from and additive to the increase in the cost of capital and lending rates through a smaller debt

tax shield, which Kashyap et al. (2010) estimate to be 25 to 45 basis points for an increase in

capital requirements of the size we consider. We emphasize, however, that despite the fact that

tightened capital requirements may considerably increase the cost of capital and lending rates,

with adverse implications for investment and growth, they may well remain desirable when all

other private and social benefits and costs are tallied up.

       Section II gives some background on the low risk anomaly. Section III describes stock

returns and capital adequacy data. Section IV contains the main results on the connections

between beta, capital levels, and costs of equity. Section V summarizes regulatory epochs and

performs a calibration exercise. Section VI concludes.



II.    The Low Risk Anomaly

       Over the long run, riskier asset classes have earned higher returns in U.S. markets. From

1926 to 2012, small capitalization stocks provided higher but more variable returns than large

capitalization stocks, which in turn were riskier and returned more than long-term corporate

bonds, and so on down the list of increasingly safer asset classes of long-term Treasury bonds,

intermediate-term Treasury bonds, and Treasury bills (Ibbotson Associates (2012)).

       More relevant to our study is that the historical risk-return tradeoff within the stock

market is flat or inverted. The standard Sharpe-Lintner Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)

predicts that the expected return on a security is proportional to its systematic risk (beta).


                                                  6
Investors are assumed to diversify away idiosyncratic risk so it does not affect their required

returns. The “low risk anomaly” is the empirical pattern that stocks with higher beta, or higher

idiosyncratic risk, have tended to earn lower returns.

         To a greater or lesser extent, this failure of the traditional risk-return tradeoff appears in

stock markets around the world. Black (1972), Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1972), Haugen and

Heins (1975), and Fama and French (1992) all noted the relatively flat relationship between

expected returns and beta risk. The more recent work of Ang, Hodrick, Ying, and Zhang (2006,

2009) has emphasized the magnitude and robustness of the anomaly. Ang et al. (2009) find that

stocks with higher idiosyncratic risk earn statistically significantly lower returns in each of the

G7 countries and across 23 developed markets. Blitz and van Vliet (2007) and Baker, Bradley,

and Taliaferro (2013) confirm the low risk anomaly within developed markets and Blitz, Pang,

and van Vliet (2012) extend this to emerging markets, where it appears to be growing over time.

These patterns challenge not just the CAPM but also any asset-pricing framework where risk and

return are positively related.

         The magnitude of the risk-return inversion is large. For example, Baker, Bradley, and

Taliaferro (2013) find that a dollar invested in a low quintile beta portfolio of U.S. stocks in early

1968 grows to $70.50 by the end of 2011, a while dollar invested in a high beta portfolio grows

to only $7.61. In a sample of up to 30 developed equity markets over a shorter period beginning

in 1989, the comparable figures are $6.40 and $0.99. It is remarkable, and appears

underappreciated within and beyond academia, that a value-weighted portfolio of high-risk

quintile stocks held for four decades did not earn the investor a positive return even in nominal

terms.




                                                    7
       Several explanations for the low risk anomaly have been put forth. A variety of evidence

suggests that some individual investors have an irrational preference for volatile or skewed

investments, due to overconfidence, as in Cornell (2008), or lottery preferences, as in Kumar

(2009), Bali, Cakici, and Whitelaw (2011) and the cumulative prospect theory of Tversky and

Kahneman (1992) as modeled by Barberis and Huang (2008). Leverage-constrained investors

who pursue a strategy of seeking high returns from beta risk must invest in high-beta stocks

directly, leading them to be overpriced relative to a leveraged position in low-beta stocks (Black

(1972) and Frazzini and Pedersen (2013)).

       One question is why more sophisticated investors do not take advantage of the anomaly.

Institutional fund managers may prefer high-beta assets themselves because the inflows to

performing well are greater than the outflows to performing poorly (Karceski (2002)). Another

reason for a high-beta preference is when managers are rewarded for beating the market, which

presumably has a positive risk premium, on a non-beta-adjusted basis (Brennan (1993) and

Baker et al. (2011)). More generally, short-selling constraints inhibit sophisticated investors’

ability to exploit the overpricing of high-beta stocks (Hong and Sraer (2012)).

       For our purposes, the precise origin of the low risk anomaly is not critical. What matters

is whether it exists among banks and, if so, is likely to persist. Given that overconfidence and

lottery preferences are intrinsic human attributes; that leverage and short-sale constraints are

enduring features of the trading environment; that institutional investors and their incentives are

only becoming more important over time; and that the low risk anomaly apparent within all-

industry samples appears in long U.S. and international samples—it seems reasonable to

maintain that any low risk anomaly present within banks would persist.




                                                  8
        The low risk anomaly has parallel implications for investors and CFOs. Low risk stocks,

at least with the benefit of high returns in hindsight, have been priced cheaply on average. So,

raising equity capital for these firms has been comparatively expensive. High risk stocks, by

contrast, have been expensive, and the cost of raising equity for these firms has been

comparatively low. One might well ask why operating firms have not increased their leverage

ratios more to take advantage of the low risk anomaly. It is hard to square the low leverage ratios

of nonfinancial firms simply with a tradeoff between the tax benefits of interest and the costs of

financial distress, much less an extra benefit of debt arising from the mispricing of low risk

stocks.4 It is worth noting that many of these low leverage firms—think of the stereotypical

profitable technology firm—start with a high asset beta or overall asset risk. For our purposes, it

is simple enough to say that there is no low leverage puzzle within banks.

        Banks in particular tend to rely largely on debt to finance their lending operations and

generally start with a very low asset beta. This means that without significant leverage their

equity might in many cases resemble investment grade debt in terms of risk. This puts another

lens on the low risk anomaly, and suggests a possible remedy to the mispricing that could arise

from significantly heightened capital requirements. It is perhaps that the mere categorization of a

security as equity leads investors to demand a return that resembles the return on other stocks,

regardless of its particular risk properties. Coval, Jurek, and Stafford (2009) argue that such

investor behavior influenced the pricing of highly rated collateralized debt obligations. This

suggests a marketing effort, albeit perhaps an unrealistic one, would be required to help investors

differentiate low leverage bank equity from similarly labeled equity in industrial firms.




4
  See Graham (2000) on the low leverage puzzle. The low risk anomaly suggests another source of profits from
leveraged buyouts, if the equity of a low-leverage firm is made more valuable by increasing its risk.



                                                        9
         But before making any policy prescriptions, we ask whether the combination of an

exogenous increase in capital requirements and the low risk anomaly would increase the overall

cost of capital for banks. The first step is to ask whether heightened capital requirements would

reduce equity risk for banks. The second is to ask whether the low risk anomaly holds within

banks such that the increase in equity would raise the cost of capital. In general, we focus on beta

risk, where the Modigliani-Miller logic best applies, but we also explore idiosyncratic risk.



III.     Data

A.       Banks, Betas, and Returns

         Estimating the relationship between expected equity returns—alternatively, the required

return on equity or the cost of equity—and beta requires both a long time series of returns and a

large number of banks to provide breadth in beta. Our main sample for the returns analysis

includes almost 4,000 publicly traded banks or bank holding companies that make an appearance

in over 40 years of returns data, for a total of more than a quarter of a million bank-months of

returns.

         We gather bank stock prices and returns data from January 1931 through December 2011

from the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) database. We focus our attention on

the second half of the sample, the most recent 40.5 years starting in July 1971. We save the full

sample as a robustness check, because there are relatively few publicly traded banks in the early

CRSP years, rendering the beta portfolios undiversified and highly volatile.5 We identify banks

using the set of four-digit SIC codes suggested in Fama and French (1997) plus the three-digit




5
 After July 1971, there are at least 70 firms in the sample. Prior to July 1971, there are between five and 69 banks,
with an overall average of 22.



                                                          10
SIC code corresponding to bank holding companies.6 The primary sample includes bank-months

for which we can compute a valid beta, with at least 24 monthly holding period return (CRSP:

RET) observations, a valid market capitalization, with a nonmissing price (PRC) and shares

outstanding (SHROUT) observation, and at least one holding period return following a valid

beta. Due to the return requirements, the bank-months we follow run from February 1970

through December 2011.

        The primary sample of banks is broken down by decade and SIC in Table 1. Holding

companies are the most numerous group, followed by savings institutions, commercial banks,

state banks in the Federal Reserve System, national commercial banks, S&Ls, and national banks

in the Federal Reserve System. A total of 3,952 banks make an appearance over the course of our

CRSP sample.

        Summary statistics for this sample are in Table 2. The bank-month observations are

divided by pre-ranking risk measures. Pre-ranking beta is computed for each bank-month by

regressing a minimum of 24 months and a maximum of 60 months of trailing holding period

returns in excess of the riskless rate on the corresponding CRSP U.S. value-weighted market

holding period returns (CRSP: VWRETD, also in excess of the riskless rate, and provided by

Ken French). We also take the root mean squared error from these regressions as our measure of

idiosyncratic risk. This pre-ranking beta is what we will use to rank banks when tracking

subsequent returns. We will consider forward (realized) betas and idiosyncratic risk as well

when correlating beta and capital ratios.

        It is worth noting at the outset that bank betas on an equal weighted basis are relatively

low. The overall median is only 0.67. There is also ample spread on pre-ranking equity beta
6
 We exclude a small number of firms included in Fama and French’s definition of banks: those with SIC
classifications as Federal Reserve Banks, Foreign Banks, Functions Related to Deposit Banking, Nondepository
Credit Institutions, Federal Credit Agencies, or FNMA. Including these firms has no effect on our results.



                                                       11
among our bank sample. The mean pre-ranking beta among the bottom three deciles is 0.18 and

the mean among the top three deciles is 1.37. More importantly, we will see that this pre-ranking

spread leads to differences in realized portfolio betas of approximately 0.6. Another important

pattern from Table 2 is the correlations between risk measures and capitalization. Beta is higher

for large banks, while idiosyncratic risk is lower. As we shall also see, the risk measures imply

similar conclusions for leverage and returns, suggesting that the results are not being mediated

by capitalization.

        In total, this broad sample contains up to 272,031 bank-months for our beta and returns

analysis. We also use three control variables common in the analysis of the cross-section of stock

returns; e.g. Fama and French (1992) and Jegadeesh and Titman (1993). As suggested above,

higher-beta banks tend to be larger market capitalization. This is the opposite of the negative

correlation between beta and market capitalization among nonfinancial firms. Bank holding

companies may have units such as investment banking where profits are more correlated with the

overall stock market. Also, smaller firms, with less geographic and product diversification, may

choose less risky operations with endogenously higher capital. To the extent that the endogenous

link is through idiosyncratic risks, not beta, this is a useful form of identification for us.

        We also compute book-to-market equity ratios. Book equity data are available for a

subset of stocks from Compustat, sourced from Moody’s. We follow the definition of book

equity from Ken French’s data library. Within each beta group there is skewness in book-to-

market; it will come as no surprise that some banks have seen the market value of their assets

deteriorate faster than they were marked down. The median ratio across beta groups is an

identical 0.76. Another control variable is return momentum, defined as usual as the total stock

return over the prior twelve months excluding the most recent one.




                                                   12
       Figure 1 shows the time series of the average betas in each quantile. In an average year

there is a spread of around 1.0 between the average beta in the top three deciles and the bottom

three deciles. The average CRSP market return over the riskless rate is 6% and the standard

deviation is 18% over our sample period, suggesting meaningful dispersion in CAPM-based

expected equity returns and very wide dispersion in market-driven realized returns. There is a

jump in the number of smaller banks in 1973, when Nasdaq-listed firms first appear in the CRSP

database. This influx of typically lower-beta banks brings down average betas significantly in

the early years, to a range and spread that has remained somewhat stable since the mid-1970s.



B.     Bank Capital

       We are able to gather capitalization data for a subset of the CRSP sample from the

quarterly call reports data in the WRDS Bank Regulatory database. We use the CRSP PERMCO

to bank RSSID ID link table available from March 1996 through December 2010 that is provided

by WRDS; we start at 1996 with the introduction of granular capital data. In cases of multiple

RSSIDs per PERMCO, we aggregate RCFD data items across RSSIDs. An alternative approach

that yields similar results (unreported) is to use the quarterly Compustat data items on capital

adequacy for banks. Our overall coverage is slightly better using the aggregation of call reports.

Finally, we merge CRSP PERMCOs to PERMNOs.

       We consider five common capital ratios to determine which measure of equity best lines

up with equity beta. The ratio of total equity capital (RCFD3210) divided by average total assets

(RCFD3368) is the simple shareholder equity ratio. Tier 1 capital (RCFD8274, which is first

available in March 1996) to average total assets is called the leverage ratio. Total risk-based

capital (RCFD3792) to assets puts the sum of Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital in the numerator. Tier 1




                                                 13
capital to total risk-weighted assets (RCFDa223) is the widely followed Tier 1 capital ratio.

Total risk-based capital to total risk-weighted assets is called the total capital ratio. Scaling by

risk-weighted assets is an effort to address the possibility that asset beta may differ somewhat

across our sample.

       We distribute these quarterly capital data across relevant months to yield an intersection

of 74,105 bank-months with the basic returns data set. Table 3, Panel A, shows the distribution

of these measures of bank capital. The sample is divided each month into ten deciles of capital

adequacy. We report the median and market-capitalization weighted mean ratio within each

decile. In this somewhat heterogeneous sample of banking institutions, the average capital ratios

in the highest decile are typically around twice those of the lowest decile. The highest spread

appears in the ratio Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, which over this period was widely

regarded as the most important measure of capital by market participants. See the Appendix for

capital structure data on the largest bank holding companies as of the end of 2011.



IV.    Analysis

A.     Predictions: Capital Adequacy, Beta, and Returns

       In efficient capital markets, higher capital ratios will be associated with lower equity

betas and lower equity returns, all else equal. Capital structure is endogenous, however, so we

cannot use the cross-sectional relationship between capital ratios and beta to measure the causal

effect of an increase in capital requirements. These effects tend to attenuate the relationship

between capital ratios and equity beta. So, if there is a meaningful difference between

endogenously selected capital ratios and empirical equity betas, we can be comfortable that

exogenous effects would be at least as large.




                                                  14
         Figure 2 shows some basic predictions for how leverage affects equity betas. Writing the

definition of asset beta as a weighted average of equity and debt betas, with e being the ratio of

equity to total assets and the inverse of e leverage, and rearranging, yields

β e = 1e β a − (1e − 1)β d .                                                                                         (1)


With approximately riskless debt, the last term drops out and the relationship between equity

beta and leverage is linear with a slope of asset beta, as shown with the solid line in Figure 2.7

The effect of risky debt is apparent at high leverage, where debt’s beta rises and causes equity’s

beta to rise less than linearly, as indicated by the dashed line on the right-hand side of Figure 2.

         When banks differ in their asset betas, endogenous leverage choice due to financial

distress costs leads to an additional effect that flattens the predicted relationship between equity

beta and leverage. Banks with high asset betas, and therefore high equity betas for any given

leverage, will tend to choose lower leverage. Similarly, and reinforcing the risky debt effect,

banks with low asset betas, and thus low equity betas for any given leverage, may choose higher

leverage. To summarize, the dashed line in Figure 2 is what we would expect from this real-

world combination of risky debt and endogenous capital structure choice. The coefficient in a

regression of equity betas on inverse capital ratios is likely to be somewhat lower than the asset

beta, particularly for extreme levels of leverage.

         This discussion also suggests why we want to go from capital adequacy to returns in two

steps—from capital to beta, and from beta to returns—as opposed to directly from capital to

returns. As explained above, capital is endogenous in a way that may attenuate the results we are

looking for: High capital firms tend to have riskier assets to start with. Critically, however, this
7
  It is worth a reminder that the weighted average of equity and debt betas equals asset beta by identity, in the same
way that the beta of any portfolio is the weighted sum of the betas in the portfolio. The CAPM is not required for its
validity. Also note that a debt tax shield do not alter this formula as long as the bank continuously rebalances its debt
to maintain a constant debt to value ratio; the tax shield asset is as risky as the operating assets.



                                                           15
endogenous selection of capital will be apparent in betas, i.e. an attenuated link between capital

and beta. From a regulatory perspective we wish to understand the effect of an exogenous

increase in capital requirements. In that case, beta will fall, and then we can use the beta effects

to infer the ultimate effects of higher capital. The capital data therefore is in place to estimate a

reasonable lower bound for the link between capital requirements and beta, and then we can use

the returns data to get at the link between beta and returns.8



B.       Capital Adequacy and Beta

         The channel that we are interested in is how equity affects beta. Table 3, Panel B, shows

the relationship between capital measures and realized beta. The equal-weighted columns

indicate that across all banks and for all capital measures, higher capital is associated with lower

beta. We highlight the popular Tier 1 ratio, which generates the largest spread on beta as well as

on capital. It is not surprising that the pure equity in the Tier 1 ratio (despite including some

preferred equity) spreads beta better than other measures. Subordinated debt of the sort that is

included in Tier 2, for example, provides a broader notion of capital but cannot reduce the beta

of equity by nearly as much as more equity. Kashyap et al. (2010) focus on larger banks and use

Computstat data on bank equity, and they document a relationship between beta and total equity

to total assets. The more detailed breakdown afforded by the use of call reports data suggests

that Tier 1 equity is by far the most important for spreading beta.

         The value-weighted differences in Panel B show that the link between beta and capital

adequacy ratios is weaker for larger banks. It is precisely in these banks where one would expect

the endogenous selection of leverage to be apparent, because the asset mix is much more

8
 A more practical constraint is that fifteen years of capital data are not enough for sufficiently reliable estimates of
average returns on different risk categories of banks.



                                                           16
variable. For example a bank with a high capital ratio might nonetheless have a high beta,

because it derives more profit from higher beta activities like investment banking and brokerage.

Still, the difference in realized beta as a function of the Tier 1 ratio is statistically and

economically meaningful even in value-weighted terms.

           The significant spread in capital ratios suggests that some banks may not face binding

leverage constraints, but this is misleading. We review actual regulatory requirements in the

calibration, but note here that falling below regulatory minima subjects U.S. banks to Prompt

Corrective Action restrictions, including ceasing dividends, filing and implementing a capital

restoration plan, and prohibiting acceptance, renewal, or rolling-over of broker CDs. It may also

force a return to the equity markets with an obvious lemons problem. Even falling below the

higher standard of “well capitalized” triggers an increase in deposit insurance premia. Given the

consequences of falling short, the overwhelming majority of banks maintain a sizable buffer over

the well-capitalized boundary, not just the regulatory minimum. The precise buffer presumably

varies with asset risk, perceived access to the equity market, capital structure adjustment costs,

and other factors. In short, it is difficult to know whether bank leverage responds fully one-for-

one with capital requirements, but they influence even banks that are already well above

heightened regulatory percentages.9

           To obtain a precise estimate of the linear relationship between forward (realized) beta and

equity capital we can go beyond decile sorts. For idiosyncratic risk in particular, which cancels

out in portfolios, we must look at the full cross section of beta and root mean squared error

measured at the stock level. Table 4 shows regression results of forward beta and idiosyncratic

risk on inverse equity capital, the specification suggested by equation (1), for all banks. We use


9
    We are grateful to Sam Hanson for the discussion in this paragraph.



                                                           17
the Fama-MacBeth (1973) procedure, which gives equal weight to each cross section, in the

estimation, and we also use two-dimensional clustering, which corrects the standard errors of a

single regression for correlated residuals for different time periods for the same firm or for

different firms at a point in time. Figure 3 shows a third approach to tease out some of the

nonlinear effects in Figure 2. These are kernel regressions of the same relationship for all banks

and for banks only in the top half by market capitalization.

       Recall the discussion of the predictions in Figure 2. If variation in leverage were

exogenous and debt were riskless, we would expect the slope in a regression of equity betas on

inverse capital ratios to equal the average bank asset beta, and we would expect the intercept to

be exactly zero. Both endogenous leverage choices and measurement error in capital cause the

slope to be attenuated and the intercept to be positive. Consistent with measurement error, we

find lower slopes for cruder measures of assets and equity capital. Consistent with the presence

of endogenous leverage choices, the intercept is somewhat greater than zero even for the Tier 1

to risk-weighted assets ratio and there is attenuation in the slope in Figure 3 for very low levels

of leverage. A rough correction is to run this regression while forcing the intercept to be zero.

This raises the lower bound estimate for asset beta to 0.074, which is the measured slope of the

line in Panel A of Figure 3.

       This will be convenient for benchmarking in our calibration below. If bank assets have an

inherent beta of 0.074 and the CAPM holds in frictionless capital markets, the pre-tax weighted

average cost of capital for banks should have exceeded the risk free rate by 0.074 times the

market risk premium, or approximately 40 basis points annually (= 45 x 12 x 0.074) using the

market risk premium from Ken French’s data library of 45 basis points per month from July

1971 through December 2011. This matches the estimation period that we will use below and




                                                 18
roughly corresponds to the approach in Damadoran (2012).10 For the full CRSP history and the

same asset beta, the corresponding figure was 57 basis points annually.

        In results available upon request, we confirm the relationships between capital and future

beta using Compustat’s reported Tier 1 capital ratio (CAPR1Q) and total risk-based capital ratio

(CAPR3Q). The slope coefficients and explanatory power are slightly lower in the Compustat

data, suggesting that the call reports data is slightly more accurate.

        Finally, the bottom panels of Table 4 show that greater capital is also associated with

higher idiosyncratic risk, at least for capital measures scaled by risk-weighted assets. The

strongest relationship is between idiosyncratic risk and total risk-based capital to risk-weighted

assets, which, like Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets, also spreads beta well. Overall, capital

ratios are somewhat more tightly linked to beta than to idiosyncratic risk.



C.      The Low Risk Anomaly Within Banks

        The data clearly show that raising capital requirements would reduce the equity beta of

banks. This is consistent with the textbook Modigliani-Miller argument and essentially

mechanical. The next question is whether this can be expected to reduce the cost of equity, as

theory also predicts. Here the theory is not quite as strong, because it relies on the efficient

pricing of CAPM risks across banks. The empirical alternative is that there is a low risk anomaly

in banks, just as there has been in nonfinancial firms.

        Table 5 runs cross-sectional Fama-MacBeth regressions of monthly returns on beta

deciles. Under the CAPM, the coefficient on beta should reveal the market risk premium.

Because of measurement error and skewness in beta, book-to-market, and momentum, we run
10
   Damodaran’s approach is simple, but it is easy to find higher or lower estimates based on other methodologies or
samples. The equity premium “puzzle” literature regards the historical premium as too high to be explained with
standard intertemporal models (Mehra and Prescott (1985)). See Mehra (2008) for an overview.



                                                        19
these regressions using deciles instead of raw values. Because we are using beta deciles, not beta

per se, an approximate relationship to keep in mind is from Table 2, which suggests that a

movement of about seven deciles corresponds to an increase in pre-ranking beta of 1.2 and a

difference in realized portfolio betas shown below of approximately 0.6.

       In the univariate regression of returns on beta decile alone, however, the point estimate is

actually negative. Adjusting the point estimate to be in units of beta thus does not help us get to

a plausible market risk premium. In the multivariate regression where we make the conservative

assumption that size, book-to-market, and return momentum are risk factors that need to be

controlled for, we also fail to find any meaningful relationship between beta and returns. For

example, adjusting the point estimate to be in units of realized beta implies an implausibly small

market risk premium of around 1% per year. This is far lower than realized market returns over

the same or longer periods, not to mention that the difference is statistically indistinguishable

from zero.

       In Table 6, we follow beta-sorted portfolios, and once again find no evidence of a

positive relationship between beta and returns. As in Table 2, we divide stocks into three groups

according to pre-ranking beta. Sorting stocks leads to a reliable difference in realized portfolio

betas. The low beta, value-weighted portfolio has a realized beta of 0.71 and the high beta

portfolio has a beta almost twice as high at 1.27. These differences in risk should in theory lead

to higher average returns over a period when equity returns overall were positive. Yet, the

monthly returns in excess of the riskless rate are actually 16 basis points per month higher for the

lowest beta group than for the highest beta group. Risk-adjusted underperformance is

mechanically much greater. For a basic market model, the underperformance rises to 41 basis

points per month. For a Fama-French three-factor model, the underperformance rises further to




                                                 20
46 basis points per month. Equal weighting stocks within each portfolio does not alter these

impressions. The raw return differences are smaller at 0.9 basis points, and the comparable risk-

adjusted figures are 28 and 47 basis points per month.

       While these risk-adjusted differences are economically large and statistically significant

at conventional levels, the t-stats are not overwhelming. Plotting the time series in Figure 4

reveals why. There are periods where low beta stocks underperform, most notably in the late

1990s and in nonfinancial stocks, when risky stocks of all types outperformed low risk stocks.

One can either view this as a brief confirmation of the CAPM or an exceptional bubble which,

when removed, strengthens the conclusions of a low volatility anomaly elsewhere.

       The simplest evidence that the low risk anomaly holds within banks is in the cumulative

returns in Figure 4. High-beta banks underperform on a raw basis. Note that this is true over a

42-year sample—there is no suggestion that the underperformance of high beta banks can be

attributed to a crisis period. Moreover, and not surprisingly, the shareholder who held high beta

banks also experienced greater volatility. To summarize, the low risk anomaly holds within

banks: for banks, lower beta has historically been associated with equal or higher, not lower,

costs of equity.

       Turning to idiosyncratic risk in Table 7 shows that the second side of the low risk

anomaly also holds in banks. Here, the results are stronger in equal weighted portfolios. High

idiosyncratic risk underperformed low idiosyncratic risk by 28 basis points per month in raw

terms, 46 basis points per month in beta-adjusted returns, and 76 basis points per month in Fama-

French three-factor model adjusted returns. Qualitatively similar but quantitatively smaller

patterns obtain for value-weighted portfolios. Examining idiosyncratic returns has an important

side benefit. As mentioned earlier, large banks have higher beta but lower idiosyncratic risk. The




                                                 21
fact that the returns (and leverage) results are similar for both measures suggests that the

conclusions apply both to large and small banks. It also suggests the interpretation that the three-

factor results are statistically stronger precisely because they remove extra random variation that

arises from the exposure to the Fama-French size factor, isolating the low risk anomaly from the

size anomaly.

       A final set of robustness checks appears in Table 8, where we extend the sample back to

1931 for beta-sorted portfolios and idiosyncratic risk sorted portfolios, and we show results for

the full sample of CRSP stocks. The important things to note are that the low risk anomaly is as

large economically in the full sample as in the most recent 40 years, and that results within

banking stocks alone are consistent with the low risk anomaly found in earlier research using the

entire CRSP sample.



V.     Calibration

       We now explore the quantitative effects of a hypothetical shift in capital requirements on

the spread between banks’ weighted average cost of capital and the riskless rate. We first review

the current regulatory environment to provide some context. We then proceed in three steps.

First, we consider the simple case where there is a low risk anomaly in equities, but banks are

otherwise able to raise risk-free and correctly priced debt. We also relax the assumption of risk-

free debt, but retain the assumption of efficiency in the debt market. Second, we layer on the

possibility of a low risk anomaly for debt as well as equity securities. Third, we briefly consider

the effects of a government guarantee on bank debt.



A.     Regulatory Capital Requirements




                                                 22
           Bank capital regulations continue to evolve both in the United States and worldwide.

While countries have differed in the speed of reforms and their implementation details, the broad

international trend has been toward increased capital requirements. Basel I, agreed in 1988,

defined Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital as well as risk-weighted assets, and required a minimum of Tier

1 capital to risk-weighted assets of 4% and a total of Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital of 8% (ratios here

and below are also scaled by risk-weighted assets unless otherwise specified). Basel II, agreed in

2006, attempted to address deficiencies of Basel I by modifying the risk-weighting scheme and

introducing a 2% requirement of common-only Tier 1 capital. Basel III, developed in 2011,

further revised the definitions of risk-weighted assets, raised the required common Tier 1 ratio to

between 7% to 9.5% depending on market conditions, raised the required Tier 1 ratio to between

8.5% to 11%, and raised the total capital requirement to between 10.5% and 13%. As a

backstop, Basel III also introduces a minimal requirement of 3% leverage ratio, defined as Tier 1

capital to total (non-risk weighted) assets. (The U.S. Federal Reserve had long maintained a

minimal leverage ratio requirement of 4%.) The U.S. Federal Reserve intends to transition to

essentially the Basel III rules in phases, with full implementation now expected in 2019.11

           Such regulations are the outcome of interactions among regulators, politicians, investors,

and bankers, each with somewhat different preferences and proposals. In recent years, some have

argued for raising the common Tier 1 ratio all the way up to 30% (Elliott (2013)). Accordingly,

we follow Kashyap et al. (2010) and assume that regulators impose a 10% increase of capital

requirements in the form of common equity. We assume that this is a fully binding and

immediate increase from current levels for every bank. But it might, very roughly speaking, be

viewed as the difference between a benchmark with no capital requirements and the current


11
     See Saunders and Cornett (2010) and Yang (2012) for details on the recent history of banking regulation.



                                                          23
regime. We emphasize that we do not estimate the effect of any specific reform proposal, but

our hypothetical change is nonetheless in an empirically relevant range in light of various policy

proposals.

          We focus on capital requirements in this paper, but it is worth noting that liquidity

requirements of the sort called for in Basel III may also activate the low risk anomaly. Holding

cash or highly liquid instruments reduces asset beta and overall risk, thus equity beta and

idiosyncratic risk, which may then increase the cost of bank equity.



B.        The Effect of Higher Capital Requirements on the Weighted Average Cost of Capital

          We start by supposing that the CAPM holds, but with a low risk anomaly. In other words,

higher beta equities underperform their CAPM benchmark and lower beta equities outperform

their CAPM benchmark. In particular, returns are assumed to take the following linear form:

ri = ( βi −1) γ + rf + βi rp ,                                                                      (2)

where βi is the β of any equity i, rf is the risk free rate, rp is the market risk premium, and

     dα
γ=   dβ   < 0 measures the extent of the low risk anomaly. Note that Baker et al. (2011) derive a

pricing equation of exactly this form when investment is delegated to an investment manager

with a typical information-ratio objective. (That is, to maximize the return on the portfolio in

excess of a benchmark divided by the standard deviation of the portfolio return over the

benchmark.) Also assume that debt is correctly priced by the CAPM at:

ri = rf + βd rp .                                                                                   (3)

We relax this assumption in an extension below.

          The cost of capital for a bank is the weighted average of the cost of debt rd and the cost of

equity re:


                                                   24
WACC = ere + (1 − e)rd ,                                                                               (4)

where e is the ratio of equity to total assets. We can then substitute equation (2) and equation (3)

into equation (4), and simplify:

WACC = e(β e − 1)γ + r f + β a rp ,                                                                    (5)

where β a is the β of the banks’ operating assets which we assume is invariant to its capital

structure.

        We are interested in how the cost of capital changes with a change in capital

requirements that moves the bank from its old level of capital e to a new regulatory level e*.

Differencing equation (5), evaluated at the new and old levels of capital, and substituting out the

equity beta, leads to the following increase in the cost of capital:

               (       )                  [                    (      ) ] (                ( ))
∆WACC = e* β e* − 1 γ − e(β e − 1)γ = γ e − e* + (1 − e )β d − 1 − e * β d * ≡ γ e − e* + A e, e* .    (6)

A special case is when the debt is riskless, in both capital regimes, so that β d = β d * = 0 . This

means that the change in the cost of capital is simply γ (e − e * ) , which is greater than zero for

increases in the ratio of equity e. In general, we believe that the effects of changing debt betas are

likely to be small. Given that bank equity betas are somewhat less than 1.0 on average, and

equity ratios are in the range of 8 to 19 percent in Table 3, estimates of β a for banks are quite

small, estimates of β d are by definition smaller, and differences in β d are smaller still. Even so,

this simplified measure of the change in the cost of capital under the assumption of riskless debt

should be viewed as an upper bound. The term A(e,e*) is greater than zero when e > e*. When

debt shares the asset risk with equity, the impact of an increase in capital requirements on equity

betas is mitigated somewhat.




                                                    25
       We can use Table 4 to get a rough sense of the size of γ = ddαβ . In Figure 5 Panel A, we

plot the estimated alphas and betas from Table 6, separately for CAPM and Fama-French three

factor regressions. The CAPM betas range from 0.56 for an equal-weighted portfolio of low beta

banks to 1.27 for a value-weighted portfolio of high beta banks. The corresponding three factor

betas range from 0.55 to 1.32. The portfolio alphas range from -48 basis points per month for the

value-weighted portfolio of high beta banks, controlling for the size and book-to-market factors,

to 34 basis points per month for the equal-weighted portfolio of low beta banks, controlling only

for the market factor. The figure shows simple regressions of alpha on beta for the two sets of

portfolio alphas and betas. The historical slope estimates of γ = ddαβ are -68 and -75 basis points

per month.

       Assuming riskless debt, this assumed linear relationship between beta and alpha indicates

that a 10 percentage point increase in required equity capital would be associated with an 82 (=

68 x 12 x 0.1) to 90 basis point increase in the weighted average cost of capital, and, assuming

competitive lending markets, a corresponding increase in spreads.

       As a robustness test, Panel B plots the analogous results from Table 6-style regressions

that exclude two prominent crisis periods, October 1989 through October 1990 and January 2007

through February 2009. It is not the case that the underperformance of high-beta banks is due to

exceptionally poor performance during crises, and the anomaly is roughly linear whether one

includes or excludes such periods.

       Finally, in Figure 6 we substitute the data from Table 6 with comparable estimates using

the entire CRSP universe of financial and nonfinancial firms. If anything, the low risk anomaly is

actually stronger in banks than nonfinancial firms. Using the linear, all-CRSP slope estimates, a

10 percentage point increase in required equity capital is associated with a weighted average cost



                                                 26
of capital increase of 61 to 65 basis points. So, the range of estimates using a linear empirical

model of only banking stocks or all US stocks and using a simple CAPM or a three-factor model,

is from 60 to 90 basis points.



C.      Extension 1: Adding a Low Risk Anomaly for Debt

        The calibration is greatly simplified with the assumption of fairly priced and riskless

debt. The important assumption, though, is not that debt is riskless but that the debt and equity

markets are not efficiently integrated. If the two markets are integrated and a single equation (2)

governs the pricing of debt and equity, then the Modigliani and Miller theorem is restored and

the cost of capital for banks is simply equal to:

WACC = ( βa −1) γ + rf + β a rp ,                                                                   (7)

which is independent of the chosen capital structure e. Given the magnitude of the low risk

anomaly within equity markets, this sort of debt market integration suggests an implausibly large

expected return on debt. An investment grade debt security, say with a beta equal to 0.1, would

have an expected alpha of 0.9 x 68 = 61 to 0.9 x 75 = 68 basis points per month according to

equation (2) and Figure 5, and all debt securities, with β s well below 1, would offer large, risk-

adjusted expected returns. Spreads on corporate debt are smaller than this by an order of

magnitude, so integrated markets of this sort are not likely to be empirically relevant.

        More plausible is a low risk anomaly that holds within each asset class, along the lines of

Frazzini and Pedersen (2013), but not across asset classes. Baker, Bradley, and Wurgler (2012)

emphasize that an upward sloping risk and return relationship holds at the level of asset classes,

ranging from government securities to small cap stocks. This means equation (3) could be

modified as follows:



                                                    27
rd = (β d − β d )γ d + r f + β d rp ,                                                                    (8)

where it is the difference of an individual debt security’s β d from the average of all debt

securities (not 1) that determines the extent of mispricing. Now the overall cost of capital equals:

WACC = e(β e − 1)γ + (1 − e )(β d − β d )γ d + r f + β a rp .                                            (9)

The analogue of equation (6), the change in the cost of capital as leverage changes, is:

                [            ( )]       [ ( ) (                 ) ] (   )              ( )
∆WACC = γ e − e * + A e, e* + γ d − A e, e* − e − e* β d = e − e * (γ − β d γ d ) + A e, e* (γ − γ d ) . (10)

An analytically simple special case is when the extent of the low risk anomaly per unit change in

β is the same within each asset class, so that γ = γ d . This means that the change in the cost of

                       (       )
capital is simply γ e − e * (1 − β d ), which is greater than zero for increases in the ratio of equity e.

         The terms that depend on the change in the debt beta drop out, because there are exactly

offsetting effects. On the one hand, the debt becomes safer, sharing some of the risk reduction in

equity as leverage decreases and thus mitigating the increase in the cost of equity. This is the

impact shown within the first term of equation (10), multiplied by γ , and it arises because the

equity beta falls less than linearly in the inverse of the leverage ratio, and the cost of capital rises

by less than in the case of riskless debt. On the other hand, because there is less of the now safer,

lower β , debt, the cost of capital rises by more than in the case of riskless debt. Because of the

low risk anomaly within the debt markets, safer debt is more expensive on a risk-adjusted basis.

These two effects offset exactly, when the extent of the low risk anomaly is the same within the

two asset classes. When the low risk anomaly is smaller in debt markets, the effect of changing

debt betas on mitigating the rise in the cost of equity is larger, so that an increase in capital

increases the cost of capital by less than in the case where γ = γ d and the simplified expression

is an upper bound effect.



                                                        28
                                               (        )
         The simplified expression γ e − e * (1 − β d ) contains an extra term added to the case of

correctly priced, riskless debt. It measures the extent to which the two markets are not integrated,

in other words the difference between the pricing of debt and equity in equations (2) and (7)

versus (8). If the markets are perfectly integrated, so that β d = 1 , then the Modigliani and Miller

theorem holds. If there is a separate low risk anomaly within each asset class, so that β d << 1 ,

the effects are slightly smaller than in the riskless debt case.



D.       Extension 2: Adding Government Subsidies

         The analysis so far considers situations where the government is not involved in insuring

the debt of banks. Deposit insurance means that a bank can issue risky debt at the riskless rate of

return. It means equation (3) for the pricing of debt can be modified to:

ri = − β d rp + r f + β d rp = r f .                                                                  (11)

For the bank, the result is something very similar to the riskless case, except that the debt, despite

being priced as riskless, shares some of the risk of equity, mitigating the effect of the low risk

anomaly on the cost of equity:

∆WACC = γ e − e* + A ( e, e* ) − rp −A ( e, e* ) = γ ( e − e* ) + A ( e, e* ) (γ + rp ) .     (12)

If γ = − rp , which is empirically not far from the estimates derived for γ , then the effect on bank

cost of capital is the same as it was in the riskless case. Again, there are two offsetting effects for

the bank. As rp increases, the effect of leverage on the cost of capital is larger than in the riskless

case. This is intuitive: lower leverage means that the bank gets a smaller subsidy from the

government. There is less debt overall and the debt that remains requires a smaller subsidy. As γ

increases in absolute value, the effect of leverage on the cost of capital is smaller than in the



                                                               29
riskless case. This is because the impact of debt sharing in the risk of equity is magnified relative

to the riskless case where there is no risk sharing.

       Another conclusion from equation (12) is that the government subsidy falls, of course, as

capital increases, but there is an additional increase in the cost of capital that is not zero-sum

between the government and banks, because their cost of equity capital increases.

E.     Summary of the Calibration

       To sum up, as long as the debt and equity markets are not integrated, heightened capital

markets will ceteris paribus increase the weighted average cost of capital for banks, in the

presence of a low volatility anomaly. Table 9 summarizes the theoretical analysis. In every

situation where capital markets are segmented, the basic effect is simply the product of the

percentage point increase in equity capital times the excess risk-adjusted performance per unit of

beta. Reasonable point estimates for these effects are in the range of 60 to 90 basis points,

depending on whether we rely on the general pattern in all stocks or the experience of banks

alone. These are attenuated in the case of risky debt or when there is a corresponding, but

segmented low volatility anomaly in debt markets. But, we believe this attenuation is slight, in

large part because bank debt betas overall are likely to be small.

       It is worth putting 60 and 90 basis points in comparative perspective. Recall that our asset

beta estimate for banks was 0.074. With the historical risk premium, this suggests a pre-tax

weighted average cost of capital under the CAPM of around 40 basis points per year above the

risk-free rate over the same 40 year period. Relative to this spread, the effects of significantly

heightened capital requirements when combined with the historical low volatility anomaly are

large indeed. They suggest more than doubling the weighted average cost of capital, when it is

measured as a premium over the risk-free rate, to 100 to 130 basis points.




                                                  30
VI.        Conclusion

           Regulators and bankers are concerned about the effect of capital requirements on the cost

of capital and lending rates. Standard theory argues that this is naïve in perfect and efficient

capital markets, because increased capital will reduce the beta and thus the cost of equity,

leaving the overall cost of capital unchanged.

           We find that this theory does not match the data on stock returns for banks. While the

evidence does show that less leverage reduces equity risk, this in turn puts the low risk anomaly

into play. In our sample, lower risk banks have the same or higher returns than higher risk

banks. Unless long-term and worldwide patterns are reversed, reducing equity beta will not

reduce the cost of equity. In a simple calibration that uses the historical pattern between risk and

return, we find that a ten percentage-point increase in the required Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted

assets ratio would have increased the overall cost of capital by as much as 90 basis points. Given

the relatively low estimate for the beta of bank assets overall, this would more than double the

spread of the cost of capital over the risk-free rate. Alone or in concert with other cost-of-capital

effects of heightened capital requirements, such as the loss of tax benefits in Kashap, Stein, and

Hanson (2010), such an effect would put banks at a larger competitive disadvantage relative to

the shadow banking system, provided it is not similarly regulated.12

           We repeat the qualification given in the introduction. When all other private and social

costs and benefits are totaled up, strict capital requirements may well remain desirable. Our

contribution is to point out that the low volatility anomaly produces an underappreciated and

potentially significant cost to consider.




12
     See Adrian and Ashcraft (2012) for a broad overview of approaches to shadow banking regulation.



                                                         31
References

Admati, Anat R., DeMarzo, P. M., Hellwig, M. F., and P. C. Pfleiderer. “Fallacies, Irrelevant
Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation: Why Bank Equity is Not Expensive.”
Stanford University working paper (2011).

Admati, Anat R., M. Hellwig. The Bankers’ New Clothes. Princeton: Princeton UP (2013).

Adrian, Tobias, A. B. Ashcraft. “Shadow Banking Regulation.” Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Report No. 559 (2012).

Ang, Andrew, R. Hodrick, Y. Xing, X. Zhang. “The Cross-Section of Volatility and Expected
Returns.” Journal of Finance 61 (2006), pp. 259-299.

–. “High Idiosyncratic Volatility and Low Returns: International and Further U.S. Evidence.”
Journal of Financial Economics 91 (2009), pp. 1-23.

Baker, Malcolm, B. Bradley, R. Taliaferro. “The Low Risk Anomaly: A Decomposition into
Micro and Macro Effects.” Harvard Business School, working paper (2013).

Baker, Malcolm, B. Bradley, J. Wurgler. “Benchmarks as Limits to Arbitrage: Understanding the
Low-Volatility Anomaly.” Financial Analysts Journal 67 (2011), pp. 40-54.

Bali, Turan, N. Cakici, R. Whitelaw. “Maxing Out: Stocks as Lotteries and the Cross-Section of
Expected Returns.” Journal of Financial Economics 99 (2011), pp. 427-446.

Barberis, Nicholas, M. Huang. “Stocks as Lotteries: The Implications of Probability Weighting
for Security Prices.” American Economic Review 98 (2008), pp. 2066-2100.

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. “An Assessment of the Long-term Economic Impact
of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements.” Bank for International Settlements mimeo
(2010).

Black, Fischer. “Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing.” Journal of Business 45
(1972), pp. 444-455.

Black, Fischer, M. C. Jensen, M. Scholes. “The Capital Asset Pricing Model: Some Empirical
Tests.” In M. C. Jensen, ed., Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets. New York: Praeger
(1972), pp. 79-121.

Blitz, David, P. V. Vliet. “The Volatility Effect: Lower Risk Without Lower Return.” Journal of
Portfolio Management 34 (2007), pp. 102-113.

Blitz, David, J. Pang, P. V. Vliet. “The Volatility Effect in Emerging Markets.” Robeco Asset
Management, working paper (2012).



                                               32
Brennan, Michael. “Agency and Asset Pricing.” University of California, Los Angeles, working
paper (1993).

Cornell, Bradford. “The Pricing of Volatility and Skewness: A New Interpretation.” California
Institute of Technology working paper (2008).

Coval, Joshua, J. Jurek, E. Stafford. “The Economics of Structured Finance.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 23 (2009), pp. 3-25.

Cummins, Jason G., K. A. Hassett, R. G. Hubbard. “A Reconsideration of Investment Behavior
Using Tax Reforms as Natural Experiments.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2 (1994),
pp. 1-74.

Damodaran, Aswath. “Equity Risk Premiums (ERP): Determinants, Estimation and Implications
– 2012 Edition.” NYU Stern School of Business working paper (2012).

Elliott, Douglas J. “Quantifying the Effects on Lending of Increased Capital Requirements.” The
Brookings Institution mimeo (2009).

Elliott, Douglas J. “A Further Exploration of Bank Capital Requirements: Effects of Competition
from Other Financial Sectors and Effects of Size of Bank or Borrower and of Loan Type.” The
Brookings Institution mimeo (2010).

Elliott, Douglas J. “Higher Bank Capital Requirements Would Come at a Price.” Brookings
Institute Internet posting. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2013/02/20-bank-capital-
requirements-elliott (February 20, 2013).

Fama, Eugene F., K. R. French. “The Cross-Section of Expected Stock Returns.” Journal of
Finance 47 (1992), pp. 427-465.

Fama, Eugene F., K. R. French, “Industry Costs of Equity.” Journal of Financial Economics 43
(1997), pp. 153–193.

Fama, Eugene F., J. D. MacBeth. “Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empirical Tests.” Journal of
Political Economy 81 (1973), pp. 607-636.

Frazzini, Andrea, L. H. Pedersen. “Betting Against Beta.” NYU Stern School of Business
working paper (2013).

Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek. “Misallocation and Financial Market Frictions: Some
Direct Evidence from the Dispersion in Borrowing Costs.” Review of Economic Dynamics 16
(2013), pp. 159-176.

Graham, John, “How Big Are the Tax Benefits of Debt.” Journal of Finance 63 (2000), pp. 1901-
1941.



                                               33
Haugen, Robert A., A. J. Heins, “Risk and the Rate of Return on Financial Assets: Some Old
Wine in New Bottles.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 10 (1975), pp. 775-784.

Hong, Harrison, D. Sraer. “Speculative Betas.” Princeton University working paper (2012).

Ibbotson Associates, 2012, Ibbotson SBBI 2012 Classic Yearbook (Morningstar, Chicago).

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, S. Titman, “Returns to Buying Winners and Selling Losers: Implications
for Stock Market Efficiency.” Journal of Finance 48 (1993), pp. 65-91.

Karceski, Jason. “Returns-Chasing Behavior, Mutual Funds, and Beta’s Death. “ Journal of
Financial and Quantitative Analysis 37 (2002), pp. 559-594.

Kashyap, Anil K., Stein, J. C., and S. Hanson. “An Analysis of the Impact of ‘Substantially
Heightened’ Capital Requirements on Large Financial Institutions.” Harvard University working
paper (2010).

Kumar, Alok. “Who Gambles in the Stock Market?” Journal of Finance 64 (2009), pp. 1889-1933.

Macroeconomic Assessment Group of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. “Assessing
the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements –
Final Report.” Bank for International Settlements mimeo (2010).

Mehra, Rajnish. Handbook of the Equity Risk Premium. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2008.

Mehra, Rajnish, E. C. Prescott. “The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 15 (1985), pp. 145-161.

Philippon, Thomas. “The Bond Market’s q.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2009), pp.
1011-1056.

Santos, Andre Oliveira, D. Elliott. “Estimating the Costs of Financial Regulation.” IMF Staff
Discussion Note (2012).

Saunders, Anthony, and M. Cornett. Financial Institutions Management: A Risk Management
Approach. Seventh Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill (2010).

Tversky, Amos, D. Kahneman. “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of
Uncertainty.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5 (1992), pp. 297-323.

Van den Heuvel, Skander J. “The Welfare Cost of Bank Capital Requirements.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 55 (2008), pp. 298-320.

Yang, Emily. “Bank Capital and Regulation.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York presentation
http://www.newyorkfed.org/education/pdf/2012/Yang_bank_capital_regulation.pdf. (March 20,
2012).


                                               34
Figure 1. Pre-ranking Beta in the Banking Industry, Value-Weighted. Value-weighted pre-ranking beta, July
1971 through December 2011. We define the banking industry as the union of the banking SIC codes from Ken
French’s definition of 48 industries and the three-digit SIC 671, which includes bank holding companies. Pre-
ranking beta is computed by regressing a minimum of 24 months and a maximum of 60 months of trailing holding
period returns (RET) on the corresponding CRSP value-weighted market holding period returns (VWRETD). The
sample is divided into low (bottom 30%), medium (middle 40%), and high (top 30%) portfolios according to pre-
ranking beta. The sample includes firms for which we can compute a valid beta, with at least 24 monthly holding
period return (RET) observations, a valid market capitalization, with a nonmissing price (PRC) and shares
outstanding (SHROUT) observation, and at least one holding period return following a valid beta.

 2.50




 2.00




 1.50




 1.00                                                                                            Top 30%
                                                                                                 Middle 40%
                                                                                                 Bottom 30%
 0.50




 0.00




 -0.50
         197107
         197212
         197405
         197510
         197703
         197808
         198001
         198106
         198211
         198404
         198509
         198702
         198807
         198912
         199105
         199210
         199403
         199508
         199701
         199806
         199911
         200104
         200209
         200402
         200507
         200612
         200805
         200910
         201103




                                                      35
Figure 2. Bank Capital and Beta: Empirical Predictions. Exogenouss changes in the inverse capital ratio on the x-        x
axis should be associated linearly with increases in equity beta if the changes in capital are exogenous and the debt
is approximately risk free. The slope is equal to the asset beta. Endogenous leverage choi  choice,
                                                                                                ce, where a bank chooses
higher or lower leverage to match its asset beta risk, or risky debt will both tend to flatten the predicted relationship.




                                                           36
Figure 3. Kernel regressions of future beta on the inverse capital ratio. The dependent variable is the forward
beta, computed by regressing a minimum of 24 months and a maximum of 60 months of future holding period
returns (RET) in excess of the riskless rate on the corresponding CRSP valuevalue-weighted
                                                                                  weighted market holding period
returns (VWRETD, also in excess of tthe he riskless rate). The independent variable is the ratio of total risk-based
                                                                                                          risk
capital (RCFD3792) to Tier 1 capital (RCFD8274). Panel A includes all banks. Panel B includes only banks above
the median market capitalization in each month. The local polynomial regressions use a Epanechnikov kernel,
                                                                                                        kernel with
20 bins and smoothing interval of 0.1.

Panel A. All banks




Panel B. Large banks




                                                        37
Figure 4. Beta Sorted Portfolio Returns. Portfolio returns for low, medium, and high beta bank stocks. Each
portfolio total return
                   urn in excess of the riskless rate is computed using either equal or value weights. The sample is
divided within each month into low (bottom 30%), medium (middle 40%), and high (top 30%) portfolios according
to pre-ranking beta. Pre-ranking
                          ranking beta and the sa
                                               sample are described in Table 2.


Panel A. Equal Weighted Portfolio




Panel B. Value Weighted Portfolio




                                                        38
Figure 5. The Estimated Size of the Low Risk Anomaly in the Banking Industry. Plots of CAPM and Fama-          Fama
French 3-Factor
          Factor alpha and beta for six portfolios
                                        portfolios.. The alphas and betas are described in Table 6. Slopes from linear
regressions of alpha on beta are shown on the plots. Panel A shows the results for the banking industry as defined in
Table 1. Panel B excludes the peak to trough periods in the middle ban    bankk portfolio from October 1989 through
October 1990 and from January 2007 through February 2009. Excluding the periods of poor ex post performance
increases the alpha estimates.

Panel A. Banks




Panel B. Banks, Excluding Two Crisis Periods




                                                         39
Figure 6. The Estimated Size of the Low Risk Anomaly for All Firms. Plots of CAPM and Fama-French   Fama         3-
Factor alpha and beta for six portfolios. The alphas and betas are estimated as in Table 6, but for all CRSP firms.
Slopes from linear regressions of alpha on beta are sshown on the plots.




                                                        40
Table 1. Banking Industry. Number of firms in each industry group by decade and overall, July 1971 through
December 2011. We define the banking industry as the union of the banking SIC codes from Ken French’s data
library definition of 48 industries and the three-digit SIC 671, which includes bank holding companies. The sample
includes firms for which we can compute a valid beta, with at least 24 monthly holding period return (RET)
observations, a valid market capitalization, with a nonmissing price (PRC) and shares outstanding (SHROUT)
observation, and at least one holding period return following a valid beta. There are relatively few publicly traded
banks in the first half of the CRSP sample, so we focus on the second half, using July 1971 as a start date. Table 8
shows the full sample as a robustness check.


                                                                                 CRSP Firms
                                                                1971-    1980-       1990-       2000-
SIC Code       Industry                                          1979     1989        1999        2011        Total
  6000-6000    Depository institutions                             0         0            1           2           3
  6020-6020    Commercial banks                                    1       213         465         334          597
  6021-6021    National commercial banks                           0         4          51         144          165
  6022-6022    State banks - Fed Res System                       13        30          76         229          276
  6023-6024    State banks - not Fed Res System                   15        31            7           0          33
  6025-6025    National banks - Fed Res System                    62       120          45            4         131
  6026-6026    National banks - not Fed Res System                 0         1            2           0           2
  6027-6027    National banks, not FDIC                            0         1            0           0           1
  6028-6029    Banks                                               1         1            7          46          48
  6030-6036    Savings institutions                                0       142         463         427          674
  6040-6059    Other Banks                                         4        11            5           1          13
  6060-6062    Credit unions                                       0         0          10            1          10
  6120-6129    S&Ls                                               29       130          20            4         142
  6130-6139    Agricultural credit institutions                    0         1            1           0           1
  6140-6149    Personal credit institutions (Beneficial)          23        21          47           40          92
  6150-6159    Business credit institutions                        9        33          56           56         115
  6160-6169    Mortgage bankers                                   16        34          68           52         119
  6170-6179    Finance lessors                                     0         0            3           1           3
  6190-6199    Financial services                                  0         2            3           2           7
  6710-6719    Holding offices                                   315       852         968         182         1520
               Total                                             485     1,394       1,786        1,316       3,952




                                                           41
Table 2. Summary Statistics: CRSP Data. Summary statistics by pre-ranking risk, July 1971 through December
2011. We define the banking industry as the union of the banking SIC codes from Ken French’s definition of 48
industries and the three-digit SIC 671, which includes bank holding companies. Pre-ranking beta is computed by
regressing a minimum of 24 months and a maximum of 60 months of trailing holding period returns in excess of the
riskless rate on the corresponding CRSP value-weighted market holding period returns (VWRETD, also in excess of
the riskless rate). Pre-ranking root mean squared error uses the residuals from these regressions. In the first two
panels, the sample is divided within each month into low (bottom 30%), medium (middle 40%), and high (top 30%)
portfolios according to pre-ranking beta. The last panel sorts by RMSE. Market capitalization is equal to price
(PRC) times shares outstanding (SHROUT). Book-to-market ratio is the ratio of book equity to market
capitalization. Book equity is computed as described in Ken French’s data library. The sample includes firms for
which we can compute a valid beta, with at least 24 monthly holding period return (RET) observations, a valid
market capitalization, with a nonmissing price (PRC) and shares outstanding (SHROUT) observation, and at least
one holding period return following a valid beta.


                                                                         Pre-Ranking Risk
                                                               Bottom                   Middle                  Top
                                                       N         30%            N        40%            N      30%
Panel A. Means, Pre-Ranking Beta Sorts
Pre-Ranking Beta                                  82,082          0.18    109,456            0.68   80,493     1.37
 Decile                                           82,082          2.00    109,456            5.50   80,493     8.99
Pre-Ranking Root Mean Squared Error (%)           82,082          8.05    109,456            8.37   80,493    10.94
 Decile                                           82,082          4.69    109,456            5.15   80,493     6.69
Market Capitalization ($M)                        82,082         210.6    109,456           702.8   80,493   3,012.0
Book-to-Market Ratio                              54,356          1.39     86,643            1.87   66,955     3.63
Return from t-12 through t-2 (%)                  81,312         12.62    109,075           14.00   80,135    14.06
Panel B. Medians, Pre-Ranking Beta Sorts
Pre-Ranking Beta                                                  0.21                       0.67              1.27
 Decile                                                           2.00                       5.00              9.00
Pre-Ranking Root Mean Squared Error (%)                           6.89                       7.35              9.43
 Decile                                                           4.00                       5.00              7.00
Market Capitalization                                             47.3                       95.8             196.1
Book-to-Market Ratio                                              0.76                       0.76              0.76
Return from t-12 through t-2 (%)                                  8.86                      11.11             10.29
Panel C. Means, Pre-Ranking RMSE Sorts
Pre-Ranking Beta                                  82,420          0.56    109,288            0.71   80,323     0.95
 Decile                                           82,420          4.52    109,288            5.45   80,323     6.50
Pre-Ranking Root Mean Squared Error (%)           82,420          5.39    109,288            7.94   80,323    14.26
 Decile                                           82,420          2.00    109,288            5.50   80,323     8.99
Market Capitalization ($M)                        82,420       2,172.5    109,288       1,141.1     80,323    409.5
Book-to-Market Ratio                              66,126          1.77     84,061            2.23   57,767     3.04
Return from t-12 through t-2 (%)                  82,048         13.52    108,730           14.00   79,744    13.14




                                                        42
Table 3. Realized Portfolio Beta and Bank Capital. Portfolio betas by capital adequacy decile, March 1996
through February 2011. The sample is divided within each month into ten decile portfolios according to capital.
Each portfolio total return in excess of the riskless rate is computed using either equal or value weights. The first
two columns use the ratio of total equity capital (RCFD3210) divided by average total assets (RCFD3368). The
second two columns use Tier 1 capital (RCFD8274) in place of total equity capital. The third two columns use total
risk-based capital (RCFD3792) in place of total equity capital. The fourth and fifth pairs of columns use total risk-
weighted assets (RCFDa223) in place of average total assets. The sample runs from March 1996, the first date where
RCFD8274 is available, through February 2011. It includes 74,105 firm-months for which we can compute capital
ratios from the Federal Reserve Bank, a valid market capitalization, with a nonmissing price (PRC) and shares
outstanding (SHROUT) observation, and at least one holding period return following a valid capital ratio.


Decile                                                                      Tier 1 Capital to    Risk-Based Capital
Sorts                            Tier 1 Capital to      Risk-Based           Risk-Weighted        to Risk-Weighted
By:          Equity to Assets         Assets          Capital to Assets          Assets                 Assets
               EW        VW         EW        VW         EW        VW           EW        VW          EW        VW
Panel A. Capital Adequacy (%), Decile Median and Value-Weighted Mean
1              6.58      6.58       6.15      6.27       7.02      6.78         8.24      8.16       10.26     10.45
2              7.54      7.60       6.84      6.85       7.81      8.05         9.30      9.30       10.79     10.91
3              8.05      8.03       7.23      7.27       8.27      8.44         9.77      9.85       11.17     11.23
4              8.46      8.66       7.55      7.55       8.62      8.74        10.17    10.30        11.54     11.55
5              8.82      8.92       7.88      7.87       8.94      9.03        10.61    10.83        11.93     12.00
6              9.19      9.25       8.21      8.24       9.27      9.39        11.11    11.29        12.41     12.38
7              9.64      9.94       8.59      8.66       9.67      9.73        11.70    11.90        12.98     13.01
8             10.17     10.74       9.09      9.05      10.16     10.19        12.51    12.60        13.77     13.70
9             11.00     10.92       9.81      9.95      10.87     10.78        13.94    14.02        15.18     15.17
10            13.24     15.26      11.45     14.33      12.51     13.74        17.26    18.36        18.45     19.82
10-1           6.66      8.68       5.29      8.06       5.48      6.96         9.02    10.20         8.20      9.37
Panel B. Realized Portfolio Beta, Equal and Value-Weighted Decile Portfolios
1              0.80      1.20       0.86      1.35       0.78      0.97         0.93      1.24        0.76      0.80
2              0.65      1.18       0.74      1.12       0.64      0.88         0.82      1.16        0.75      0.89
3              0.60      0.78       0.68      0.95       0.65      1.04         0.67      1.29        0.71      1.00
4              0.65      1.04       0.67      0.92       0.65      1.19         0.66      1.11        0.70      1.11
5              0.70      1.11       0.66      1.05       0.64      1.12         0.63      0.96        0.67      1.06
6              0.70      1.05       0.69      1.12       0.68      1.07         0.69      0.98        0.73      1.19
7              0.66      1.26       0.60      1.00       0.63      1.16         0.61      0.76        0.64      1.14
8              0.59      1.19       0.64      1.02       0.63      1.10         0.63      0.92        0.64      1.14
9              0.66      1.03       0.54      0.81       0.71      1.23         0.50      1.08        0.55      1.03
10             0.63      1.23       0.57      1.24       0.63      1.27         0.50      0.91        0.49      0.96
10-1          -0.18      0.03      -0.28     -0.11      -0.15      0.30        -0.43     -0.34       -0.26      0.16
Panel C. T-Stats for Panel B
10-1          [-1.8]     [0.3]     [-2.8]    [-1.1]     [-1.6]     [3.3]       [-4.0]   [-3.6]       [-2.5]     [1.5]




                                                         43
Table 4. Bank Capital and Forward Systematic and Idiosyncratic Risk. Regressions of forward beta or
idiosyncratic risk on measures of bank capital. The dependent variable in Panels A and B is the forward beta,
computed by regressing a minimum of 24 months and a maximum of 60 months of trailing holding period returns in
excess of the riskless rate on the corresponding CRSP value-weighted market holding period returns (VWRETD,
also in excess of the riskless rate). The dependent variable in Panels C and D is the root mean squared residual from
these regressions. Both are Winsorized at 1% and 99%. The first two columns use the ratio of total equity capital
(RCFD3210) divided by average total assets (RCFD3368) as the independent variable. The second two columns use
Tier 1 capital (RCFD8274) in place of total equity capital. The third two columns use total risk-based capital
(RCFD3792) in place of total equity capital. The fourth and fifth pairs of columns use total risk-weighted assets
(RCFDa223) in place of average total assets. The sample runs from March 1996, the first date where RCFD8274 is
available, through December 2010. The last forward beta that we can compute is in December 2010, using CRSP
data through December 2012.

                                                                                    Tier 1 Capital     Risk-Based
                                                                   Risk-Based          to Risk-         Capital to
                                              Tier 1 Capital       Capital to         Weighted        Risk-Weighted
                          Equity to Assets       to Assets           Assets             Assets            Assets
                            Coef       [T]     Coef       [T]     Coef       [T]    Coef       [T]    Coef       [T]
Panel A: Fama-MacBeth, Dependent Variable is Forward Beta
Inverse Capital Ratio      0.011      [5.8]    0.031   [20.8]     0.011     [9.2]   0.058    [27.4]   0.056   [23.5]
Intercept                  0.549    [18.6]     0.297   [12.4]     0.560    [31.3]   0.160     [7.2]   0.234   [11.2]
Observations                        59,316             59,316             59,316            59,316            59,316
T                                      178                178                178               178               178
Average R-Squared                    0.015              0.032              0.006             0.072             0.036
Panel B: Pooled with 2D Clustering, Dependent Variable is Forward Beta
Inverse Capital Ratio     -0.011     [-1.5]    0.019     [2.9]   -0.003    [-0.4]   0.058     [8.0]   0.057     [5.9]
Intercept                  0.802      [9.6]    0.442     [5.3]    0.714     [7.5]   0.154     [2.3]   0.225     [2.8]
Observations                        59,316             59,316             59,316            59,316            59,316
Average R-Squared                    0.002              0.007              0.000             0.045             0.023
Panel C: Fama-MacBeth, Dependent Variable is Forward RMSE (%)
Inverse Capital Ratio      0.160      [7.7]    0.010     [0.5]    0.032     [1.2]   0.332    [11.0]   0.603   [13.4]
Intercept                  7.669    [22.6]     9.318   [24.5]     9.078    [20.9]   6.462    [27.5]   4.656   [15.7]
Observations                        59,316             59,316             59,316            59,316            59,316
T                                      178                178                178               178               178
Average R-Squared                    0.028              0.013              0.019             0.024             0.036
Panel D: Pooled with 2D Clustering, Dependent Variable is Forward RMSE (%)
Inverse Capital Ratio     -0.059     [-0.8]   -0.103    [-1.6]   -0.091    [-1.1]   0.363     [4.6]   0.678     [6.3]
Intercept                 10.101    [11.0]    10.720   [12.4]    10.436    [10.9]   6.176     [9.3]   4.061     [5.2]
Observations                        59,316             59,316             59,316            59,316            59,316
Average R-Squared                    0.001              0.002              0.001             0.017             0.030




                                                         44
Table 5. Returns and Beta: Fama-MacBeth Regressions. Regressions of excess returns on pre-ranking beta
deciles. Pre-ranking beta, market capitalization, book-to-market ratio, past returns, and the sample are described in
Table 2.


Dependent Variable:
Excess Return (Basis Points)                                    Univariate                     Multivariate
                                                           Coefficient           [T]       Coefficient            [T]
Pre-Ranking Beta Decile                                           -0.5        [-0.19]               0.8        [0.33]
Log (Market Capitalization ($M))                                                                   -2.1        [-0.45]
Book-to-Market Ratio Decile                                                                       11.4         [5.95]
Return from t-12 through t-2 (%) Decile                                                           15.3         [6.72]
Intercept                                                         63.9        [3.98]             -65.4         [-1.05]
Observations                                                                 272,031                          207,267
T                                                                                486                              486
Average R-Squared                                                             0.0203                           0.0676




                                                         45
Table 6. Realized Returns and Risk: Beta Portfolios. Regressions of portfolio returns on market excess returns
and the Fama-French factors, SMB and HML. Each portfolio total return in excess of the riskless rate is computed
using either equal or value weights. The sample is divided within each month into low (bottom 30%), medium
(middle 40%), and high (top 30%) portfolios according to pre-ranking beta. Pre-ranking beta and the sample are
described in Table 2.


Panel A. Equal Weighted
                          Bottom 30%              Middle 40%               Top 30%               Top – Bottom
Basis Points          Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient       [T]
Mean Excess Returns
                            59.1     [3.42]         65.0     [2.90]         58.2     [1.93]          -0.9   [-0.05]
CAPM Regressions
Market                      0.56    [18.91]         0.81    [23.51]         1.14    [26.15]         0.59    [17.67]
Intercept                   33.6     [2.55]         28.0     [1.82]           5.9    [0.30]         -27.7   [-1.86]
T                                      486                     486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.425                   0.533                   0.586                   0.392
Fama-French 3-Factor Regressions
Market                      0.55    [21.59]         0.80    [28.96]         1.15    [32.29]         0.60    [18.63]
SMB                         0.38    [10.46]         0.47    [11.74]         0.52    [10.24]         0.14     [3.08]
HML                         0.46    [12.04]         0.65    [15.50]         0.89    [16.48]         0.43     [8.71]
Intercept                     9.1    [0.82]          -5.6   [-0.45]         -38.3   [-2.44]         -47.4   [-3.33]
T                                      486                     486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.602                   0.716                   0.743                   0.460


Panel B. Value Weighted
                          Bottom 30%              Middle 40%               Top 30%               Top – Bottom
Basis Points          Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient       [T]
Mean Excess Returns
                            52.2     [2.37]         56.1     [2.31]         36.4     [1.21]         -15.8   [-0.71]
CAPM Regressions
Market                      0.71    [19.17]         0.95    [28.87]         1.27    [35.73]         0.55    [12.93]
Intercept                   19.6     [1.17]         12.4     [0.84]         -21.6   [-1.36]         -41.2   [-2.14]
T                                      486                     486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.432                   0.633                   0.725                   0.257
Fama-French 3-Factor Regressions
Market                      0.72    [19.78]         1.00    [31.46]         1.32    [38.74]         0.60    [13.90]
SMB                         0.20     [3.78]         -0.03   [-0.58]         -0.13   [-2.62]         -0.33   [-5.24]
HML                         0.46     [8.33]         0.59    [12.35]         0.69    [13.41]         0.23     [3.57]
Intercept                    -1.9   [-0.12]         -11.5   [-0.83]         -47.9   [-3.18]         -46.0   [-2.41]
T                                      486                     486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.492                   0.684                   0.762                   0.291



                                                       46
Table 7. Realized Returns and Risk: Idiosyncratic Risk Portfolios. Regressions of portfolio returns on market
excess returns and the Fama-French factors, SMB and HML. Each portfolio total return in excess of the riskless rate
is computed using either equal or value weights. The sample is divided within each month into low (bottom 30%),
medium (middle 40%), and high (top 30%) portfolios according to pre-ranking root mean squared error. Pre-ranking
root mean squared error and the sample are described in Table 2.


Panel A. Equal Weighted
                          Bottom 30%              Middle 40%                Top 30%               Top – Bottom
Basis Points          Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient       [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient       [T]
Mean Excess Returns
                             70.8    [4.23]         67.6      [3.05]         42.6     [1.35]         -28.1   [-1.34]
CAPM Regressions
Market                       0.64   [27.31]         0.82     [25.24]         1.03    [19.50]         0.39     [9.02]
Intercept                    41.3    [3.92]         29.9      [2.04]          -4.8   [-0.20]         -46.1   [-2.36]
T                                      486                      486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.607                    0.568                   0.440                   0.144
Fama-French 3-Factor Regressions
Market                       0.65   [29.55]         0.82     [31.52]         1.02    [24.28]         0.38     [9.95]
SMB                          0.17    [5.35]         0.43     [11.32]         0.80    [13.23]         0.63    [11.61]
HML                          0.42   [12.70]         0.67     [16.92]         0.91    [14.24]         0.49     [8.50]
Intercept                    22.0    [2.28]          -3.8    [-0.33]         -54.3   [-2.92]         -76.3   [-4.56]
T                                      486                      486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.682                    0.741                   0.670                   0.393


Panel B. Value Weighted
                          Bottom 30%              Middle 40%                Top 30%               Top – Bottom
Basis Points          Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient       [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient       [T]
Mean Excess Returns
                             55.7    [2.26]         43.8      [1.56]         49.4     [1.42]          -6.3   [-0.29]
CAPM Regressions
Market                       1.02   [34.23]         1.16     [33.62]         1.32    [26.40]         0.30     [6.30]
Intercept                     8.9    [0.66]          -9.2    [-0.60]         -11.0   [-0.49]         -19.8   [-0.94]
T                                      486                      486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.708                    0.700                   0.590                   0.076
Fama-French 3-Factor Regressions
Market                       1.08   [37.65]         1.21     [38.06]         1.34    [29.36]         0.26     [6.00]
SMB                         -0.27   [-6.60]         -0.03    [-0.69]         0.34     [5.20]         0.62     [9.86]
HML                          0.51   [11.67]         0.71     [14.72]         0.87    [12.57]         0.36     [5.52]
Intercept                    -7.9   [-0.62]         -38.1    [-2.71]         -51.7   [-2.56]         -43.9   [-2.29]
T                                      486                      486                     486                      486
R-Squared                            0.747                    0.760                   0.679                   0.263



                                                        47
Table 8. Realized Returns and Risk: Robustness. Regressions of portfolio returns on market excess returns and the Fama-French factors, SMB and HML.
Each portfolio total return in excess of the riskless rate is computed using either equal or value weights. The sample is divided within each month into low
(bottom 30%), medium (middle 40%), and high (top 30%) portfolios according to pre-ranking beta or pre-ranking root mean squared error. Pre-ranking beta and
root mean squared error and the sample are described in Table 2. All portfolios are value-weighted. The first four pairs of columns use only bank stocks, while
the last two pairs of columns use the full CRSP sample.


                                                                 Idiosyncratic Risk:       Idiosyncratic Risk:                             Beta: Top-Bottom,
                Beta: Top-Bottom,        Beta: Top-Bottom,       Top-Bottom, Bank          Top-Bottom, Bank       Beta: Top-Bottom, All        All Stocks,
                 Bank Stocks, July      Bank Stocks, January     Stocks, July 1971-          Stocks, January       Stocks, July 1971-       January 1931-
               1971-December 2011       1931-December 2011         December 2011          1931-December 2011         December 2011          December 2011
Basis Points   Coefficient       [T]    Coefficient       [T]   Coefficient         [T]   Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient      [T]    Coefficient      [T]
CAPM Regressions
Market                0.55   [12.93]           0.74   [18.59]          0.30     [6.30]          0.50     [9.47]         0.71    [19.47]         0.80    [37.92]
Intercept            -41.2    [-2.14]         -44.6   [-2.10]          -19.8   [-0.94]          -24.8   [-0.87]         -37.7   [-2.32]         -35.3   [-3.14]
T                                486                     972                        486                    972                     486                     972
R-Squared                      0.257                    0.263                   0.076                    0.085                   0.439                   0.597
Fama-French 3-Factor Regressions
Market                0.60   [13.90]           0.64   [15.75]          0.26     [6.00]          0.18     [3.58]         0.63    [18.66]         0.70    [34.42]
SMB                  -0.33    [-5.24]         -0.13   [-2.05]          0.62     [9.86]          1.04    [13.05]         0.25     [5.19]         0.35    [10.69]
HML                   0.23     [3.57]          0.56    [9.73]          0.36     [5.52]          0.61     [8.51]         -0.17   [-3.23]         0.15     [5.30]
Intercept            -46.0    [-2.41]         -58.3   [-2.84]          -43.9   [-2.29]          -61.2   [-2.41]         -32.3   [-2.16]         -46.1   [-4.49]
T                                486                     972                        486                    972                     486                     972
R-Squared                      0.291                    0.320                   0.263                    0.273                   0.540                   0.671




                                                                               48
Table 9. Theoretical Determinants of Changes in WACC. This table summarizes how the weighted average cost
of capital depends on assumptions regarding the efficiency of the debt market, its integration with the equity market,
and the existence of a government subsidy.


                               Bank Debt
                                Integrated
Risk          Pricing           Markets           Government Subsidy        ∆WACC
Risky         Correctly         No                No                        γ (e − e * + A (e, e * ))
              Priced
Risk Free     Correctly         No                No                        γ (e − e * )
              Priced
Risky         Low Risk
              Anomaly
                                No                No                        (e − e )(γ − β γ ) + A(e, e )(γ − γ )
                                                                                   *
                                                                                             d       d
                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                                   d

Risky         Low Risk          No                No                        γ (e − e )(1 − β )
                                                                                       *
                                                                                                 d
              Anomaly
              γ = γd
Risky or      Low Risk          Yes               No                        0
Risk Free     Anomaly           βd = 1
              γ = γd
Risky         Correctly         No                Yes                       γ (e − e * ) + A(e, e * )(γ + rp )
              Priced




                                                         49
Appendix: Sample Bank Data. Example beta, RMSE, and Tier 1 capital ratio for select large and small
capitalization banks as of December 2011. The first panel lists banks with greater than $5 billion in market
capitalization. The second panel lists banks with market capitalization between $75 and $125 million. Pre-ranking
beta is computed by regressing a minimum of 24 months and a maximum of 60 months of trailing holding period
returns in excess of the riskless rate on the corresponding CRSP value-weighted market holding period returns
(VWRETD, also in excess of the riskless rate). Pre-ranking root mean squared error uses the residuals from these
regressions. The first measure of capital adequacy is the ratio of total equity capital (RCFD3210) divided by average
total assets (RCFD3368). The second replaces Tier 1 capital (RCFD8274) in place of total equity capital and uses
total risk-weighted assets (RCFDa223) in place of average total assets. The third uses total risk-based capital
(RCFD3792) in place of total equity capital.


                                                                            Risk             Capital Adequacy (%)
                                                                                                             Risk-
                                                                                                Tier 1      Based
                                                                                               Capital     Capital
                                                                                   Equity     to Risk-    to Risk-
                                                       Market            RMSE          to    Weighted Weighted
Bank Name                                                Cap      Beta     (%)     Assets       Assets      Assets
Panel A. Large Capitalization Banks, Over $5 Billion
CITIGROUP INC                                          122,000    2.42     14.52     11.20        15.09        16.91
FIFTH THIRD BANCORP                                      9,516    2.13     15.79     14.34        13.18        15.17
BANK OF AMERICA CORP                                   110,400    2.01     14.26     11.40        11.54        14.73
AMERICAN EXPRESS CO                                     52,027    1.91     11.00     19.22        18.26        19.53
CAPITAL ONE FINANCIAL CORP                              17,011    1.65     11.73     15.29        11.94        16.31
STATE STREET CORP                                       21,687    1.31      8.70     10.80        18.14        19.99
WELLS FARGO & CO NEW                                   142,800    1.28     10.37     11.20        10.40        13.36
GOLDMAN SACHS GROUP INC                                 79,825    1.24      8.46     19.22        18.87        23.94
SUNTRUST BANKS INC                                      11,679    1.19     11.79     11.94        10.05        12.58
P N C FINANCIAL SERVICES GRP INC                        28,314    1.14      8.82     15.41        12.18        15.49
MORGAN STANLEY DEAN WITTER & CO                         37,005    1.14     12.26     12.17        16.70        19.49
JPMORGAN CHASE & CO                                    146,200    1.08      8.06      8.40         9.71        13.59
REGIONS FINANCIAL CORP NEW                               6,758    1.01     13.27     11.92        11.68        14.93
COMERICA INC                                             6,440    0.99      8.03     11.04        10.27        14.29
U S BANCORP DEL                                         45,617    0.94      7.66     10.34         9.30        12.72
B B & T CORP                                            16,095    0.87     10.79     11.23        13.02        15.48
NORTHERN TRUST CORP                                     12,182    0.76      6.22      9.14        13.12        15.72
M & T BANK CORP                                          9,187    0.69      8.62     13.24         8.82        12.43
NEW YORK COMMUNITY BANCORP INC                           7,318    0.68      6.57     14.40        13.51        14.18
BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON CORP                            33,480    0.61      6.36      9.68        12.14        15.76
KEYCORP NEW                                              6,630    0.53     11.16     10.54        12.41        16.52




                                                         50
                                                                        Risk            Capital Adequacy (%)
                                                                                                        Risk-
                                                                                           Tier 1      Based
                                                                                          Capital     Capital
                                                                               Equity    to Risk-    to Risk-
                                                      Market          RMSE         to   Weighted Weighted
Bank Name                                                Cap   Beta     (%)    Assets      Assets      Assets
Panel B. Small Capitalization Banks, $75 to $125 Million
HERITAGE COMMERCE CORP                                    97   1.54    15.61    13.06       16.83      18.10
FIRST BANCORP P R                                         77   1.05    19.07     7.63       10.28      11.57
NORTHRIM BANCORP INC                                     121   1.02     7.68    11.94       13.11      14.36
HERITAGE OAKS BANCORP                                     83   1.01    10.57    12.70       13.47      14.75
HORIZON BANCORP IND                                       84   0.90     8.40     9.40       12.70      13.95
ENCORE BANCSHRES INC                                     108   0.79    17.11    10.33       11.78      13.04
SOUTHERN NATIONAL BANCORP VA INC                          85   0.76     9.86    15.82       19.74      20.99
MIDDLEBURG FINANCIAL CORP                                 97   0.70     7.74     8.40       12.28      13.54
MIDWESTONE FINANCIAL GRP INC NEW                         124   0.68    11.79     9.61       11.96      13.21
ENTERPRISE BANCORP INC                                   106   0.62     6.77     9.04       10.11      11.42
BAR HARBOR BANKSHARES                                    104   0.62     5.25     9.38       13.72      15.56
N B & T FINANCIAL GROUP INC                               78   0.60     5.28    10.30       15.44      16.31
MONROE BANCORP                                            76   0.58    20.92     8.28       12.44      13.71
PORTER BANCORP INC                                       121   0.56     9.05    11.30       12.79      14.72
B N C BANCORP                                             80   0.53     7.53     8.34       11.19      13.01
PREFERRED BANK LOS ANGELES                               105   0.43    15.39    10.69       13.75      15.02
OHIO VALLEY BANC CORP                                     78   0.38     7.62     8.71       12.16      13.41
CHICOPEE BANCORP INC                                      76   0.32     3.27    13.35       16.14      17.11
WILBER CORP                                              100   0.28    11.38     8.29       13.22      14.48
B C B BANCORP INC                                         88   0.26     4.98     9.16       14.95      15.89
NORWOOD FINANCIAL CORP                                    78   0.18     5.26    12.35       17.94      19.23
CITIZENS HOLDING CO                                       87   0.17     8.90     8.96       14.82      16.07
CENTURY BANCORP INC                                       85   0.15     8.36     6.23       12.43      13.61
UNION BANKSHARES INC                                      80   0.15     4.25     9.21       13.90      15.10
HINGHAM INSTITUTION FOR SVGS MA                           89   0.04     4.72     7.20       11.61      12.72




                                                     51
