NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SALES MECHANISMS IN ONLINE MARKETS:
WHAT HAPPENED TO INTERNET AUCTIONS?
Liran Einav
Chiara Farronato
Jonathan D. Levin
Neel Sundaresan
Working Paper 19021
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19021

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

We are grateful to Pat Bajari, Preston McAfee and many seminar participants for helpful comments.
We appreciate support from the National Science Foundation, the Stanford Institute for Economic
Policy Research, the Toulouse Network on Information Technology, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation.
The data for this study were obtained through a contract between the Stanford authors (Einav, Farronato,
Levin) and eBay Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19021.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Liran Einav, Chiara Farronato, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Sales Mechanisms in Online Markets: What Happened to Internet Auctions?
Liran Einav, Chiara Farronato, Jonathan D. Levin, and Neel Sundaresan
NBER Working Paper No. 19021
May 2013
JEL No. D02,D43,D44,D47,D82,L13,L86
ABSTRACT
Consumer auctions were very popular in the early days of internet commerce, but today online sellers
mostly use posted prices. Data from eBay shows that compositional shifts in the items being sold,
or the sellers offering these items, cannot account for this evolution. Instead, the returns to sellers using
auctions have diminished. We develop a model to distinguish two hypotheses: a shift in buyer demand
away from auctions, and general narrowing of seller margins that favors posted prices. Our estimates
suggest that the former is more important. We also provide evidence on where auctions still are used,
and on why some sellers may continue to use both auctions and posted prices.

Liran Einav
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu

Jonathan D. Levin
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
jdlevin@stanford.edu

Chiara Farronato
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
chiarafarronato@gmail.com

Neel Sundaresan
eBay Research Labs
2065 Hamilton Avenue
San Jose, CA 95125
nsundaresan@ebay.com

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19021

1

Introduction

In the early days of the internet, many observers speculated that technology would shift retail
markets in the direction of more dynamic and ‡exible pricing mechanisms. The Economist
(2000) wrote that the internet had introduced “the possibility of a permanent worldwide
bazaar in which no prices are ever …xed for long, all information is instantly available, and
buyers and sellers spend their lives haggling to try to get the best deals”(see also Hall, 2002).
The best example is eBay, which by 2001 had become a dominant platform for consumer
auctions, and was the third-ranked web site in terms of time spent by consumers.1 Its
growth was enabled by the development of proxy bidding, which allowed buyers to submit
a maximum bid and have the computer respond to opponent bids up to this maximum,
thereby lowering transaction costs because bidders did not need to be physically present or
even paying attention in real time in order to participate in a dynamic auction.
Since this time, online commerce has grown enormously but internet auctions have not.
Today most online commerce takes place at posted retail prices, as has been the case o- ine
for at least a hundred years (Surowiecki, 2011). Figure 1 shows this evolution on eBay: the
share of listings and transaction volume attributable to auction sales has fallen well below
…fty percent.2 Figure 2 shows a similar pattern, this time for Google searches involving the
terms “online auctions”and “online prices.”In this paper, we explore this evolution, which
we view as interesting not just because of the fast growth of online commerce, but because
the choice of sales mechanism, and competition between sales mechanisms, is one of the
classic problems in microeconomic theory.
We combine a simple model with rich data from eBay to tease apart competing explanations. One immediate hypothesis is that there has been a shift in the composition of internet
sellers, or of items being sold online. We show that, at least on eBay, this does not appear
to explain much of the move to posted prices. Instead, the shift has occurred within natural
groupings of sellers and products. A second possibility is a change in consumer preferences.
1

Source: http://blog.compete.com/2007/10/01/top-ranked-web-sites-popularity-2001/.
The sharp drop in the fall of 2008 partly re‡ects a change in eBay policy that made posted price listings
cheaper and allowed posted price listings to remain active for longer periods. The …gure omits a variety of
other sales mechanisms such as “hybrid” auctions that allow a preemptive posted price purchase, or posted
prices with an option to make a lower o¤er. These represent a smaller share of listings and transactions.
2

1

Ten years ago, internet auctions were a form of online entertainment. Today, YouTube,
Facebook, and other online diversions may have increased the demand for convenient shopping. Finally, the price discovery bene…ts of auctions have declined over time: either because
online search has made it easier to …nd comparable prices, or (relatedly) because increased
competition has narrowed seller margins.
We start in Section 2 by documenting some empirical facts about the decline in auctions,
and about where and when they are currently used. Many of the patterns are expected:
auctions are favored for used and idiosyncratic items, and by less experienced sellers. Others
are more surprising. Compositional changes do not explain the decline in auctions. And
there are only small di¤erences in the selling behavior of di¤erent cohorts of sellers. The
latter two facts suggest that changes in seller incentives, rather than seller composition,
have been important. These patterns together also provide a starting point for a theoretical
model.
In Section 3, we develop a model that captures the key trade-o¤ between the price discovery that results from running an auction, and the convenience of using a posted price.
The model is parsimonious. It has just a few parameters, which capture how reduced uncertainty about an item’s value, greater retail competition, and greater demand for convenience
all favor posted prices. Nevertheless, it matches the basic patterns in the data, including a
robust pattern that auction listings tend to have higher sale probabilities but lower prices.
In Section 4, we analyze the returns to auction and posted price selling at di¤erent
points in time. The main di¢ culty is accounting for di¤erences in the types of items sold by
auction and posted price, and the types of sellers doing the selling. Items listed by auction
can be quite di¤erent than items listed by posted price, even after controlling for their
measurable characteristics. Potential confounders include the quality of the free-text item
description, the attractiveness of posted pictures, and the identity of the seller. Moreover,
except for a limited set of products with catalogue identi…ers, we lack information on product
characteristics apart from the seller-chosen listing title, and a somewhat coarse category
classi…cation.
To make progress, we adopt a strategy used by Elfenbein et al. (2012, 2013) and Einav
et al. (2013). We take advantage of a ubiquitous feature of eBay’s platform, namely that
2

sellers frequently list the same item, either simultaneously or over time, while varying their
sale format or other pricing parameters. We construct a large dataset of matched listings
spanning from 2003 (when auctions were the dominant sales mechanism) to 2009 (by which
time posted prices had overtaken auctions). We focus on cases where a seller listed the same
item by auction and by posted price, enabling an “apples-to-apples”comparison.
The comparison reveals the growth of a large “auction discount”. In 2003, auction prices
were on average within …ve percent of matched posted price sales. By 2009, the discount
had grown to over sixteen percent. The drop cannot be explained by sellers lowering their
auction reserve prices. In fact, reserve prices generally increased relative to matched posted
prices. In addition, we show that success rates for both formats fell considerably, but not
di¤erentially, over this time period.
In Section 5, we connect these …ndings to seller incentives. To do this, we need to account
for the ‡exibility that sellers have to adjust their posted prices and/or reserve prices. We use
variation in these prices, within sets of matched listings, to estimate the combinations of sale
probability and sale price that can be achieved with di¤erent mechanisms. The estimates
can be interpreted as “listing-level” demand curves. Comparing the estimates from 2003
and 2009 shows that listing-level demand has fallen for both formats, but much more for
auctions. The qualitative features of the estimates also align with our theoretical model.
We therefore decompose the time-series change into a general fall in listing-level demand,
and a speci…c fall in auction demand, and use the model to back out the e¤ects on seller
pro…tability under auctions and price posting. We …nd that most of the impetus toward
price posting has arisen from the relative fall in auction demand, rather than the overall
increase in listing competition. This has been particularly true in categories such as Collectibles, Jewelry and Clothing that feature relatively di¤erentiated products. The increase
in listing competition seems to have played a bigger role in categories such as Electronics
and Computers, which have seen a similar shift toward posted pricing.
In the …nal sections of the paper, we provide some additional evidence on the changing
nature of buyer demand. We …rst show that compositional changes in the set of buyers do
not appear to have driven the increased demand for posted prices. However, at any point
in time, there is signi…cant heterogeneity in the pool of buyers. Buyers who do a lot of
3

shopping on eBay tend to focus more on auctions, and get better bargains when they are
bidding. This suggests that customer segmentation could be one reason why sellers have
continued to use auctions for items that are not particularly idiosyncratic or unusual. From
this perspective, the rationale for auctions becomes less about price discovery and closer to
the use of couponing and other promotional strategies seen in more traditional retail markets.
We also discuss a few other factors that might have some explanatory power over the mix of
sales formats, including platform fees and the general speed of market adaptations.
Our paper relates to a theoretical literature on the choice between auctions and posted
prices, and to work on online auctions and online commerce. Prior theoretical work includes
Wang (1993), Lu and McAfee (1996), and Kultti (1999). The literature on online auctions is
surveyed by Bajari and Hortacsu (2004). Hammond (2010) focuses speci…cally on the choice
between auctions and price posting in selling compact disks online. He …nds that sellers
with a higher opportunity cost tend to choose posted prices and that seller heterogeneity
can account for the coexistence of the two mechanisms. Bauner (2011) studies the use of
auctions and price posting using eBay sales of Major League Baseball tickets. He …nds that
not only opportunity costs, but heterogeneity across buyers, broadly divided into “…xed price
lovers” and “neutrals,” help explain the coexistence of auction and …xed price sales. In a
separate study of Major League Baseball tickets that focuses on dynamic price adjustment,
Sweeting (2012) observes that auction prices are typically below posted price transaction
levels. Finally, Ariely and Simonson (2003) and Malmendier and Lee (2011) analyze auction
prices relative to posted prices in an earlier time period. They …nd that auction prices can
be anomalously high, and argue that bidding behavior can contradict the predictions of
standard economic models.

2

Setting, Data, and Preliminary Evidence

Our analysis focuses on eBay, which started in 1995 as an online auction site. Many auction
sites were active at the time, but eBay became the most successful (Lucking-Reiley, 2000).
Its marketplace transaction volume reached 9.3 billion dollars in 2001 (it has subsequently
risen to over $67 billion as of 2012). Initially, eBay was known for its used and idiosyncratic
4

items – the …rst item sold was a broken laser pointer – but it has evolved over time into
a market that pools consumer sellers with small to large retailers. Nowadays, …rms such
as Buy.com and Toys“R”Us o¤er their inventory on eBay. In the summer of 2002, eBay
began allowing sellers to list items at posted prices, using the “Buy it Now”(BIN) format.3
Transactions have shifted steadily toward this format, as was shown in Figure 1.
While this evolution has mirrored a broader trend in e-commerce, there are two features
that make eBay a particularly interesting environment to study pricing mechanisms. The
…rst is the coexistence of auctions and posted prices, which allows us to look at selection —
who uses auctions and for what types of goods — and to compare the performance of auction
and posted price mechanisms in a controlled fashion. The second is the platform’s gradual
transition, which allows us to ask what underlying features of the economic environment
might be responsible for the change. In this section, we start with a description of the
stylized facts — …rst in the cross-section, and then in the time-series.

2.1

Who Sells What by Auction?

We begin by using recent data to document how auctions and posted prices are used for
di¤erent types of items and by di¤erent types of sellers. Because of the time and e¤ort
they require from buyers, one expects auctions to be used in cases where it is di¢ cult for
the seller to forecast the appropriate price: either because the item is idiosyncratic, or
consumer demand is uncertain, or because the seller has relatively little experience or has
little interest in keeping the item or trying a second time to sell it. These types of predictions
can be assessed in a relatively controlled setting because eBay has a robust market both for
widely available goods and idiosyncratic or used goods, as well as a mix of professional and
occasional sellers.
The data clearly show a greater prevalence of auctions for items that are more idiosyncratic. There are various ways to categorize items based on their “idiosyncrasy”. As one
example, consider the distinction between used and new goods. Of the items listed in 2009
3

A hybrid format has been introduced earlier, in which sellers list the item for auction but also set a
price at which a buyer can preempt the auction by purchasing the item at that price before the …rst bid is
submitted. We return to this hybrid format, which is still used, in Section 5.

5

that were labeled as “used”(i.e. the word “used”appears in the item’s 10-word listing title),
79% were o¤ered by auction and only 21% by posted price.4 In contrast, of the items labeled
“new” (i.e. the word “new” appears in the listing title) 44% were o¤ered by auction and
56% by posted price. To the extent that it is harder to …nd comparable prices for used
goods, or there is more uncertainty about buyer valuations, this is what one would expect.
Another way to identify more idiosyncratic items starts from the observation that many
listings (about 73% in 2009) have “duplicates” — near-identical matches where the same
seller has posted the same item with exactly the same title (but potentially with di¤erent
pricing or sales format). Listings with duplicates generally are products that the seller is
sourcing or has multiple units of inventory, whereas unique or truly idiosyncratic items (e.g.
a lock of teen heartthrob Justin Bieber’s hair) would have no duplicate. Of the individual
listings that appeared in 2009, about 75% are auctions, compared to 57% of the duplicates.5
Distinguishing between more and less idiosyncratic items helps explain why auctions are
more or less prevalent across broad product categories. For instance, auctions are much more
common in selling collectibles or clothing, whereas posted prices are much more common for
selling electronics or computers. Figure 3 shows that product categories that have a higher
fraction of “new” or duplicate listings (and hence less “idiosyncrasy”) also have a higher
frequency of posted price listings. A similar pattern shows up for earlier years, although
with a lower overall prevalence of posted prices.
We can identify similar patterns for sellers. Here, we rely on eBay’s internal classi…cation
of sellers based on past transaction volume on eBay. We compare experienced (“business”)
sellers and inexperienced (“occasional”) sellers. There are also two groups of sellers with
intermediate experience. Business sellers are much more likely to use posted prices. Of the
items listed by business sellers, 65% have a posted price, compared to only 13% of the items
listed by occasional sellers. It is also the case that sellers gravitate toward posted prices
as they gain experience. If we look at sellers who entered the market between 2004 and
4
In this calculation we limit attention to only “pure” auction listings and “pure” posted price listings,
omitting other (less common) types, such as the hybrid auctions mentioned earlier. Unless speci…cally noted
otherwise, we use this convention through the rest of the paper.
5
Note that these percentages are for new listings. Because …xed price listings generally remain active for
at least 30 days, whereas the most common auction length is 7 days, a consumer who randomly sampled an
active listing would see a smaller fraction of auctions as compared to …xed price listings.

6

2008, and were active for at least two years, their second-year listings were more than three
percentage points more likely to be posted price than their …rst-year listings, after controlling
for the overall aggregate growth of posted price.6
The data also reveal a robust but less obvious relationship between the choice of sales
mechanism and listing outcomes. The overall sale probability of auction listings is considerably higher than the sale probability of posted price listings. In 2009, 49 percent of auction
listings sold compared to 42 percent of posted price listing. At the same time, the average
auction sales price is signi…cantly lower than the average posted price sale, and this pattern
of higher prices and lower sale rates for posted price listings holds for every major category
of items.7 These statistics do not control for within-category di¤erences in the items and
sellers across the di¤erent sales mechanisms, but we will show below that the same pattern
appears even when we compare identical items sold by the same seller.

2.2

Why Have Auctions Declined?

Figure 1 already documented the dramatic decline in the use of auctions over the last decade.
Based on the patterns above, a natural candidate to explain the decline is that the marketplace itself has evolved: from an environment where consumers sold each other unique items
such as dolls or collectibles, towards a retail channel for business sellers. There is evidence
to support this shift. The share of “idiosyncratic”(i.e. non-duplicate) listings declined from
32 percent to 25 percent between 2003 and 2009. And even as late as 2005, business sellers
accounted for just 16 percent of listings; by 2009 they accounted for 27 percent.
Nevertheless, and perhaps surprisingly, compositional changes in the types of sellers and
products do not seem to have much power in explaining the shift toward posted prices.
One way to see this is to decompose the overall growth in posted price transaction volume
into changes in the share of volume by di¤erent types of sellers, changes in the shares of
di¤erent product categories, and changes that occurred within seller-product classi…cations.
6
This result comes from a regression in which the dependent variable is the share of posted-price listings for
a seller in his second year on eBay minus the share in his …rst year. The right-hand-side is the corresponding
di¤erence on eBay overall over the same two years. The number we report is the constant term. As discussed
below, there is little evidence of additional cohort-speci…c patterns after the second year.
7
Except for “Phones” where auction sale rates and prices are both higher.

7

Because 2005 is the …rst year for which we have the data that allow us to construct the seller
classi…cation, we do this for 2005 to 2009, a period which captures the sharpest shift in sales
formats.
De…ne Z = 20:9% to be the overall share of posted price transaction volume (in dollars)
in 2005 and Z 0 = 53:9% the corresponding share for 2009. Let s index the seller classi…cations (four groups ranging from “occasional” to “business”) and c index eBay’s 33 product
categories. Next, let
P
in 2005, let c = s

c;s

denote the share of volume in item category c and seller category s

c;s

denote the share of volume in item category c, and let

sjc

=

c;s = c

denote the share of volume in seller category s within item category c, also in 2005.
Using
Z0

0

s to de…ne the corresponding quantities for 2009:

Z =
=

X
X

c;s
c;s

0
Zc;s

0
c;s

Zc;s

sjc

(

X

0
c

c;s

Zc;s

c)

+

(1)

c;s

X

c;s

Zc;s

0
sjc

sjc

0
c

+

X

c;s

0
Zc;s

Zc;s

0
c;s :

The …rst term captures the shift toward posted prices due to a change in the composition of
products (e.g., from collectibles to electronics). The second term captures the shift due to
changes in the sellers within product categories. The …nal term is the average change within
seller-product groupings. Almost all of the shift is attributable to the …nal component. Of
the overall 33 percentage point increase in posted price transaction volume, the …nal term
is responsible for 27.7 percentage points.8 An increase in business sellers accounts for 2.8
percentage points of the change toward posted prices, and changes in product composition
for 2.5 percentage points.
There is another way to look for compositional changes that also proves informative.
Suppose that early sellers were primarily consumers o¤ering idiosyncratic items, while later
arrivals tended to be professionals o¤ering retail items. Then later cohorts of sellers might be
more likely to use posted prices. To examine this, we group sellers based on the year during
which they …rst listed an item on eBay (all sellers who joined prior to 2002 are grouped
together). Figure 4 then plots for each cohort the fraction of their listings that were posted
price, and how this fraction has evolved over time. The …gure shows that while there is
8

The prevalence of posted prices rose in almost every seller-product category cell. Of the 4 33 = 132
cells, the posted price share has increased in 131 of them.

8

a modest “…rst year” e¤ect (noted earlier), at any given point in time, di¤erent cohorts
of sellers behave in remarkably similar fashion, with all cohorts evolving over time toward
posted pricing.
These time-series patterns suggest that to understand why auction listings have declined,
we should look at changes in seller incentives. We start in the next section by developing
a simple theoretical model of the choice between sales mechanisms. We then develop an
empirical strategy that looks at the trade-o¤ between auctions and posted prices for a given
seller and product, and examine how this trade-o¤ has shifted over time.

3

A Simple Model

In this section, we develop a model of the choice between sales mechanisms. The model is
designed to emphasize a trade-o¤ between price discovery and convenience for buyers. It
is extremely parsimonious. We focus on a single seller o¤ering a single item, and discuss
extensions later in the paper. Consistent with the evidence above, we try to capture how
changes in buyer demand, or changes in competition that give rise to changes in residual
demand, might a¤ect the choice of sales mechanism.
A seller has a single item to sell, and a cost c of making the sale. We assume there
are two or more buyers, each with the same value v for the item, and a common …xed
reservation utility u. We assume that v is drawn from a log-concave distribution F , where
the distribution (but not the realization) is known to the seller.9 The seller can choose
between posting a price or running a second-price auction. If the item is sold via auction,
there is a transaction cost that reduces the buyer valuation from v to a lower amount v
where

,

is assumed to be identical across buyers and known to the seller.

The seller’s problem is to choose a sales mechanism, and either a posted price or a reserve
price. Suppose the seller opts for a posted price p. The item will sell if v
probability QF (p) = 1 F (p+u). So the expected pro…t is

F

u

p, or with

(p) = (p c)QF (p). If instead

9
In Appendix A of the online appendix, we discuss a more general version of the model in which there
are n
1 bidders, and the value of bidder i is given by vi = v + wi , where v is common across bidders
and w1 ; :::; wn are independent across bidders. Under appropriate distributional assumptions, all of the
comparative statics discussed in this section continue to hold in this more general model.

9

the seller runs an auction, and sets a reserve price r, the item will sell if v
with probability QA (r) = 1
v

u

r, or

u

F (p + u + ). If the item does sell, the auction price will be

, so the expected price conditional on sale is pA (r) = E [v

The seller’s expected pro…t is therefore

A

(r) = (pA (r)

u

jv

u

r].

c) QA (r).

Figure 5 illustrates the di¤erence between the two sale mechanisms. The black line shows
the posted price demand curve, i.e. for any price p, the probability of sale is QF (p). The
gray line shows the implied “auction demand curve”. That is, each possible reserve price
r is converted to its implied sale probability QA (r) and the expected price conditional on
sale pA (r). The demand curves are drawn assuming that consumer values are distributed
uniformly on [0; 1], with u = 0 and

= 0:2. Finally, the dashed gray line shows the

probability of sale associated with di¤erent reserve prices, that is, the auction sale probability
QA (r) for each reserve price r.
An immediate observation is that the posted price demand curve is steeper than the
auction demand curve.10 This is intuitive: the auction uniformly reduces the willingness
to pay of all buyers including those with the highest value, but it also creates competition
that increases the …nal price above the reserve price. The second e¤ect is largest for low
reserve prices (or high sale probability). Both e¤ects are visible in the picture if we consider
the auction sale curve. The vertical distance between the posted price demand curve and
the auction sale curve is the transaction cost , while the distance between the auction sale
curve and auction demand curve represents the e¤ect of competition –the expected amount
by which the auction price will rise above the reserve price.
This structure has relatively clear implications for seller incentives. We will not take
the view that every seller chooses the optimal sales strategy for every listing. Indeed our
empirical approach in the next section will be premised on the idea that sellers engage in
considerable experimentation with alternative strategies. Nonetheless, it is useful to consider
the pro…t-maximizing incentives. A pro…t-maximizing seller will want to choose a point on
the upper envelope of the demand curves: using a …xed price if she aims to sell at a high
price, and an auction if she aims to sell with high probability. For a …xed price listing,
10

More generally, assuming F is log-concave, then so long as
E[v] v, where v is the lowest possible
value of v, the …xed price demand curve will start above the auction demand curve and cross it exactly once
to end below it.

10

the optimal price p maximizes

F

(p) = (p

c) [1

F (p + u)], and satis…es the …rst order

(p+u)
condition: p = c + 1 f F(p+u)
. For an auction, the optimal reserve price is r = c. Overall, the

seller does best to use a posted price if and only if

F

(p )

A

(r ).

The model gives rise to several comparative statics predictions. (1) All else equal, a
higher level of c pushes the seller toward a posted price. For the example shown in Figure 5,
an auction is optimal for c . 0:317 while a posted price is preferable for c & 0:317. (2) All
else equal, a higher level of u (i.e. lower buyer value relative to the next best alternative)
also pushes the seller toward a posted price. For instance, if we …x c = 0:3 in the example of
Figure 5, a posted price is optimal if and only if u
a higher level of

0:017. (3) Finally, and most obviously,

also pushes the seller toward a posted price by directly making auctions

less attractive.11
Another prediction of the model is that (under some additional restrictions on ) conditional on using a posted price, a seller will optimally choose a higher p and lower QF (p),
than if she sells by auction, in which case using the optimal reserve price r = c implies a
probability of sale equal to QA (c) and expected price pA (c). Below we will see that this
general pattern holds in the data: if we look at sellers who have tried using posted prices
and auctions to sell a given item, their sale rate is higher with auctions but their expected
price is lower. These observations suggest some simple tests of the model, and a way to
disentangle possible explanations for the shift from auctions to posted prices over time.

4

Evidence from “Seller Experiments”

Our empirical analysis makes use of what we call “seller experiments,” by which we mean
the common practice of individual sellers listing the same item, either simultaneously or
sequentially, to use di¤erent sale formats or with di¤erent pricing parameters. Elfenbein et
al. (2012) were the …rst to make use of matched listings, in their study of charity auctions.
In Einav et al. (2013), we documented the widespread use of this approach by eBay sellers,
11
Reduced uncertainty about buyer values will also make posted prices more attractive. Speci…cally, if the
seller has access to a signal z that is informative about v, this will increase the expected pro…t from posted
price, but have no e¤ect on the expected auction pro…t. In a related but somewhat di¤erent model, Wang
(1993) also has shown that a reduction in the “dispersion” of F will favor price posting.

11

and described some of the features of eBay’s platform that favored it, and why it might be
attractive to sellers who were uncertain about their optimal sales strategy. We also discussed
how, by aggregating many thousands of moderately sized “experiments,” it was possible to
use very large-scale heterogenous data but still control tightly for the most plausible sources
of confounding or endogeneity.12

4.1

Data construction and summary Statistics

Our goal is to compare the performance of auction and posted price listings, holding …xed
the seller and item. To do this, we start with all listings posted in 2003, 2005, 2007, and
2009 by a random 50% sample of all eBay sellers.13 We then identify every set of matched
listings in this data, where a match means the listings have a common seller, a common
ten-word item description and were posted in the same year. For data quality reasons, we
drop a small number of sets (0.8% or less in each of the years) where the average posted
price is above $10,000, or where there is a outlier sale that occurred at a price more than
…ve times the average. From the remaining matched sets, we select those that include at
least four listings of each format, at least ten listings overall, and at least one auction and
one posted price sale. These “seller experiments”constitute our core data.
Relative to our model of a seller making an optimal choice between sale formats, focusing
on sellers who use both formats might appear odd. However, an overwhelming feature of
the data is that sellers very commonly use both auctions and posted prices. Moreover, even
if sellers favor one sale format, they commonly continue to use both over time, without
converging to just one. Below we will discuss why using both sale formats together could
be pro…t-enhancing, but our general view is that sellers tend to engage in considerable and
persistent experimentation, even if they gravitate over time toward more pro…table strategies.
In comparing auction and posted price listings of a given item, we have to address two
measurement issues. First, the typical posted price listing lasts for up to 30 days. In contrast,
the typical auction lasts one week. Second, posted price listings can allow for the sale of
12

In Einav et al. (2012), we used seller experiments data from a single year, 2009, to study the market
response to di¤erent auction listing strategies: alternative reserve prices, di¤erent shipping fees, and preemptive “buy it now” o¤ers, and to look at price dispersion.
13
The 50% sample is used to keep the size of the data manageable.

12

multiple units, and multi-unit listings became common in the later years of the sample.
Auctions are for a single unit. To account for these di¤erences, we de…ne a posted price
listing to be successful if it sells at least one unit within the …rst week.14 Therefore, a
“success”for each format means a positive answer to the question: “Did the seller sell a unit
within a week of listing?”
Finally, our analysis will rely on aggregating comparisons involving di¤erent items. To
facilitate this, we de…ne for each item a reference value equal to the item’s average price
across all …xed price listings in the relevant experiment. Later, we sometimes work with
normalized prices. The normalized sale price is the sale price divided by the item’s reference
value. Similarly, the normalized start price in an auction is the start price divided by the
reference value. So an item that lists on average for $100 and then is o¤ered by auction with
a start price of $50 has a normalized start price of 0.5. If the item then sells for $95, it’s
normalized sale price is 0.95.
Table 1 provides summary statistics on the data for 2003 and 2009. Relative to all of
eBay, the data are of course a selected sample. They exclude the many items that are truly
“one of a kind”and appear as one-o¤ listings. As we noted above, these are overwhelmingly
auction listings. We also have dropped hybrid auctions and other sales formats such as
“best o¤er” as we did in Section 2. Nevertheless, the resulting data set is still quite large,
and includes items from all product categories.
The statistics in Table 1 already indicate that one basic prediction of the model holds in
the data: auction listings are more likely to sell than their matched posted price counterparts,
but they result in lower prices on average.15 Figure 6 uses the 2009 sample to show that in fact
this prediction holds in essentially every single product category. The …gure is constructed by
…nding the di¤erences in sale probability and price for every experiment in the sample, and
then averaging these di¤erences across the items in each category. With this construction,
14

Due to the way the data is archived, we currently do not observe the exact timing of sales of multi-unit
listings that are associated with more than one sale. We therefore use the distribution of the time until sale
for single-unit posted-price listings to convert the overall sale rate of multi-unit listings to sale rate within a
week. The underlying assumption is that the timing of sales (conditional on sale) is the same for multi-unit
and single-unit posted-price listings.
15
The one somewhat surpiring exception to this is Jewelry, which in fact has a very high overall fraction
of auction listings (see Figure 3), but where both the probability of sale as well the average price conditional
on sale is higher for posted prices.

13

the di¤erences in the sale rate and sale price are not due to some items being sold primarily
by auction and others by posted price, but rather re‡ect di¤erences between format outcomes
holding the mix of items (and sellers) constant.

4.2

Changes in the “auction discount”

How do auction prices compare to posted prices for the same item o¤ered by the same seller?
To consider this, let i index sets of matched listings, and j index sales (i.e. successful listings)
within an experiment. Let Aij be an indicator variable equal to 1 if the sale resulted from
an auction, and let pij denote the transaction price (posted price or …nal auction price).
We compare auction prices to posted sale prices using the …xed e¤ects regression:
log pij = ai + bAij + eij .

(2)

In this speci…cation, the coe¢ cient b can be interpreted as the price premium (conditional
on sale) for an auction listing relative to a …xed price listing of the same item by the same
seller. Equivalently, the expected (log) auction price conditional on sale for item i is ai + b,
where ai is the average (log) price of the posted price transactions of item i.
We estimate the regression separately for each year, and plot the estimated price di¤erentials (the b coe¢ cients) in Figure 7(a).16 As the …gure makes clear, the price di¤erential
has widened dramatically. Sellers o¤ering a given item by auction and posted price in 2003
received on average about 4.7% less from their auction sales. By 2009, the auction discount
had widened to 16.5%. Interestingly, the average transaction price for posted price sales remained very similar over this period (despite turnover in the set of items).17 In our sample,
the average log posted price was 3.1 in 2003 and 3.0 in 2009.
The price di¤erentials in Figure 7(a) are estimated from two scenarios in the data that are
potentially useful to distinguish. The …rst are situations where a seller conducts an auction
while contemporaneously o¤ering the same item by posted price. The second are situations
16

The regression results underlying Figure 7 are available in Appendix Table A1(a).
That is, the average (across items) of the ai ’s. To construct this average we use all items in the sample
(which were all sold at least once in each format, given our sample restrictions), and weight each item by
the number of sales in each format. We use the same average in Figure 7(a).
17

14

where the seller uses both formats to sell a given item but not at the same time. In principle,
the former situation might o¤er a more direct look at buyer preferences (although because
eBay’s search algorithm tends to separate matched listings, buyers often may not make a
direct comparison). The latter arguably …ts more cleanly with our theoretical model, where
the outside option (u) is exogenous. In the Appendix, we replicate the analysis for these two
di¤erent situations. The estimated auction discount (in either 2003 or 2009) is higher for
auctions with a contemporaneous posted price. However, the main result that we emphasize
— the growing auction discount over time — does not depend much on exactly how we set
up the posted price comparison.18
It is also interesting to compare the success rates of matched auction and posted price
listings. Again let i index a group of matched listings, and let j index listings within each
group. We de…ne qij to be an indicator equal to one if the listing results in a sale,19 and
estimate a …xed e¤ects linear probability regression of the form:
qij =
In this speci…cation,
and

i

i

(3)

+ Aij + "ij :

is the average sale probability for posted price listings of item i,

is the extra sale probability for auction listings. Again, we estimate the speci…cation

separately for each year. Figure 7(b) shows the results. The black line plots the average sale
probability for a posted price listing, i.e. the average of the estimated

i ’s

for each year.

The grey line plots the corresponding sale probability for auction listings, computed as the
…xed price sale probability for that year plus the estimated .
Two features stand out. As noted in Section 2, the average sale probability for both
formats has declined. The decline has been substantial. The average posted price sale rate
in our sample fell from 40.3% to 25% between 2003 and 2009. However, the di¤erence in
18

Appendix Table A1(b) and Appendix Figure A1 provide more details. For auctions with concurrent
posted price listings, the auction discount has increased from 11.3% in 2003 to 18.2% in 2009, while for
auctions with no concurrent posted price listing the discount has increased from 2.2% to 14.4%.
19
As mentioned earlier, the typical auction duration on eBay is seven days, while the typical posted price
listing lasts for 30 days (unless it sells earlier). For comparability, throughout the analysis in this section we
de…ne a successful posted price listing to be one that sells within the …rst seven days, although the results
are not particularly sensitive to this choice.

15

success rates across formats (the estimated ), has not changed much.

20

It starts at about

8% in 2003, declines a bit, and then increases to 11% in 2009. A similar “participation”
pattern arises if we look at the number of bidders in successful auctions. In 2003, the
average number of unique bidders was 3.98 and 33% successful auctions had a single bidder.
By 2009, the average number of bidders had fallen by 20% to 3.19 and the share of single-bid
auctions had increased to 45%. Appendix Figure A2 provides more details.
Taken together, these results suggest two important changes over time: a secular fall
in the success rate of item listings, and a fall in the relative demand for auctions that has
reduced auction prices relative to comparable posted prices. These estimates do have one
limitation. They do not account explicitly for possible changes in how sellers are setting
auction reserve prices. In principle, lower auction prices could be explained by lower reserve
prices. However, as we show in the Appendix, sellers in fact moved towards slightly higher
reserve prices (see Appendix Figure A3). An implication is that the increase in the auction
discount resulted from a fall in auction sale prices conditional on reserve prices (see Appendix
Figure A4). We develop this point more fully in the next section.

5

Changes in Auction Demand

The growing auction discount provides a fairly strong indication that seller incentives have
shifted. But as we noted, it does not cleanly separate shifts in demand — due to changes in
buyer preferences, or in competition — from shifts in pricing behavior. In this section, we use
variation in sellers’pricing behavior to estimate the trade-o¤ sellers face between probability
of sale and expected price for both posted price and auction listings. These estimates can
be interpreted as residual, or “listing-level”demand curves. We use the estimates at various
points in time to map back to the parameters in the theoretical model that determine sellers’
incentives to use auction or posted price listings.
20

The use of category level or seller level …xed e¤ects instead of experiment level …xed e¤ects does not give
rise to meaningful changes in the average success rate of posted price and auction listings.

16

5.1

Estimates of listing-level demand

To estimate listing-level demand, we exploit the within-experiment variation in auction start
prices and posted prices. The variation in auction start prices is very large. The average
within-experiment standard deviation in auction start price is 25% of the item’s reference
value, as reported in Table 1. The variation in posted prices is not as dramatic. Nevertheless,
the average within-experiment standard deviation in posted prices is still over 10% of the
item’s reference value.
We consider the auction case …rst. We start with all auction listings in our sample, and
estimate separately for each year the probability of sale as a function of the auction start
price:
qij =

i

+ g snij + "ij :

(4)

In this speci…cation, i indexes sets of matched listings, j indexes listings within an experiment, and qij is an indicator variable equal to one if the auction results in a sale. The key
pricing variable is the normalized start price, snij . It is equal to the start price sij divided
by the reference value for item i. The normalization allows for a comparison of items of
di¤erent value. We specify the function g( ) ‡exibly by allowing separate dummy variables
for di¤erent levels of the normalized start price.21 In this regression and those that follow,
we weight each experiment by its total number of listings.
We estimate a parallel regression for the …nal auction price. Here we restrict attention
to successful auctions and estimate for each year:
pnij = ai + h snij + eij :

(5)

The normalized price pnij is the …nal auction price divided by the item’s reference value.
Again, h( ) is estimated ‡exibly by allowing separate dummy variables for each level of the
normalized start price.
The last step is to combine the regression estimates and trace out an auction demand
curve for each year. For each value of the normalized start price sn , we consider the locus
21

Speci…cally, we categorize the (normalized) start price to the following bins: [0-0.3], (0.3-0.4], (0.4-0.5],
(0.5-0.6], (0.6-0.7], (0.7-0.8], (0.8-0.9], (0.9-1], (1-1.1], (1.1-1.2], and >1.2.

17

q (sn ) =

^ (sn ), where
+ g^ (sn ) ; pn (sn ) = a + h

and a are the average …xed e¤ects.

(As before, the averages are weighted by the total number of listings in the corresponding
experiments.) One point to emphasize is that we are constructing for each possible start
price the probability of sale and the expected sale price (if there is a sale). Chen et al.
(2012) have suggested that one reason sellers may prefer posted prices is to avoid the price
variability that occurs with an auction, but we will not focus on this point here.
We also estimate posted price demand curves separately for each year. This exercise is
conceptually more straightforward. We estimate the …xed e¤ects linear probability model:
qij = ki + m pnij +

ij :

(6)

Here qij is an indicator equal to one if the listing results in a sale, and pnij is the normalized
price of the listing (equal to the listing price divided by the item’s reference value). To
estimate m( ) we specify separate dummy variables for di¤erent levels of the normalized
price.22 Note that with this ‡exible speci…cation, the within-experiment variation in posted
prices will limit the range over which we can obtain a demand estimate.
Figure 8 presents the estimated demand curves using the 2003 and 2009 samples.23 One
prediction of the theory is apparent. In both years, the posted price demand curve is steeper
than the auction demand curve. Their relative positions, however, look quite di¤erent in
2003 and 2009. In 2003, the estimated auction demand lies mostly above the posted price
demand. A seller facing these residual demand curves would be better o¤ using an auction,
unless her marginal cost was extremely high. In 2009, the auction demand lies below the
posted price demand for a wide range of prices. For a seller facing these residual demand
curves, the optimal sale format would depend on marginal cost.
The estimates in Figure 8 involve averaging over a range of heterogeneous items. It
is informative to repeat the exercise focusing on more narrowly de…ned groups. To do
this, we used the characteristics described earlier to rank the eBay product categories from
22

The pricing variation for posted-price listings is not as rich as it is for the auction listing. The speci…c
(normalized) price bins we use are [0-0.7], (0.7-0.8], (0.8-0.85], (0.85-0.9], (0.9-0.95], (0.95-1.05], (1.05-1.1],
and >1.1.
23
The underlying regression results are available in Appendix Tables A2 and A3 and Appendix Figure A5.

18

“most idiosyncratic”to “least idiosyncratic”.24 We then selected the …ve most idiosyncratic
and …ve least idiosyncratic categories from the largest …fteen categories. The …rst group of
“idiosyncratic”categories includes Collectibles, Fan Shop, Toys, Jewelry, and Clothing. The
second group of “commodity” categories includes Electronics, Computers, DVDs, Health,
and Phones.
Figure 9 presents separate demand estimates for each year and group of categories.25 The
estimates for the idiosyncratic categories show that the average residual demand for auctions
dominated posted prices in 2003. By 2009, however, the auction demand curve had shifted
considerably, making posted prices attractive across a fairly wide price range. In contrast,
the average demand estimates for the commodity categories suggest that posted prices were
attractive even in 2003. By 2009, posted prices had become even more attractive, but only
because both demand curves shifted inward by approximately the same amount. We return
to the interpretation of these shifts below.

5.2

Identifying seller incentives

The estimates in Figure 8 show a clear shift in the relative demand for auctions over time.
They also can be viewed as the empirical analogues of the theoretical demand curves in
Figure 5. In this section, we tighten the connection. We use the demand estimates to
calibrate the key parameters of the model. While the model is obviously too parsimonious
to capture the heterogeneity of the many thousands of sellers and items in the data, the
exercise is nonetheless useful to place some structure on how and why seller incentives have
shifted over time. We do this both on average across all categories and for the idiosyncratic
and commodity categories de…ned above.
The theoretical model derived item-level demand curves from three parameters: the
24

To construct the ranking, we used a large random sample of 2009 listings. For each category, we
constructed the following variables: share of items that are classi…ed in the eBay catalog, share of sales from
multi-unit listings, share of listings with the word “new”in the title, and share of duplicate listings. We then
used principal components to assign each category a one-dimensional score, with a high score corresponding
to “less idiosyncratic” and a low score corresponding to “more idiosyncratic”. Appendix Table A4 provides
more details. One point of caution is that although this classi…cation seems quite natural, the items from
the idiosyncratic categories that make it into our experiments sample are still retail items, in the sense that
the seller is trying to sell multiple units. Hence we do not include the truly one-of-a-kind items that might
come to mind in thinking about an idiosyncratic category such as Collectibles.
25
The underlying regression results are available in Appendix Tables A5(a), A5(b), and A5(c).

19

distribution of consumer valuations F ( ), the utility from the next best alternative u, and
the auction disutility . Each might have changed over time. Roughly, one might think
of changes in the reservation utility u as capturing intensi…ed competition, perhaps due to
consumers being able to search more easily for alternative products. In contrast, changes in
the auction disutility

are a potential proxy for increased online entertainment options that

may have made auction bidding less fun or exciting in comparison.
We begin by estimating . We already observed that in the theoretical model

could be

identi…ed as the vertical distance between the …xed price demand curve and the auction sales
curve. To see why, recall that given a posted price p, the probability of sale is 1
Similarly, given an auction with start price r, the probability of sale is 1
a given probability of sale q corresponds to a posted price F
start price F

1

(1

q)

u

1

(1

q)

F (p + u).

F (r + u + ). So
u and an auction

. The di¤erence is .

Figure 10 plots the estimated posted price demand curves for 2003 and 2009 (identical to
Figure 8), along with the estimated auction sale curves from the auction sale regression (4). If
the estimates were perfectly consistent with the theoretical model, the posted price demand
curve for year t would be an exact upward translation of the auction sale curve. In practice,
the shapes are similar but not identical, so to estimate
2009

2003

(corresponding to 2003) and

(corresponding to 2009), we compute the average vertical distance between the curves

across the quantity range where we have nonparametric estimates of both curves.26 We …nd
that

2003

= 0:076, and

2009

= 0:163. That is, we estimate that an auction in 2003 involved

a “hassle cost”equal to roughly eight percent of an item’s typical price (or reference value),
and that this cost doubled between 2003 and 2009.
Next, we estimate changes in u by looking at how demand has shifted over time. Here,
a normalization is required. Because consumer decisions are based on the incremental value
u, it is not possible to separately identify u from the mean of the v distribution. To

v

proceed, we normalize u2003 = 0. We further assume that F ( ) remained constant over time.27
26

The results we report use an unweighted average of the vertical distance between the two curves. We
repeated the analsysis using two sets of weights (one that weights by the reserve prices of auction listings
in the data, and one that uses the empirical distribution of posted prices in the data), and the calibrated
values for the parameters remain essentially the same.
27
In principle, we only need a known percentile of F ( ) to have remained constant, but making the stronger
assumption keeps things very simple. Note that if the distribution of consumer valuations remained constant,
the posted price demand curves in Figure 10 would be exact translations. In practice they are similar in

20

It follows that to achieve sale probability q in year t required a posted price F

1

(1

So the vertical distance between the 2003 and 2009 posted price demand curves is
u2009

u2003 . We therefore estimate

ut .

q)

u =

u by computing the average vertical distance between

the estimated demand curves. This yields an estimate of

u = 0:144. That is, between 2003

and 2009, the consumer reservation utility increased by around 14% of the reference value
for an average item.28
The …nal step is to evaluate how these changes in

and u might have a¤ected seller

incentives. Here we return to the model and use some price theory. Let pF (q; ; u) =
F

1

(1

q)

u denote the posted price a seller could charge and sell with probability q.

With this notation, the seller’s maximum pro…t from price posting is:

F

( ; u) = max q [pF (q; ; u)
q

(7)

c] :

From the envelope theorem,
@ F
@pF
= qF
=
@u
@u

qF ,

(8)

where qF is the optimal sale probability. Moreover, @

F =@

= 0. Intuitively, a small change

in u will not a¤ect the optimal probability of sale, but will force the seller to lower the price
by du to o¤set the reduction in residual buyer value.
Next, consider an auction seller. To sell with probability q requires a reserve price r =
F

1

(1

q) u

. This leads to an expected price pA (q; ; u) = E [v j v

F

1

(1

q)

u

So the seller’s maximum pro…t from an auction is:

A

( ; u) = max q [pA (q; ; u)

Again using the envelope theorem, @

q

A =@

=@

A =@u

=

c] :

(9)

qA , where qA is the optimal sale

probability for an auction seller.
We are interested in the di¤erence in posted price and auction pro…ts. We have shown
shape, but not identical.
28
Note that the analysis of each year is based on a di¤erent set of seller experiments, so in order to
compare demand and outcomes across di¤erent years, we implicitly assume that overall pricing patterns on
the internet remained unchanged (e.g., we assume that markups online did not decline), so that the average
posted-price transactions serve as a reasonable online price index.

21

].

that
@(

A)

F

@

= qA and

@(

A)

F

@u

= qA

qF .

(10)

The derivation indicates that a change in , which shifts only the auction demand curve,
will have a bigger e¤ect than an equivalent change in u, which shifts both demand curves.
On the other hand, we have estimated a larger absolute change in u.
To sort out these competing e¤ects, we approximate the e¤ect of
qA

, and the e¤ect of

u by (qA

on

F

A,

by

u. This requires information on qA and qF . In

qF )

2003, the average sale probability in our data was 0:40 for posted price sales and 0:48 for
auctions, so for this exercise we assume qF = 0:40 and qA = 0:48:
Table 2 shows the resulting calculation for the e¤ects of u and
The calculation suggests that the increase in

on seller incentives.

had more than three times the e¤ect on the

posted price pro…t di¤erential as did the increase in u. If we set qF and qA using the 2009
sale probabilities, we obtain a somewhat smaller multiple, just under two. But either way
the increase in

seems considerably more important.

It is also informative to focus on particular product categories, as we did in the prior
section. When we restrict attention to only the most idiosyncratic product categories, we
estimate that

2003

= 0:06 and

2009

= 0:186. So

= 0:126, while

u = 0:109. As a result,

by far the most important factor in these categories in explaining the move toward posted
prices was a fall in the relative demand for auctions. The increase in

accounts for well over

80% of the total change in relative pro…ts.
We obtain somewhat di¤erent quantitative conclusions for the commodity categories.
There we estimate

2003

= 0:186 and

2009

= 0:235. So

= 0:048, while

u = 0:153. As

noted above, there appears to be a signi…cant auction discount in these categories as early
as 2003. As shown in Table 2, the implication is that the increase in

and u had roughly

similar e¤ects on the pro…t di¤erential between posted prices and auctions. To understand
why the e¤ects are equivalent despite the increase in u being much larger, recall that

a¤ects

only the auction demand curve, whereas the increase in u reduces the pro…tability of both
sale formats.

22

6

Changing Demand and Buyer Heterogeneity

Our analysis has highlighted the role of changing (residual) buyer demand in explaining the
shift toward posted price listings. In this section, we ask whether the change was due to
shifts in the composition of buyers, or rather in the behavior of buyers over time. We …rst
show, parallel to our earlier analysis of sellers, that there is considerable heterogeneity in
the cross-section of buyers. However, and also parallel to our seller …ndings, the time-series
shifts in demand appear to have taken place within cohorts of buyers rather than through
changes in the composition of buyers over time. Finally, we point out that the cross-sectional
heterogeneity in consumers can help to explain why sellers might want to o¤er both types
of sales mechanisms as a way to target di¤erent types of buyers.
As in our earlier classi…cation of sellers, we divide buyers based on their purchases in
a given year. We label buyers who purchase more than 100 items a year as “professional”
and those who buy less than 5 as “occasional”, and include an intermediate category as
well. Professional buyers are more likely to buy at auction. In 2003, the auction expenditure
share of these buyers was 95%, compared to 80% for occasional buyers. The corresponding
statistics for 2009 were 69% and 38%. Using the successful sales in the matched listings
sample, we …nd that the buyer is 5.4% more likely to be a professional buyer if the item
was listed for sale by auction.29
An additional, and quite striking, feature of the data is that the more active buyers seem
to get better deals. First, we have already documented an auction discount. So by doing
more purchasing at auction relative to at posted prices, professional buyers are more likely
to experience discounts. A more telling comparison, however, is to compare the prices paid
at auction by professional and occasional buyers for equivalent items, using the experiments
data. Using the 2009 data, we …nd that professional buyers on average obtain a 20% auction
discount, compared to only 12% for the occasional buyers.30
Despite these cross-sectional di¤erences, however, the shift away from auctions over time
29
This is based on a linear probability regression (not shown), in which we use all the posted-price and
auction sales and regress an indicator for professional buyer on an auction dummy variable and experiment
…xed e¤ects.
30
This estimate is based on regressing (log) price on experiment …xed e¤ects, an auction dummy and a
categorical variable for buyer’s types interacted with the auction dummy (not shown).

23

cannot be explained by an increase in occasional relative to professional buyers. The fractions
of occasional and professional buyers on eBay have been relatively stable over time. The
professional buyers account for just over 1% of the buyers, and the occasional buyers for
around 60%. In fact, the purchasing share of professional buyers increased over the period
we study. Professional buyers accounted for 14% of transaction volume in 2003 and 20%
in 2009. Instead, the shift toward auctions has been within buyer groups, when buyers are
strati…ed by purchasing intensity.
The decline of auctions also cannot be explained by di¤erences between early cohorts of
online shoppers and later cohorts. Figure 11 shows the purchasing propensities of di¤erent
buyer cohorts, analogous to our earlier depiction of sellers. As can be seen in the Figure,
buyers in their …rst year are more likely than average buyers on the site to buy using a
posted price, but after the …rst year, di¤erent cohorts look very similar, and all cohorts
have trended together toward posted price purchasing. Our interpretation, therefore, is that
the documented shift in item-level demand curves is likely to come from changes in online
attitudes and competition, rather than from changes in the composition of buyers.

7

Other Explanations and Extensions

We have provided a variety of evidence about how and why internet auctions declined over
the last decade. In this Section, we brie‡y discuss three factors that did not play a major
role in our analysis, but that potentially might have some explanatory power. The …rst is
changes in the eBay platform that might have favored posted price listings. The second is
the possibility that the basic empirical pattern can be explained by gradual seller learning.
The third, which does not directly explain the fall in auction listings, but might help to
explain their continued use, is the idea that sellers might use auctions and posted prices in
combination as a form of price discrimination.
Changes in the eBay platform. Our analysis emphasized changes in the marketplace incentives facing sellers. There also have been some changes in eBay’s platform that may have
favored posted prices, especially beginning in 2008. In February 2008, eBay changed its
search ranking algorithm. Rather than putting the soonest-to-end listing at the top — a
24

natural strategy for auctions with a …xed ending time, but less natural for posted price listings — it implemented a relevance ranking. Then in September 2008, eBay allowed 30 day
posted price listings to be “rolled over”with automatic payment of the monthly listing fee.
The mechanical e¤ects of that change help explain the sharp concurrent rise in active posted
price listings that can be seen in Figure 1. However, given that posted prices already had
been on the rise for several years, it probably makes more sense to think of these platform
changes as a response to changes in the market, rather than the impetus for evolution of
sales format.
In addition to its search algorithm, eBay also has changed its fees on multiple occasions
over the last decade. Many of these changes have not had clear implications for the choice
of sales format, and their net e¤ect is not entirely obvious. To take just one example, eBay
in September 2008 lowered its posted price listing fee and raised the commission rate for
successful sales. Posted price listings increased, despite the fact that in expectation total
fees were slightly higher.31 More generally, it seems di¢ cult to tell a story in which the
steady decline of auctions in Figure 1 is driven by a series of occasional, discrete changes in
the fee structure, only some of which have favored posted prices.
Gradual seller learning. Until the middle of 2002, eBay sellers did not have the option to
use posted price listings, although they could use a hybrid format that allowed buyers to
pre-empt an auction by purchasing at the “buy it now”price. One hypothesis we have heard
is that once posted prices were introduced, they were from the start the better mechanism,
but it took a long time for sellers to realize this and for posted prices to di¤use in the market.
Several pieces of evidence go against this hypothesis. First, posted prices are hardly
an unfamiliar technology, so even if there is some stickiness in buyer and seller behavior,
a decade of learning seems like a very long time. Second, our estimates of auction prices
and demand indicate that in 2003, auctions were in fact a very attractive sale format. In
particular, auctions o¤ered a pro…table way for sellers to increase sales probability in return
for accepting a modest price discount.
31

The e¤ects here are confounded because sellers also gained the opportunity to roll over their listings.
However, the fee changes were di¤erential across categories, and the increase in posted price listings is not
closely related to the di¤erential changes in the fees.

25

Price discrimination strategies. In the previous section, we pointed out that more active
buyers on eBay are more likely to buy at auction compared to occasional buyers. In principle,
this heterogeneity might help to explain why sellers might want to o¤er both sale formats
as a way to cater to di¤erent types of buyers. We illustrate this in a very simple extension
of the model.
Imagine that there are two types of buyers: “deal shoppers” (denoted as type D) and
“convenience buyers”(denoted as type C). They have the same intrinsic value v for a given
item, drawn from F ( ), but di¤erent ( ; u). Assume that the convenience shoppers have a
high

C

so they are not interested in auctions, and a relatively low uC that increases their

willingness to pay. On the other hand, deal shoppers have a low
searching for deals, a relatively high uD . Then, provided that uD

D

and, because they are
uC is su¢ ciently large,

and there are enough convenience shoppers, a seller who lists by posted price will sell to
the convenience shoppers but to few (if any) deal shoppers. If she adds additional auction
listings, she may be able to sell to the deal shoppers, without cannibalizing her existing
market.32
One point to note is that allowing for buyer heterogeneity as in this example might
suggest a modi…cation of our calibration exercise, because at least in this example auction
and posted price demand would come from di¤erent types of buyers, so the lower auction
sales curve could re‡ect the lower willingness-to-pay (higher u) of the deal shoppers as well
as their . Trying to construct richer econometric models of e-commerce that incorporate
di¤erent forms of heterogeneity across buyers, sellers, and items, and might help rationalize
di¤erent types of price discrimination would be a worthwhile goal for future research.
32

In a more general version of this model, we might consider a more continuous distribution of types. In
that case, one would have to take a stand on the extent to which buyers arbitrage between sale formats
when both are o¤ered at the same time. We do not focus on such a model because based on our estimates
in Section 4.1 it is not clear that arbitrage between sale formats for a given seller/item is playing a very
major role on the eBay marketplace (or else we would have expected to see very di¤erent pricing results for
contemporaneous vs. non-contemporaneous auction and posted-price sales). One interesting feature of these
models is that they also can rationalize the use of the hybrid auctions used by some sellers on eBay.

26

8

Conclusion

In this paper we document the dramatic shift of internet retail from auctions to posted prices,
and explore the potential causes to it. Using rich data from eBay, we provide evidence that
suggests that changes in the composition of buyers, sellers, or items is unlikely to be driving
the decline in online auctions. Rather, we show that the shift can be primarily attributed
to a decline in the relative demand for auctions, which operated within cohorts of buyers
and item categories. We further explore whether the decline in auction demand is driven
by increased retail competition or by a change in preferences toward convenience shopping.
Using a calibration exercise of a stylized model, we …nd that the latter e¤ect accounts for
much of the overall e¤ect, especially for item categories that include more idiosyncratic items.
As emphasized throughout the paper, our modeling approach and subsequent calibration
exercise were purposely very parsimonious and stylized. A unique feature of internet commerce in general, and eBay in particular, is the extent of heterogeneity in the items that are
being sold. One can easily imagine that the aggregate decline in online auctions, its precise
timing, and the exact mechanism that led to it has operated slightly di¤erently across submarkets. Our goal in this paper was not to provide a story that …ts every underlying item
category, but rather to shed light on the primary factors that were in play. Indeed, trying to
construct richer econometric models of e-commerce that would either focus on several item
categories or try to incorporate the requisite heterogeneity across buyers, sellers, and items
would be a worthwhile exercise, which would complement the evidence provided here.
Our analysis focus on eBay during the period of 2003 to 2009. While studying eBay –
which in 2009 had ninety million active users and $57 billion in gross merchandise volume
– may be of interest in its own right, a natural question that may arise is to what extent
our …ndings extend into later periods and more generally to other environments on the
internet. Regarding the former, we suspect that the increased use of smart phones by eBay
users may help exacerbate the decline in auctions; on smart phones, eBay browsing sessions
are 25% shorter and cover 50% fewer page views. One might expect smart phone users to
favor convenience even more. Regarding the latter, the recent decision of Prosper.com, in
December 2010, one of the two leading social lending web sites, to abandon its original auction

27

model in favor of pre-set interest rates suggest that similar mechanisms may be at play
elsewhere. Indeed, Prosper’s CEO explained the decision by arguing that pre-set rates were
more e¢ cient and that auctions were “too complicated” (Gonsalves, 2010). A more careful
answer to this question, however, would require data we don’t currently have, for example
on users’internet browsing and usage and the extent to which other online entertainment
options, such as Facebook or YouTube, have crowded out the early excitement that was
initially associated with bidding in online auctions. We think that this is a promising avenue
for further research.

References
Ariely, Dan, and Itamar Simonson (2003). “Buying, Bidding, Playing, or Competing?
Value Assessment and Decision Dynamics in Online Auctions.” Journal of Consumer
Psychology 13, 113-123.
Bajari, Patrick, and Ali Hortaçsu (2004). “Economic Insights from Internet Auctions.”
Journal of Economic Literature 42(2), 457-486.
Bauner, Christoph (2011). “Mechanism Choice and the Buy-It-Now Auction: A Structural
Model of Competing Buyers and Sellers.”Working Paper, University of Massachusetts.
Chen, Jong-Rong, Kong-Pin Chen, Chien-Fu Chou, and Ching-I Huang (2012). “A Dynamic Model of Auctions with Buy-it-now: Theory and Evidence. ”mimeo.
The Economist (2000), “In The Great Web Bazaar.”The Economist. February 24, 2000.
Einav, Liran, Theresa Kuchler, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan (2013). “Learning
from Seller Experiments in Online Markets.”NBER Working Paper No. 17385.
Elfenbein, Daniel W., Ray Fisman, and Brian Mcmanus (2012). “Charity as a Substitute
for Reputation: Evidence from an Online Marketplace.”Review of Economic Studies.
Elfenbein, Daniel W., Ray Fisman, and Brian Mcmanus (2013). “Market Structure, Reputation and the Value of Quality Certi…cation.” Working Paper, University of North
Carolina.
Gonsalves, Atone (2010). “Social Lender Prosper.com Drops Auction Model.” InformationWeek, December 20, 2010.
Hall, Robert E. (2002). Digital Dealing: How eMarkets are Transforming the Economy.
W. W. Norton.
Hammond, Robert G. (2010). “Comparing Revenue from Auctions and Posted Prices.”
International Journal of Industrial Organization 28(1), 1-9.
28

Kultti, Klaus (1999). “Equivalence of Auctions and Posted Prices.”Games and Economic
Behavior 27, 106-113.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Young Han Lee (2011). “The Bidder’s Curse.”American Economic
Review.101(2), 749-787.
Lu, Xiaohua, and R. Preston McAfee (1996). “The Evolutionary Stability of Auctions over
Bargaining.”Games and Economic Behavior 15, 228-254.
Lucking-Reiley, David (2000). “Auctions on the Internet: What’s Being Auctioned, and
How?”Journal of Industrial Economics 48(3), 227-252.
Surowiecki, James (2011). “Going, Going, Gone: Who Killed The Internet Auction?”Wired
Magazine, May 17, 2011.
Sweeting, Andrew (2012). “Dynamic Pricing Behavior in Perishable Goods Markets: Evidence from Secondary Markets for Major League Baseball Tickets.”Journal of Political
Economy, forthcoming.
Wang, Ruqu (1993). “Auctions versus Posted-Price Selling.” American Economic Review
83(4), 838-851.

29

Figure 1: Auction Share on eBay over Time
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Jan‐03

Share of active listings
Share of revenues

Jan‐04

Jan‐05

Jan‐06

Jan‐07

Jan‐08

Jan‐09

Jan‐10

Jan‐11

Jan‐12

For each month, the figure shows the average daily share of active eBay listings (black) and transaction revenues (gray) from pure auction listings out of all pure
auction and posted price listings. Less common formats, such as hybrid auctions, are not included. The sharp drop in Fall 2008 coincides with a decision in
September 2008 to allow “good till canceled” posted price listings (see Section 7).

Figure 2: Google Search Volume for Online Auctions and Online Prices
100
Online auctions
90

Search volume index (Google generated)

Online prices
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Jan‐04

Jan‐05

Jan‐06

Jan‐07

Jan‐08

Jan‐09

Jan‐10

Jan‐11

Jan‐12

Figure presents results from "Google Trends" for search terms "online auctions" and "online prices." The y‐axis is a Google generated index for the weekly volume
of Google searches for each of the two search terms, which should make the weekly volume figures comparable over time and across the two search terms.

Figure 3: Posted Prices are more Prevalent for “Less Idiosyncratic” Items
(a) Using the word "new" in the title to proxy for less idiosyncratic

Fraction of posted price listings

0.8
PCs

Books

0.7

Phones

DVDs

0.6

Music

Electronics

0.5

Home
Health
Sport

0.4
0.3
Fan Shop
Collectibles
Jewelry

0.2
0.1

Clothing

Toys
Crafts

0
0

0.1

0.2
0.3
Fraction of "new" listings in category

0.4

0.5

(b) Using duplicate listings to proxy for less idiosyncratic

Fraction of posted price listings

0.8
PCs

Books

0.7

Phones

DVDs

0.6

Music
Electronics
Home

0.5

Health

0.4

Sport

0.3
Fan Shop

0.2

Toys

Clothing
Crafts

Jewelry

Collectibles

0.1
0
0.5

0.55

0.6
0.65
0.7
0.75
0.8
Fraction of "duplicate" listings in category

0.85

0.9

Figure presents the share of posted price listings in the largest 15 item categories, plotted against (a) the share of category
listings that have the word "new" in the listing title , and (b) the share of listings that have at least one “duplicate” (i.e. another
listing by the same seller with the same title). Both figures show a listing‐weighted regression line, and are based on all eBay
listings in 2009 that were either posted price or pure auction listings.

Figure 4: Posted Price Use, by Seller Cohort

Fraction of revenues from posted price sales

0.6

0.5

0.4

2003 Cohort
2004 Cohort
2005 Cohort
2006 Cohort
2007 Cohort
2008 Cohort
2009 Cohort
Average by year

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Figure presents the evolution of the annual fraction of eBay sellers’ revenue from posted price listings (out of revenues from posted price and "pure" auction
listings), separately for each cohort of sellers. A seller is assigned to a cohort based on the calendar year in which the seller's first ever listing was posted on eBay.
The thick black line presents the overall platform average for each year.

Figure 5: Theory – The Auction and Posted‐Price Demand Curves
1
Posted price (p,q)

Start price / Expected price / Posted price

Auction (p,q)
Auction (r,q)

0.8

0.6

λ

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Probability of sale

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure is based on the model of Section 3, assuming that values are drawn from a uniform distribution on [0,1], with u=0 and λ=0.2. The black solid line is the
posted‐price demand curve. The dashed gray line is the auction sale curve, which shows the probability of sale as a function of the auction start price. The solid
gray line is the “auction demand curve,” which plots the probability of sale from a given start price against the expected sale price from that start price.

1

Figure 6(a): Sale Rates of Posted Price and Auction Listings, by Category

Posted price sale rate

0.5

0.45
Health

45o
Line

PCs

0.4

Phones
Collectibles
Home
Books
Music

0.35
Jewelry

Electronics
DVDs
Crafts

Sport

Fan Shop
Clothing

0.3
0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45
Auction sale rate

0.5

0.55

0.6

Average sale price of posted price listings ($)

Figure 6(b): Average Sale Price of Posted Price and Auction Listings, by Category
80
Sport
Electronics

70
60
Phones

50

PCs

40

Fan Shop
Collectibles Clothing
Jewelry
Health
Books
Toys

30
20

Music

Home

45o
Line

Crafts

DVDs

10
10

20

30
40
50
Average sale price of auction listings ($)

60

70

Figure is based on the 2009 seller experiments sample described in Section 4 and reports (a) the average sale rate and (b)
the average sale price in each category, by listing format. For each item (experiment) in the sample, we compute the sale
rate and price in each listing format, and then average (unweighted) across all items within each category.

Figure 7(a): Trends in The “Auction Discount" Based on Seller Experiments
3.4

Auction Discount
Auction
Posted price

Log(sale price)

3.1

2.8

13.8%
(0.0008)

14.4%
(0.0006)

2005

2007

16.5%
(0.0005)

2.5

2.2

4.7%
(0.0012)

1.9
2003

2009

Figure 7(b): Trends in Sale Rate Based on Seller Experiments
0.50
0.45

Sale rate

0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25

Auction
Posted Price

0.20
2003

2005

2007

2009

Figure is based on the seller experiments sample described in Section 4. In (a) the lines represent the predicted value from
a regression of (log) sale price on an indicator that is equal to one for an auction listing and on seller experiment fixed
effects. The regression is estimated for each year separately. The bars represent the estimated coefficient on the auction
indicator (which is the same as the vertical difference between the two lines). Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. In
(b) the lines represent the predicted value from a linear probability regression of a sale indicator on an indicator that is
equal to one for an auction listing and on seller experiment fixed effects, again estimated separately for each year.

Figure 8(a): The Relative Demand Curves in 2003

Price (normalized) conditional on sale

1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8

Auction
Posted price

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Probability of sale

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 8(b): The Relative Demand Curves in 2009
Price (normalized) conditional on sale

1.2
1.1
Auction
Posted price

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Probability of sale

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figures are based on the 2003 and 2009 samples described in Section 4. The posted price demand curve is based on
estimating a linear probability model of a sale indicator on the posted price and experiment fixed effects. The auction
demand curve is based on estimating a similar sale equation (sale indicator on start price and experiment fixed effects) and
a separate price equation (normalized sale price on start price and experiment fixed effects), and combining the estimates
to construct an auction demand curve as described in the text, and shown in Figure 5.

Figure 9(a): The Relative Demand Curve of Idiosyncratic Categories

Price (normalized) conditional on sale

1.2
Auction 2003
1.1

Posted price 2003
Auction 2009

1

Posted price 2009

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Probability of sale

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure 9(b): The Relative Demand Curve of Commodity Categories
Price (normalized) conditional on sale

1.2
Auction 2003
1.1

Posted price 2003
Auction 2009

1

Posted price 2009
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5
0.6
Probability of sale

0.7

0.8

0.9

Figure is based on the 2003 and 2009 seller experiments sample described in Section 4. Figure (a) restricts estimation to
Electronics, Computers, DVDs, Health, and Phones. Figure (b) restricts attention to Collectibles, Fan Shop, Toys, Jewelry, and
Clothing. Figures are otherwise equivalent to Figures 8(a) and (b) combined.

Figure 10: Calibrating λ and u from Posted‐Price and Auction Sale Curves
1.2
1.1

Start price or Posted price

1

u
2009

0.9

2003

0.8
0.7
Auction

0.6

Posted price

0.5
0.4
0.1

0.2

0.3
0.4
Probability of Sale

0.5

0.6

Figure illustrates the way by which we calibrate the values of λ and u, and presents the empirical analog to the theoretical Figure 5. The black lines are the
estimated posted price demand curves in 2003 and 2009 (shown in Figures 8(a) and 8(b)). The gray lines are the auction sale curves (that is, our estimates – based
on estimating equation (4) – of the effect of start price on the probability of sale for auction listings). The vertical distance between the two graphs is an estimate of
λ, and the vertical distance between the two posted price demand curves is u.

Figure 11: Posted Price Use, by Buyer Cohort
0.6

Fraction of expenditures onposted‐price purchases

2003 Cohort
2004 Cohort

0.5

2005 Cohort
2006 Cohort
0.4

2007 Cohort
2008 Cohort
2009 Cohort

0.3

Average by year

0.2

0.1

0
2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

Figure presents the evolution of the annual fraction of buyers’ expenditure on posted price purchases (out of expenditures on posted price and "pure" auction
purchases), separately for each cohort of buyers. A buyer is assigned to a cohort based on the calendar year in which the buyer’s first ever purchase was made. The
thick black line presents the overall platform average for each year.

Table 1: Summary Statistics of Experiments Samples
2003 Experiments Data

2009 Experiments Data

(23,057 experiments and 1,168,033
listings, of which 748,545 (64%) are
auction listings)

(83,685 experiments and 5,924,448
listings, of which 4,185,969 (71%) are
auction listings)

Number of listings in experiment
Auction listings in experiment
Posted‐price listings in experiment
Share of auction listings

Mean
50.7
32.5
18.2
0.56

25th pctile
18
8
6
0.38

75th pctile
50
29
19
0.74

Mean
70.8
50.0
20.8
0.61

25th pctile
19
9
6
0.43

75th pctile
68
45
18
0.81

Experiment avg. sale rate for auctions

0.51

0.22

0.80

0.44

0.16

0.73

Experiment avg. sale rate for posted prices (within 7 days)

0.44

0.20

0.67

0.37

0.17

0.50

Difference in sale rate (auction minus posted price)

0.07

‐0.10

0.23

0.08

‐0.12

0.25

Experiment avg. sale price (normalized) for auctions

0.96

0.83

1.04

0.86

0.75

0.98

Experiment avg. sale price (normalized) for posted prices

0.97

0.97

1.00

0.98

0.97

1.00

Difference in sale price (auction minus posted price)

‐0.01

‐0.15

0.08

‐0.13

‐0.24

0.00

Experiment avg. sale price (reference value)

40.3

8.2

32

42.7

10.0

40.0

Std. deviation of (normalized) auction start prices

0.25

0.14

0.34

0.19

0.09

0.27

Std. deviation of (normalized) posted prices

0.10

0.00

0.15

0.08

0.02

0.11

Table presents summary statistics for the 2003 and 2009 experiments samples. The unit of observation is an experiment, that is a matched set of listings that
have the identical seller and listing title, and were listed in the same calendar year.

Table 2: Calibration Results

Panel A. Calibrated values
2003

All categories

Idiosyncratic

Commodity

0.08

0.06

0.19

u2003

‐‐‐‐‐ Normalized to zero ‐‐‐‐‐

2009

0.16

0.19

0.23

u2009

0.14

0.11

0.15

Panel B. Success rates (q*)
Posted price success (2003)

0.40

0.34

0.49

Auction Success (2003)

0.48

0.38

0.56

Posted price success (2009)

0.25

0.25

0.29

Auction Success (2009)

0.37

0.31

0.41

0.09

0.13

0.05

Change in u

0.14

0.11

0.15

Relative importance of λ vs. u (2003 quantities)

3.60

10.22

2.52

Relative importance of λ vs. u (2009 quantities)

1.92

6.11

1.12

Panel C. Relative effects of  and u
Change in λ

The top panel presents estimates of u and λ from the estimated demand curves in 2003 and 2009. The middle panel shows success rates estimated from the linear
probability regression in Section 4.1. The bottom panel derives the relative profit effects due to the calibrated increase in u and λ, as explained in Section 4.3.
Specifically, we compute the increase in posted price profit minus auction profit due to λ and also due to u and report the ratio in the Table.

