NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUTTING THE ‘SYSTEM’ IN THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM
Michael D. Bordo
Angela Redish
Working Paper 19026
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19026

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

Paper prepared for the Conference on “Money in the Western Legal Tradition”, Cambridge, August
2012. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research. This research is supported by the Social Sciences and
Humanities research council of Canada.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Michael D. Bordo and Angela Redish. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Putting the ‘System’ in the International Monetary System
Michael D. Bordo and Angela Redish
NBER Working Paper No. 19026
May 2013
JEL No. E00,N1
ABSTRACT
The international gold standard of the late nineteenth century has been described as a system of ‘spontaneous
order’, capturing the idea that its architects at the time were fashioning domestic monetary systems
which created a system of fixed exchange rates almost as a by-product. In contrast the framers of the
Bretton Woods System were intentional in building an international monetary system and so it is by
advocates of designing an international monetary order.
In this paper we examine the transition from spontaneous order circa 1850 to designed system and
then back towards spontaneous order in the late twentieth century, arguing that it is an evolution with
multiple stops and starts, and that the threads that underlie the general tendency through these hesitations
are the interplay between monetary and fiscal factors and the evolution of the financial system. This
transformation is embedded within deep evolving political fundamentals including the rise of democracy,
nationalism, fascism and communism and two world wars.

Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu
Angela Redish
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
#997 1873 East Mall
Vancouver BC V6T 1Z1 CANADA
anji@econ.ubc.ca

Introduction
The international gold standard of the late 19th century has been described as a system of ‘spontaneous
order’ (Gallarotti, 1995), capturing the idea that while subsequent writers indeed describe the gold
standard as an international monetary ‘system’, its architects at the time were fashioning domestic
monetary systems which created a system of fixed exchange rates as almost a by‐product. In contrast, in
1944 the architects of the Bretton Woods system were intentional – they were building an international
monetary system – and so it is today, albeit with perhaps competing teams of architects vying for the
right to design the international monetary order.
In this paper we examine the transition from spontaneous order to designed system and then back
towards spontaneous order, arguing that it is an evolution with multiple stops and starts, and that the
threads that underlie the general tendency through these hesitations are the interplay between
monetary and fiscal factors and the evolution of the financial system. This transformation is embedded
within deep evolving political fundamentals including the rise of democracy, nationalism, fascism and
communism and two world wars. We begin in the 1850s and describe the emergence of the classical
international gold standard by the 1880. We argue that beneath the appearance of ‘spontaneous order’
lay a variety of indications that this was not an equilibrium. The international monetary conferences of
the mid‐19th century were (partially successful) attempts to produce a more ordered international
monetary system. After World War I, more serious international co‐ordination efforts were made and
the Bretton Woods agreement of 1944 built on, but extended dramatically, those initial efforts.
However Bretton Woods had some fatal design flaws and it devolved into the present non system of
managed floating. The present euro zone is a designed system. The future will tell us if it will survive.
The forces we focus on are fiscal and banking changes, but there were also important political and
intellectual changes. It is no coincidence that the chronology of monetary history is driven by warfare ‐
the Franco‐Prussian war and the US Civil War were critical to the evolution of their nations’ monetary
history as were the World Wars more generally. Large scale warfare changed fiscal needs, domestic
political powers and of course the balance of international political power. The importance of
intellectual views is harder to gauge. The view that ‘gold’ is money, or that money must necessarily
represent a possibly indirect claim on gold, has largely disappeared and was not universal in the 19th

2

century, but it was an influential view and the changing weight of that view was a part of the transition
between the gold standard and today.

Setting the Scene ‐ 1850
In 1850 the unit of account in each of the major powers was tied to a fixed weight of one or two
precious metals. The backing of the coins was established by laws stating the amount of metal in the
coins and the price at which the mint would buy metal. Table 1 sets out the metallic content of the coins
in the four major Western economies.
Table 1 here
The UK was on a gold standard. The US, and France were on bimetallic standards and in 1850 the
bimetallic standards were roughly in equilibrium, with both gold and silver circulating and being sold to
the Mint. The majority of the German states were on a silver standard, but also issued gold coins that
circulated at market values.
Not only was the unit of account defined as a given weight of metal but by 1850 there was an
established norm that the sovereign should not arbitrarily change this/these weights. In Britain, the
development of an orthodoxy whereby the pound sterling represented an unalterable amount of gold or
silver is seen in the success of John Locke in the Locke‐Lowndes debate in 1690s.1 At that time the
weight of coins in circulation had been considerably reduced by wear implying that the de jure weight of
the coins exceeded their de facto weight. Lowndes, the mint master, proposed to mint new coins
reduced in weight by the average amount of wear. Thus individuals could have brought in their old coins
and be given new coins of the same legal tender value and specie content, bringing the de jure down to
the de facto weight. This would effectively have depreciated the de jure value of the pound sterling. In
contrast, Locke argued that the pound sterling represented a fixed weight of metal and that there
should be no reduction in the de jure weight of a coin of a given value. He proposed unifying the de jure
and de facto weight by bringing the de facto weight up to the de jure weight. Thus either the State
would have to make up the weight lost to wear or an individual would receive back coins of less legal
tender value than they brought in. Locke won the debate, and the coinage was not depreciated. The
silver content of the pound sterling remained unchanged from 1666 until the explicit decision to issue

1

See Feavearyear (1931; 135).

3

token silver coins in 1816. The gold content of the pound did not change from 1717, when Newton
lowered the value of the guinea from £1.075 to £1.05 to 1931.
In the US, the metallic content of the dollar had been changed only once (in 1834) from the inception of
the standard in 1792 and at least arguably this could be attributed to a need to reflect changes in the
relative gold:silver price, rather than a response to fiscal needs. In France the gold and silver definitions
of the unit had remained constant since the creation of the franc germinal in 1803.2 The monetary
situation in Germany was more fragmented as many States had their own coinage. By 1838, the
Dresden coinage convention signed by the Zollverein states had somewhat reduced the heterogeneity.3
Each member state chose either the thaler (South German states) or the gulden (North German states)
and the unit of account was determined by the equivalence of both 14 thaler and 24.5 gulden to 1
Cologne mark (233.85 gms) of silver.4 States also issued gold coins, such as ducats and 10 thaler coins,
which were primarily commercial coins that traded at market rates, although some states assigned
parities at which they were accepted at public treasuries.5
In each country the stock of money included not only coins but also paper money: a circulating IOU,
issued by the State, or by a private entity with the permission of the state, a bank. However, central
banking was in its infancy. The Bank of England, created in 1694, was a privately owned central bank
which after 1844 had a monopoly over note issue.6 Notes were required to be redeemed in coin on
demand but from 1833 were legal tender outside the Bank of England. The Bank may have been
privately owned, but its affairs were completely intertwined with the state ‐ explicitly by its need to
renew its Charter, but more directly through (a) the State reliance on the Bank in times of fiscal stress
and (b) the Banks’s reliance on the State in times of liquidity stress.
In an earlier age, governments/monarchs financed their wars through debasements. The development
of the banking system enabled them to do it through depreciation and printing money. Printing money
leads to inflation which acts as a tax on the purchasing power of the money holders. The inflation tax

2

For France and U.S. see Redish (2000).
James (1997)
4
A common coin, the vereinsmunze, was produced but at over 30 gms it was too heavy to be commonly used and
states used their traditional coins. (Holtfrerich p.221)
5
The Treaty of Vienna in 1857 slightly modified the Dresden Treaty and was signed by Austria as well as the
German states. By that Treaty a 1 thaler (i.e. Prussian) coin became legel tender in all signatories. The treaty
limited the issue of gold coins by any signatory to a 10 gm and a 5 gms gold coin that was not required to be legal
tender in any state.
6
Earlier issues of other banks were permitted to remain in circulation. Smith (1936, 21).
3

4

revenue is transferred to the government. During the Napoleonic Wars, the government suspended the
requirement that Bank of England notes be convertible into specie, and then required the Bank to
finance the war by purchasing government bonds. This expansionary monetary policy led to a rise in
domestic prices and a depreciation of the currency. Indeed the value of a gold sovereign in paper
pounds rose from £1 to £x. Yet following the war the government returned to fiscal stability (i.e. a
balanced budget) by reducing its expenditure and raising taxes. Outstanding government debt declined
from its peak of 260% of GNP in 1819 to 127% thirty years later (Mitchell, 1988). Convertibility was
restored at the Pre‐War parity in 1821.
The second facet of State/Bank interdependency was seen in 1847. The Bank Charter Act of 1844
required the Bank to hold a fixed ratio of gold to bank notes. In 1847, a liquidity crisis led to a run on the
Bank which paid out gold reducing its reserves below the statutory minimum ratio. To prevent
suspension of payments, the Bank requested a ‘Treasury letter’ from the Chancellor of the Exchequer to
allow a temporary suspension of the Act, a boon that was granted.
The Bank of France, similar to the Bank of England, was a privately‐owned corporation intimately
connected with the State. It was created in 1802, in a nation still reeling from the effects of the
Revolution and the Assignats.7 The experience with the Assignats, limited the capacity of Napoleon to
finance his war with paper money, and hence the note issues of the Bank of France remained
convertible into specie throughout the war (Bordo and White, 1991). During the 1848 revolution, there
was a temporary suspension of the convertibility of notes known as the cours forcé, but by 1850
convertibility had been re‐established at the initial parity. The cours forcé had a permanent impact in
that the government forced the merger of small note‐issuing banks with the Bank of France, which
thereafter had a monopoly of the note issue.
From the early 19th century German States issued paper money for fiscal reasons (although Holtfrerich
(1989; 226) asserts that Saxony issued paper money to facilitate commerce). In the 1830s Saxony and
Bavaria both permitted the establishment of private note‐issuing banks, and by the mid 1850s there
were 30 note‐issuing banks in operation across the different German states. The largest was the
Prussian Bank (a reorganized version of the Royal Bank of Prussia created in 1765). In 1846, the Royal
Bank of Prussia (created in 1765) was reorganized and allowed to raise capital from private shareholders

7

This paragraph draws on Goodhart (1988).

5

and issue notes. Its notes had a virtual monopoly of the circulation of notes in Prussia and by 1856, were
also acceptable for government payments.8
The United States had twice chartered incipient central banks, the First and Second Banks of the United
States, but each time political opposition had defeated attempts to renew their charters, and after 1836
there was no federally chartered bank. The individual states created banks which issued notes under a
variety of regulations, in all cases committing to redeem the notes in specie coin.9 As in the other
countries severe financial crises in 1837, 1839 and 1857 led to general suspensions of convertibility of
bank notes (and deposits) into coin.
By 1850 then, the principle that the monetary unit should not be arbitrarily redefined was accepted,
paper money was widely used and (except in the US) its issue was not independent of the state.
Suspension of convertibility and depreciation of the value of paper money had replaced debasement as
a mechanism for war finance, but par resumption was the norm.10 But most countries were on
bimetallic standards, and while France and the UK were unified, Germany was a state yet to emerge and
there was no national bank note system in the US.

First steps ‐ the classical gold standard
We turn now to the transition from the orderly chaos of 1850 to the more homogenous gold standard
world of 1880. The gold standard had many layers. At one level – the clearest – each country defined its
unit of account in terms of a weight of gold and the result was a set of fixed exchange rates across
countries (see Table 2). This fixed rate system reflected national decisions, not international
agreements, and has consequently been described as ‘spontaneous order’.11 At a second level we can
ask whether either the evolution or existence of the gold standard were truly spontaneous, or did they
reflect actions of governments taken with an eye to the realpolitik of international affairs.
Table 2 here
The monetary changes reflected a number of forces that affected all economies. The falling price of gold
after the gold discoveries in Australia and California in the late 1840s necessarily meant that the
8

Tilly (1966, 157).
Legler, Sylla and Wallis (1987) argue that the states earned seignorage revenue either directly by note issue, or
indirectly by taxing note issues, or reductions in the interest on state debts.
10
Bordo and Kydland( 1995)
9

11

Gallarotti( 1995)

6

bimetallic equilibrium of 1850 would be challenged as gold the cheaper metal, drove out silver according
to Gresham’s law. This drove both international efforts at monetary co‐operation (to standardize the
bimetallic ratio and the weight and fineness of gold and silver coins) and adoption of the monometallic
gold standard. National unification in Germany (and Italy) and military needs (the U.S.) and successes
(Prussia) were also critical. The growth of international capital markets used to finance wars and capital
infrastructure expanded the significance of the international monetary system, and the growing role of
central banks and substitution of paper money for metal altered the role of states in money provision.
International interactions and the shift to gold
The UK had suspended the free minting of silver and introduced token silver coins in 1816 thereby
making the pound sterling a gold currency. By 1880, France, Germany and the US had all done the same
creating a system of fixed exchange rates across these four currencies.
In the early 19th century, the monetary systems of France, Belgium, Switzerland and Italy were all based
on similar coins – a silver coin containing 5 grams of 90% fine silver and a gold coin containing 6.45
grams of 90% fine gold. In France these were the 1 franc and 20 franc coins and in all four countries the
coinage embodied a ratio of gold to silver of 15.5:1. California gold production in the 1850s drove down
the relative price of gold (to 15.2 by 1859) and thus tended to drive silver out of circulation.12 The
resulting scarcity of small‐denomination coins led each country to introduce ‘token’ silver coins – that is,
small denomination coins with limited legal tender, with silver content value less than their face value,
and not allowing the free (i.e. unlimited) minting of silver.
The token silver coins were first issued by Switzerland which issued coins containing 80% fine silver in
1860. Italy began minting 83.5% fine silver coins, in 1862. In 1864 the French also issued fractional coins,
with 83.5% silver. In all cases, the weight of the silver coins were kept at their traditional levels – pro
rata with the silver franc – and the reduction in intrinsic value was accomplished only by a reduction in
fineness. In 1865 the Belgians, who issued no token silver coins but whose silver circulation entirely
consisted of the tokens of the others, called a convention to agree on a standardization of the token
coinage. The resulting agreement, effective in 1866, created the Latin Monetary Union (LMU): under
the agreement each country would emit subsidiary (i.e. less than 1 franc) 83.5% fine silver coins, which

12

This is an example of Gresham’s Law – bad (i.e. overvalued) money drives out good (i.e. undervalued). There is
an extensive debate over when and why Gresham’s Law held. See Selgin (2003) for a survey.

7

would be legal tender in each country up to 50 francs.13 Each country agreed to limit the issue of tokens
to 6 francs per capita, and their public treasuries would accept the coins regardless of origin within the
LMU.14
The LMU may have been more important in providing a forum for explicit discussion of international
monetary co‐ordination than for the Treaty itself. The Treaty standardized the token coinage, but the
Conference provided a forum for discussing wider monetary co‐operation and changes and also
adoption of a gold standard across the four countries – a proposal that was rejected. Switzerland,
Belgium and Italy all sent delegates to the conference who advocated for multi‐lateral adoption of a gold
standard, however, the French representative, possibly influenced by the wishes of the Bank of France,
rejected any such switch.
The success of the LMU conference encouraged Emperor Napoleon III to convene an International
Monetary Conference in 1867 with the goal of creating a universal coinage. In some ways this was a
remarkably ambitious agenda – a common money amongst major (and many minor) Western powers. In
other ways it was not such a big step. 15 The conference concluded by recommending that the 5 franc
gold coin become the basis of each country’s monetary system, with accompanying 25 franc coins
(which would have been worth about $5) and 15 franc coins worth 10 florins. But the enthusiasm of the
delegates was not matched by their principals. In England, the proposed 3.5% reduction in the gold
content of the pound, needed so that the pound equalled $5 or 25 francs, was considered tantamount
to fraud( Kindleberger ( 1984, p.66). The French thought the proposed 25f and 15f coins were at odds
with their decimalist ideals. But above all, in 1870 the Franco‐Prussian war intervened, ending any
thoughts of Franco‐Prussian co‐operation.
The Franco‐Prussian war, with its stark Prussian victory, had monetary consequences in addition to
ending Franco‐Prussian co‐operation. The Prussian victory presaged German unification, under the
Prussian lead, and consequent monetary unification of Germany. The need for a monetary transition
coupled with the wealth transfer imposed on France, enabled the Germans to adopt a gold standard.16

13

Note that granting legal tender to another country’s full bodied coins was common.
See Redish (2000) Chapter 6, and Reti (1989) Chapter 33.
15
Bagehot noting the potential benefit of a common unit of account, noted “Of course all English bankers can turn
francs into pounds, and some think they will; but few ever do” cited in Kindleberger (1984, 66).
16
‘Why’ Germany adopted gold, as opposed to ‘how’, is a debated question, and involves both the choice of
monometallism over bimetallism and the choice of gold rather than silver. Holtfrerich (1989) argues that German
policy makers had argued for a gold standard from the early 1860s; Reti (1998) argues for the importance of
14

8

The resulting increase in demand for gold, and sale of silver, combined with US silver discoveries, led to
a fall in the relative price of silver to gold. This in turn, led the French and the Scandinavians to close
their mints to silver to avoid a capital loss on their silver holdings.
The US had financed the Civil War (1861‐65) by issuing legal tender irredeemable government notes,
‘Greenbacks’, and by effectively limiting the bank note issue to a newly created set of national banks
that were required to buy federal government bonds to back their notes. In 1879 the cours forcé ended
and the Greenbacks were convertible into specie. Furthermore, by the Coinage Act of 1873, gold had
become the sole specie that was freely minted and the US was de facto on the gold standard.
Thus by 1880, each nation had adopted a domestic unit of account that was defined as a fixed weight of
gold , effectively creating a system of fixed exchange rates (see Table 2). The creation of the gold
standard did reflect interactions between the leading economies, but not co‐ordination – indeed rather
negative interactions. During the gold standard era there were a series of international monetary
conferences that were called by the United States to propose a return to a bimetallic standard, but
these did not lead to any co‐ordinated, or domestic, policy initiatives.17
The changing role of central banks
In addition to the evolution in coinage practice, the role of central banks had evolved (except in the US)
and the role of the State in creating and managing money with it. Although the central banks were
privately owned they held a privileged position in the financial system and in the second half of the 19th
century, the duty to function as a lender of last resort was emerging as one of costs of that privilege. The
archetypical definition of the lender of last resort is Walter Bagehot’s in Lombard Street – lend freely to
solvent but illiquid banks (i.e. on good collateral) at a ‘high’ interest rate.18 This will stave off a liquidity
crisis and, the emphasis on lending only on good collateral reduces the potential for moral hazard. As
illustrated in detail in the recent work of Bignon et al. (2012) both the Bank of England and the Bank of

Britain’s hegemonic status and prior adoption of gold; Gallarotti (1995) argues for the status of gold as a more
valuable metal.
17
The International Monetary Conference in 1867 was the highpoint of state‐led monetary co‐operation before
World War I. The US called a second IMC in 1878 with the explicit goal of engendering international bimetallism –
considered to be a stable bimetallic regime since all nations would adopt the same gold:silver ratio – but most
delegates only came on the grounds that they would not consider such a scheme, and the conference did not lead
to any change in monetary standards. Similar results attended the conferences held in xx and xx.
18
Bignon et al.( 2012) note that Bagehot used the word ‘high’ rather than the commonly attributed ‘penalty’ rate.
They argue that the goal was to encourage the borrowers to lend amongst themselves before going to the central
bank.

9

France adopted the role of lender of last resort between 1850 the 1880ies. See also Hautcoeur et al.
(2012)
The question of the extent to which the international financial system was an ‘automatic/self‐adjusting’
system vs. managed system is a familiar chestnut.19 In the mythical automatic version, the values of
units of account were established by independent nations and then trade and finance flowed driven
solely by the actions of private agents. How far and in what form reality diverged from that myth is
debated. In 1944 (30 years after the end of the Classical gold standard and writing to explain the failure
of the interwar gold exchange standard) Nurkse articulated tools that a central bank could use to
enhance the workings of the gold standard: use the discount rate to offset gold flows and expand or
contract the (paper) monetary stock. In later work, Bloomfield (1959) showed that these tools were not
generally used by England or France (and the US had no central bank). This did not mean that central
banks were irrelevant.
As noted above, in the mid‐19th century, when the Bank of England faced both an internal and external
gold drain they asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer to allow the gold reserve to go below the legal
limit. By the end of the century, before doing this the Bank was more likely to look for international
allies. During the Baring crisis, the Bank of England asked the Russian State bank for a loan of £800,000
in gold, and in 1907, the Bank of France shipped 80 million francs in gold to England (Kindleberger, 1984;
281). 20 Eichengreen (1984, 1992) has argued that central bank co‐operation, and the credibility of the
standard that it brought, ensured that capital flows were stabilizing.
The effectiveness of the informal interaction of central bankers lies in sharp contrast with the ineffective
international conferences that governments attended to discuss changing monetary standards.

World War I and the post war reestablishment of the gold standard
The war transformed European economies and polities. From the outbreak of the war the gold standard
was suspended in the European countries and as in earlier wars the monetary system was harnessed as
an instrument of the state.21 In the European countries, to varying extents, money creation was used to
19

Notably, and eloquently, put by Keynes (1930) who argued that the British attributed their success under the
international gold standard to their laissez faire policies when they should have realized it reflected their
hegemony: London “was so predominant that the Bank of England could almost have claimed to the be the
conductor of the international orchestra”.
20
However Flandreau (1997 ) and Bordo and Schwartz ( 1998) view central bank cooperation as largely episodic.
21
; Kindleberger p.291 on Bank of England Lender of Last Resort operations.

10

finance the war – and even when debt was used the fact that it was nominal debt changed the
incentives for post‐war monetary stability: Countries with high debts could reduce the real value of the
that debt by inflation. For contemporaries the biggest challenge for a restoration of the gold standard
was the potential that there would be a major deflation. Deflation would come about in part because
resumption at the pre‐war parity would necessitate undoing the war time inflation. Perhaps even more
of a concern was that if money demand per unit of GDP had not changed during the war, and (real) GDP
of countries on the gold standard was much higher, then the restoration of the gold standard at the pre‐
war parity would imply a lower price level.22
The political environment changed both because of the spread of the franchise and because
policymakers had learned from the experience of a ‘managed’ economy during the War (a lesson to be
learned a fortiori after World War II). The franchise was extended in both Germany and the UK. In the
UK the Representation of the People Act in 1918 allowed women over 30 to vote, and all men (without
property qualifications). It is estimated that the proportion of the population over 20 that were eligible
to vote rose from 29% to 75%. In Germany, with the creation of the Weimar Republic, the franchise was
extended to all men and women 20 years of age and over, so that the proportion of the adult population
eligible to vote rose from 39% to 98%.23 As a consequence of the extension of the franchise, it became
harder to allow the gold standard adjustment mechanism to work automatically. A balance of payments
deficit would lead to gold outflows, declining money supplies, deflation and in the face of nominal
rigidities falling real income and rising unemployment. With an expansion of the suffrage it became
harder to justify this mechanism when the unemployed had the right to vote.
Restoration of convertibility
The UK, France and Germany had all suspended convertibility of their currencies during the war and in
all three countries the default expectation of the post‐World War I period was a return to the gold
standard. But the different experience during the war affected the timing and parity that were under
discussion. England had financed half its war expenditures with taxes and was the least fiscally
challenged. France and Germany had only financed 13‐14% implying large outstanding monetary
liabilities of (nominal) debts. In addition Germany was saddled with reparations payments. The choice of
22

In terms of the Quantity equation, MV=PY: if output (Y) had risen and the stock of gold (M) and velocity (V) were
unchanged, then the price level (P) would have to decline.
23
In France universal suffrage of men over 21 was granted in 1848, and women were not give the vote until 1945.
In the US the franchise was determined at the state level and impediments to the enfranchisement of African‐
American and poor white voters continued until the 1960s. Data: Flora et al. (1983)

11

parity became a question of wealth distribution – how much of the nominal value of the debt should be
written down (Eichengreen, 1992).
Following the war, the instinctive reaction of British politicians and economists was a return to gold at
the old parity. The Cunliffe Committee created in 1918 assumed this goal (Moggridge 1972, 18) in the
interim report, and although the final report acknowledged that monetary systems did not need a gold
base, stated “We have found nothing in the experience of the War to falsify the lessons of previous
experience that the adoption of a currency not convertible at will into gold or other exportable coin is
likely in practice to lead to overissue and so to destroy the measure of exportable value and cause a
general rise in all prices” (Cunliffe 1919 – cited in Redish 1993). While there was five years of debate, in
1925 convertibility was in fact re‐established at the traditional parity.24
The return to gold was not expected to be painless as the challenge of a relative (to pre‐war conditions)
scarcity of gold was foreseen. Central bankers also saw the need to co‐ordinate as offering the
opportunity to replace the ad‐hoc cooperation of the pre‐war era with a more formal system. That
ambition led to monetary conferences under the auspices of the League of Nations in Brussels in 1920
and in Genoa in 1922, but these were ultimately unsuccessful in large part because of the absence of the
United States (largest gold holder and international creditor) and because of the unfinished business of
war debts and reparations. Although many countries adopted a gold exchange standard as suggested at
the Genoa Conference when they restored gold standard convertibility.
At the conclusion of the war the Treaty of Versailles stated that reparations would be imposed on
Germany, with the amount to be determined later. In January 1921 the Reparations commission
determined that amount, which was reluctantly accepted by Germany in May 1921. The payment of
reparations had consequences for all four powers as the payment of reparations was largely how France
intended to repay war debts to England, which provided the funds for the British to repay the US.
Germany’s recalcitrance in paying the demanded reparations led the French to occupy the Ruhr valley in
January 1923, which in turn led the German miners to go on strike and exacerbated the financial
difficulties of both the French and Germans. The already fiscally challenged German government funded
its resistance by borrowing from the Reichsbank, essentially printing money, to the point where the
24

The decision to return to gold at the old parity is one of the most notorious policy decisions of the twentieth
century, in part because of Keynes’ polemical critique, The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill. The pre‐war
parity overvalued the exchange rate by more than 10%( the precise number is debated) and led to a prolonged
slump for the British Economy. See Moggridge 9 19690.

12

mark became worthless (See figure 1). The consequence of the rising (and expected to rise) inflation
rate was a flight from the mark which exacerbated their decline in the purchasing power of Reichsbank
notes (i.e. inflation outpaced monetary growth). Figure 2 illustrates the extremity of the situation. On 15
October 1923 a monetary reform created the Rentenmark with a trillion (1012) old marks per new mark
issued by the Rentenbank. The law limited the amount of note issue and the amount that could be
loaned to the government. There was a dramatic halt to inflation, budget deficits and monetary growth.
More importantly, reparations were suspended and under the Dawes plan made more manageable in
amount and aided by a US loan.25
Slightly before the outbreak of war in Europe, the US established a central bank. The hostility to a
monolithic monetary power that had precluded the survival of earlier institutions also shaped the
structure of the new bank. The Federal Reserve System comprised the Board (located in Washington not
New York) and the powerful regional Federal Reserve Banks.26 The U.S. polity opposed a European style
central bank and ended up with a federal system. Federal Reserve Banks were owned by the member
banks (national banks and any state banks that chose to opt in) in the district– the dividends on shares
were limited. Member banks were expected to (and after 1917 required to) hold their cash reserves at
their regional Federal Reserve Bank. The Federal Reserve system was intended to eliminate the frequent
banking panics that characterized the National Banking system and to operate quasi‐automatically.27
The Federal Reserve would use its tools to iron out the seasonal in short‐term interest rates that
aggravated financial instability. Also each Reserve Bank would rediscount eligible self liquidating
commercial paper with its member banks and thereby automatically stabilize the business cycle and
prevent financial crises. The Board in Washington would coordinate the discount rate policies set by the
Reserve banks .
The US did not enter World War I until 1917 and Federal Reserve note convertibility was not suspended
(but a gold export embargo was imposed from April 1917 to April 1919) But the needs of war finance did
challenge the new institutions and the lines between private bank and central bank was clearly decided
in favour of the public role , e.g. the Federal Reserve was allowed to conduct open market operations
and discount government securities so that by the end of the War government securities dominated the

25

The Rentenmark was backed by land (Kindleberger, 326). After the monetary system was stabilized, in April
1924, the Rentenbank was replaced by a new Reichsbank.
26
Prior to 1935the Regional Feds all had Governors denoting high status in central bank circles; in 1935 they were
demoted to Presidents and the members of the Federal Reserve Board were given the title of Governor.
27
Rockoff and Walton p.414

13

Fed’s portfolio. All the belligerents’ balance sheets became exposed to credit risk and their
independence was greatly compromised .
The return to the gold standard, at any parity, similarly had distributional consequences, since the gold
standard equilibrium required prioritizing external adjustment over internal, indeed, the smooth
functioning of the gold standard relied on credible commitment to such prioritization.
The restoration of gold convertibility began when Britain returned to gold at the pre War parity of $ 4.86
in April 1925 followed by the Commonwealth countries and many others in succeeding years. The
restored gold standard was a gold exchange standard under which central banks would hold their
international reserves in the form of foreign exchange( in dollars or sterling) and gold. The typical gold
reserve ratio was 35%. The U.S. and the U.K. as reserve center countries would hold all of their
international reserves in gold. Most countries also prohibited their citizens from holding gold coins and
they held their gold reserves in bullion. These measures were instituted in response to a perceived gold
shortage.28By 1928, the gold standard was in place in all four countries, but it was short lived.
The gold exchange standard was posited as having three fatal flaws: the adjustment problem in which
surplus countries like France and the U.S. were unwilling to allow their money supplies to expand with
rising gold reserves and deficit countries like Britain were forced to deflate; the liquidity problem that
there was insufficient gold to finance the growth of world trade leading to deflationary pressure; and
the confidence problem that Britain had insufficient gold reserves to back the holding of sterling
reserves by the rest of the world and eventually there would be a run on sterling forcing Britain to leave
the gold standard. This was aggravated by efforts by France to undermine Britain’s position as an
international reserve country by converting its sterling holdings into gold.29
The gold exchange standard collapsed following the onset of the Great Depression in 1929. A series of
banking crises across the continent of Europe led to speculative attacks on the reserves of central
European countries and then Britain in 1931. In the face of deflation and depression central banks
converted their foreign exchange reserves into gold .30

Breakdown of the gold (exchange) standard

28

League of Nations 1930
Eichengreen 1992 and Bordo 1993.
30
Bernanke 2000.
29

14

In hindsight, Britain’s departure from gold in October 1931 was a game changer – as evidence that the
pre‐World War gold standard was indeed humpty dumpty and ‘couldn’t be put back together’; that the
nominal anchor would from then on be man‐made. This is misleading in many ways: the nominal
anchor was always man‐made, or at least state‐made, and the break which was indeed the beginning of
the end of the gold standard, was perceived at the time as one of the temporary suspensions of
convertibility which were an understood feature of the regime.
We return below to the big picture analysis but first describe the management of the new regime and
how states managed their internal and external monetary roles.
The basic chronology is as follows: in May 1931 the failure of Credit Anstalt in Vienna led to a banking
crisis, a rescue attempt by the BIS and several CBs failed leading to a currency crisis and Austria imposed
capital controls and froze foreign deposits, the crisis spread to Germany, in July 1931,in the face of a
banking crisis and a speculative attack on the mark. Germany imposed capital controls in the face of a
loss of foreign reserves. Germany’s decision put pressure on the reserves of the Bank of England
because of the exposure of British investment banks to Germany and Austria. The British government
faced high unemployment rates and a budget deficit and rather than impose ‘austerity’ chose to
suspend the gold standard. This led, in turn, to pressure on the US but the US held large gold reserves
and the Fed raised its discount rate by an unprecedented amount to withstand the immediate shock.
But the real appreciation of the dollar (relative to the pound) and higher interest rates, worsened the
domestic economy, weakened the solvency of the banks and worsened an ongoing banking panic.
Eighteen months later, in (April 1933) after a serious banking panic and a run on the dollar, the US
suspended gold convertibility.
The same story played out in France. With large gold reserves – and an initially undervalued exchange
rate – France could withstand the immediate shock of others leaving gold. The serious political
difficulties of resuming gold in 1926 also deterred the government from exposing itself to a return to an
inconvertible currency. In 1933, there was a gold bloc, of France, Belgium, Netherlands and Switzerland,
but by 1936 France was alone and in political chaos.
While the abandonment of the gold standard opened the door to the possibility of a system of floating
exchange rates, no‐one went through it. The pound floated from October /Sept? 1931 to the spring of
1932; the dollar floated from April 1933 to January 1934. The mark maintained its gold parity, but only
through the imposition of rigorous foreign exchange controls.
15

The collapse of the gold standard as the device for co‐ordinating exchange rates led to a rash of multi‐
lateral and bilateral initiatives. The World Monetary and Financial Conference in 1933 was a
continuation of the series of conferences around the Reparations question but Roosevelt’s decision to
unilaterally rule out a return to the previous gold parity precluded any hope of cooperation. In response
Britain arranged with the Commonwealth countries to create the sterling bloc.
By 1934, the pound and US dollar had stabilized and the U.S. returned to a managed gold standard at a
new devalued gold parity of $35 per ounce. Both countries benefitted from the now overvaluation of
the franc. When it became clear in 1936 that the French would suspend convertibility ,the US and UK,
fearful of a large devaluation of the franc, worked with the French government for a co‐ordinated
arrangement. The resultant, Tri‐Partite agreement, in which each country would coordinate intervention
in their exchange rate with the franc to prevent a disorderly devaluation, was not a formal international
agreement but rather three national statements, but they were co‐ordinated statements and it may
have been the first managed international financial system.

Bretton Woods and the move towards a managed international monetary system
The perceived problems of the interwar system which were viewed as contributing to the breakdown of
the international economic order leading to World War II led the allies (Britain and the U.S.) to plan for a
new international monetary regime.31 The new regime was intended to overcome the flaws of the gold
standard, which had placed a straitjacket on stabilization policy and was an engine for transmitting
depression and deflation globally , and floating exchange rates which were perceived as leading to
excessive volatility and the collapse of the franc in the 1920s.
The Bretton Woods agreement, worked out at Bretton Woods New Hampshire in July 1944, represented
a compromise between the British Plan of John Maynard Keynes and the American Plan drafted by Harry
Dexter White. The Keynes Plan posited an international central bank to provide a new global currency
called bancor which would provide global liquidity and help deficit countries like the UK get back on
their feet after the war. The White Plan posited a pegged exchange rate system anchored on gold, an
international credit union and protections for surplus countries like the US.
The compromise that became the Bretton Woods Articles of Agreement created an adjustable peg
system in which members parities were defined in terms of dollars and the dollar was defined in terms

31

See Bordo (1993) and the other chapters in Bordo and Eichengreen (1993)

16

of gold at $35 per ounce. The dollar was perceived as the key international currency (with sterling
having a secondary role). Each member could adjust its peg when faced with a fundamental
disequilibrium (caused for example by a productivity shock). Members were encouraged to impose
capital controls and to use domestic monetary and fiscal policy to maintain internal balance (full
employment). The International Monetary Fund was established as an international credit union to
which each member subscribed an initial quota in gold or dollars. It was to be used to provide
temporary credit to members undergoing a current account deficit.
It took until the end of 1958 for the European countries (Japan in 1962) to declare current account
convertibility to allow the Bretton Woods System (BWS) to fully function . The System functioned quite
well until the mid 1960s, delivering an expansion of trade, rapid real growth and low inflation, but began
to unravel after 1965.32 Like the Gold Exchange standard in the 1920s it was plagued by three fatal flaws:
a) the adjustment problem where the deficit countries( e.g. UK) bore the brunt of adjustment and in the
face of nominal rigidities, faced falling real income and rising unemployment. Consequent expansionary
stabilization policy would then lead to a currency crisis and a rescue by the IMF and G10; b) the liquidity
problem in which ( like the 1920s) there was a perceived gold shortage made up by the use of the dollar
as the principal source of global liquidity. The U.S. as the key international reserve provider would run
persistent balance of payments deficits to provide the dollars to the more rapidly growing countries of
continental Europe and Japan. c) As outstanding dollar holdings increased relative to the US monetary
gold stock so did the likelihood of a run on the dollar creating a confidence problem as in the interwar.
The resulting Triffin( 1960) dilemma meant that the U.S. had to either follow contractionary monetary
policy leading to global deflation or else there needed to be created a new reserve asset. This dilemma
dominated international discussion throughout the 1960s and in the end leading to the creation of the
SDR( paper gold) in 1970.
Other stresses on the BWS system were: the decline in the role of sterling as an international reserve
currency and the periodic sterling crises ( 1959, 1963, 1966, 1967) ended by ever more massive rescues
until the final devaluation in 1967 and the ignominious exit of sterling ; the spoiler role played by France
in a repeat of its behaviour in the 1920s. This time the French resented the hegemonic role of the U.S. in
the IMS and from 1963 to 1968 (when France itself had a massive crisis) tried to undermine the dollar;
The U.S. began following an inflationary policy in 1965 to finance the Vietnam War and the Great
Society. This fostered global inflation and put increasing pressure on the surplus countries of Europe and
32

For the evidence see Bordo (1993).

17

Japan who joined the French in resisting the U.S. hegemony; the growth of the international financial
markets which increasingly were able to overcome capital controls, raising the likelihood of currency
crises.
The Bretton Woods system collapsed in a series of crises from 1968 to 1971. The U.S instituted a
panoply of controls and techniques to stem the loss of gold beginning with the Gold Pool in 1961, the
Interest Equalization Tax in 1963, the Federal Reserve Swap network, Roosa bonds and threats to
withdraw U.S. troops from Germany, to no avail. In the face of rising inflation the British and French
began converting their dollar holdings into gold in 1971 leading President Nixon to close the gold
window on August 15.
In the next two years continuous high level negotiations between the Americans and the other
advanced country players led to an attempt to restore the par value system with the Smithsonian
agreement of December 1971 in which the U.S. devalued the dollar and Germany and Japan revalued
their currencies. The reconstituted system only lasted a few months. A series of currency crises ended in
the spring of 1973 with the major countries abandoning their Bretton Woods pegs and the world shifted
permanently to a managed floating exchange rate regime under which the fundamentals of growth and
inflation determined the equilibrium exchange rate and central banks intervened to smooth perceived
volatility.

Sequel: From the Managed Float to the Euro.
The major advanced countries learned to operate in the non system of floating exchange rates just as
they had learned to operate under the classical gold standard. It took the Great Inflation of the 1970s to
instil the lesson of the importance of adhering to stable and predictable monetary rules. The 1970s was
characterized both by high and variable inflation and volatile exchange rate movements. There were on
going attempts to coordinate monetary , fiscal and exchange rate policies at annual Summit meetings
between the G7 and two major conferences ( the Plaza in 1986 and the Louvre in 1988) to try to reverse
a strong and then a weak dollar. The evidence is mixed on whether these arrangements were successful(
Funabashi 1990, Bordo, Humpage and Schwartz ( 2012).
One major attempt to construct a Bretton Woods like managed system was the development of the
European Monetary Union. The idea for European integration emerged after World War II leading to the
creation of the EEC in 1957. It was strongly believed that economic integration would permanently end

18

the problem of European wars. One key component of the European Common Market was the
Common Agricultural Policy ( CAP) which instituted a series of price controls, subsidies and transfers
amongst the members of the EEC. The CAP instituted based on the Bretton Woods parities of the EEC
member states was challenged by the move to floating. This problem plus a strong preference by France
for fixed exchange rates led to several attempts by the Europeans to reconstitute a Bretton Woods like
system( with widened bands and periodic realignments amongst the EEC members) in The Snake and
the Tunnel System of the 1970s and the European Monetary System in the 1980s( James 2012) .
Neither of these systems avoided periodic crises as had occurred under Bretton Woods, reflecting a
fundamental misalignment between the hard currency policies of Germany( also the Netherlands and
Austria) and the softer policies followed by Belgium , Italy and France. The Maastricht Treaty of 1992
was designed to eliminate the currency crisis problem by instituting the permanently fixed exchange
rates of a monetary union. Ignoring the lessons of history that successful monetary unions were closely
linked to a fiscal union and a political union(Bordo and Jonung 2000, Bordo, Jonung and Markiewicsz
2011 Bordo and James 2009), the framers of Maastricht believed that the members would maintain
fiscal discipline and that the monetary union would endogenously lead to greater real integration and
convergence of productivity differentials.
The plan seemed to work in the environment of rapid global growth in the 2000s . Subsequently
following the Financial Crisis of 2007‐2008 and the Great Recession, serious growth differentials and
fiscal strains among the members have emerged. A series of sovereign debt crises and banking crises is
leading to the realization that the lessons from the history of successful monetary unions may be correct
after all and that a fiscal union with tight constraints on the members fiscal balance will be required to
make the EMU project successful. To do this will require that the members of the euro zone give up
considerable political sovereignty. The future will reveal if this will really happen.

Conclusion
This paper has described the evolution of the International Monetary System from the” spontaneous
order” driven specie standard of the early nineteenth century to the slightly more managed gold
standard to the even more managed interwar gold exchange standard to the man‐made Bretton Woods
system and its successors in Europe. Bretton Woods collapsed in the early 1970s and has been
succeeded by the Managed Floating non system. Although there have been periodic attempts at policy
coordination, the present float has evolved to look a lot like the gold standard. The key to the gold
19

standard’s success was the credible adherence to the convertibility of national currencies to gold. The
key to the success of managed floating is the credible adherence by central banks to a credible low
inflation target or rule.
The European Monetary Union has several of the elements of the man‐made Bretton Woods system:
the failure of the adjustment mechanism between Germany and the peripheral countries ;the lack of
liquidity in the periphery; and the threat to confidence in the euro from the high costs of Germany
bailing out the defaulting periphery. Its current crisis has considerable resonance to earlier attempts to
create an artificial international monetary system. It will be interesting to see how long the Eurozone
system will survive.

20

Bibliography
Bernanke,B. ( 2000) Essays on the Great Depression. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bignon, Vincent, Marc Flandreau, and Stefano Ugolini (2012), “Bagehot for Beginners: The Making of
Lending of Last Resort Operations in the Mid‐19th Century”, Economic History Review. 65(2): 580‐608.
Bordo, M. and F. Kydland (1995), “ The Gold Standard as a Rule: An Essay in Exploration” Explorations in
Economic History October.
Bordo, M. and E. White (1991) "A Tale of Two Currencies: British and French Finance During the
Napoleonic Wars." Journal of Economic History, Vol. 51, No. 2, pp. 303‐316, (June 1991).
Bordo,M.( 1993) “ The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: An Historical Overview” in
M.Bordo and B. Eichengreen (eds) A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bordo, M and B. Eichengreen ( eds) ( 1993). A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press
Bordo, M. and A. Schwartz ( 1999) “ Under What Circumstances, Past and Present, Have International
Rescues of Countries in Financial Distress Been Successful?” Journal of International Money and Finance.
Vol 18, No.4. August pp 683‐708.
Bordo,M. and L. Jonung ( 2000) Lessons for the EMU from the History of Monetary Unions. Institute of
Economic Affairs. London
Bordo,M., L. Jonung and A. Markiewicsz ( 2011) “ A Fiscal Union for the Euro: Some Lessons from
History” NBER Working Paper 17380 September.
Eichengreen, B. (1984) “Central Bank Cooperation under the Interwar Gold Standard” Explorations in
Economic History 21, 64‐87.
Eichengreen, B. (1992) Golden Fetters: The gold standard the great depression, 1919‐1939. Oxford.
Feavearyear, A.E. (1931) The pound sterling, Oxford.
Flandreau,M. ( 1987) Central Bank Cooperation in Historical Perspective: A Skeptical View” Economic
History Review. Volume 50 Issue 4 November pp735‐763
Flandreau, M. (2004) The Glitter of Gold Oxford.
Flora, P with J. Alber, P. Eichenberg, J.K.F. Krausm, W. Pfenning, K. Seebohm, (1983) State Economy and
Society, 1815‐1975 Campus Verlag, Frankfurt.
Friedman,M. ( 1990) “ The Crime of 1873” Journal of Political Economy. Vol 98. No.6 Dec. Pp 1159‐1194

21

Y. Funabashi ( 1992). Managing the Dollar: From the Plaza to the Louvre. Institute of International
Economics. Washington. D.C.
Gallarotti,G. (1995) The Anatomy of an International Monetary Regime. Oxford University Press.
Goodhart, C. (1988) Evolution of Central Banks Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press
Hautcoeur, Pierre‐Cyrille, Angelo Riva and Eugene N. White (2012) "Bagehot on the Continent? How the
Banque de France Managed the Crisis of 1889" ms.
Holtfrerich, C‐L (1989) “The monetary unification process in 19th century Germany” in M. de Cecco and
A. Giovannini eds. A European Central Bank? Perspectives on monetary unification after ten years of the
EMS Cambridge
James, H. (1997) “Monetary and Fiscal Unification in 19th century Germany: What can Kohl learn from
Bismarck?” Essays in international finance, #202. Princeton.
James, H. ( 2012), Making the European Monetary Union. Harvard University Press
Keynes, J. (1930) The Applied Theory of Money. Republished: Macmillan, 1971.
Kindleberger, C. (1984) A Financial History of Western Europe London: George Allen & Irwin.
League of nations ( 1931). Second Interim Report of the Gold Delegation of the Financial Committee.
Issue 4. Geneva.
Legler, J., R. Sylla and J. Wallis (1987) “Banks and State Public Finance in the New Republic, 1790‐1860,"
Journal of Economic History 47 (June 1987), 391‐403.
Mitchell, B. (1988) British Historical Statistics Cambridge: University Press.
Moggridge, D (1969) Return to gold, 1925: the formulation of economic policy and its critics. Cambridge:
University Press.
Nurkse R. ( 1944) International Currency Experience: Lessons of the inter‐war period. League of Nations.
Geneva
Redish (1993a) “Anchors Aweigh” Canadian Journal of Economics. Vol 26, No. 4. (Nov) pp 777‐795.
Redish (1993b) “The Latin Monetary Union” in M. Bordoa nd F. Capie eds., Monetary regimes in
transition Cambridge: University Press.
Redish, A. (2000) Bimetallism: An historical and economic analysis New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Reti, S. (1998) Silver and Gold: The Political Economy of International Monetary Conferences, 1867‐1892
Westport: Greenwood Press.

22

Rockoff, H. and G. Walton (2010) History of the American Economy 11th edn. Gage: New York.
Russell, H.B. (1898) International Monetary conferences, their purposes, character and results. New York:
Harper & bros.
Sargent, T. (1982) “ The End of 4 big inflations” in R. Hall ed, Inflation: Causes and Effects, Cambridge,
Mass.: NBER, pp 41‐98
Sargent, T. and F. Velde (2002) The Big Problem of Small Change Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Selgin, George. (2003) "Gresham's Law". EH.Net Encyclopedia, edited by Robert Whaples. June 9, 2003.
URL http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/selgin.gresham.law
Smith, V. (1936) The Rationale of Central Banking Reprinted 1990, Liberty Press.
Tilly, R. (1966) “Germany, 1815‐70” in R. Cameron ed., Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 151‐182.
Triffin, R. (1960) Gold and the Dollar New Haven: Yale University Press.

23

Figure 1

Source: Francois Velde.

24

1803 France

Table 1
Coins and units of account in effect in 1850
Base Coin
Value of
Metal
coin
1f
1f
silver
20f
5f
gold

Fine weight(gms)
per ut of account
4.50/f
0.29/f

1834 US

$1
$10

$1
$10

silver
gold

24.06/$
1.505/$

1717 UK

Guinea

£1.1

gold

7.32/£

1838 Germany
Vereinmunze
2 thaler
silver
Sources: US, UK, France, Redish (2000); Germany Holtfrerich (1989).

Table 2
Mint parities under the Classical gold standard, 1880 ‐
Germany
France
Britain
Coin:
20 marks
20 francs
1 pound
gms fine gold:
7.166
5.806
7.322
mark
1 mark =
1 franc =
1 pound =
1 dollar =

mark
franc
pound
dollar

1
0.308
20.43
0.238
1 mark =
1
3.241
0.048
4.199

franc
1
25.22
0.193
1 franc =
1
0.40
5.183

pound

16.70/th

US
$10
15.046
dollar

1
0.205
1 pound =

1
1 dollar =

1
4.866

1

Sources: Sources: US, UK, France, Redish (2000); Germany Holtfrerich (1989).

25

