NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET DEREGULATION AND OPTIMAL MONETARY POLICY IN A MONETARY
UNION
Matteo Cacciatore
Giuseppe Fiori
Fabio Ghironi
Working Paper 19025
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19025
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

For helpful comments, we thank Francesco Giavazzi, Alexandre Jeanneret, Athanasios Orphanides,
Paolo Pesenti, and participants in seminars and conferences at Boǧaziçi University-CEE 2012 Annual
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Florida State University, Magyar Nemzeti Bank, NBER
IFM November 2012, North Carolina State University, Rutgers University, SED 2012, Société Canadienne
de Science Économique, University of California-Riverside, University of Oxford, UQAM, University
of Surrey, University of Virginia, and University of Washington. We are grateful to Jonathan Hoddenbagh
and Tristan Potter for outstanding research assistance. Remaining errors are our responsibility. Ghironi
thanks the NSF for financial support through a grant to the NBER. Work on this paper was done while
Ghironi was a Visiting Scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. The support of this institution
is also acknowledged with gratitude. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect those of the NBER, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, or Federal Reserve
policy.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Matteo Cacciatore, Giuseppe Fiori, and Fabio Ghironi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Market Deregulation and Optimal Monetary Policy in a Monetary Union
Matteo Cacciatore, Giuseppe Fiori, and Fabio Ghironi
NBER Working Paper No. 19025
May 2013
JEL No. E24,E32,E52,F41,J64,L51
ABSTRACT
The wave of crises that began in 2008 reheated the debate on market deregulation as a tool to improve
economic performance. This paper addresses the consequences of increased flexibility in goods and
labor markets for the conduct of monetary policy in a monetary union. We model a two-country monetary
union with endogenous product creation, labor market frictions, and price and wage rigidities. Regulation
affects producer entry costs, employment protection, and unemployment benefits. We first characterize
optimal monetary policy when regulation is high in both countries and show that the Ramsey allocation
requires significant departures from price stability both in the long run and over the business cycle.
Welfare gains from the Ramsey-optimal policy are sizable. Second, we show that the adjustment to
market reform requires expansionary policy to reduce transition costs. Third, deregulation reduces
static and dynamic inefficiencies, making price stability more desirable. International synchronization
of reforms can eliminate policy tradeoffs generated by asymmetric deregulation.
Matteo Cacciatore
HEC Montréal
Institute of Applied Economics
3000 chemin de la Côte-Sainte-Catherine
Montréal (Québec), Canada H3T 2A7
matteo.cacciatore@hec.ca
Giuseppe Fiori
North Carolina State University
Poole School of Management
Department of Economics
2801 Founders Dr, Box 8110
Raleigh (NC), 27695-8110
giuseppefiori@gmail.com

Fabio Ghironi
Boston College
Department of Economics
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467-3859
and NBER
fabio.ghironi@bc.edu

1

Introduction

The wave of crises that began in 2008 reheated the debate on market deregulation as a tool to
improve economic performance. Calls for removal, or at least reduction, of regulation in goods
and labor markets have been part of the policy discussions on both sides of the Atlantic.1 The
argument is that more flexible markets would foster a more rapid recovery from the recession
generated by the crisis and, in general, would result in better economic performance. Deregulation
of product markets would accomplish this by facilitating producer entry, boosting business creation,
and enhancing competition; deregulation of labor markets would do it by facilitating reallocation
of resources and speeding up the adjustment to shocks. Results in the academic literature support
these arguments, but they do not address the consequences of market deregulation for the conduct
of macroeconomic policy.2 In a recent IMF Staﬀ Discussion Note, Barkbu, Rahman, Valdés, and
Staﬀ (2012) discuss the eﬀects of market reforms in Europe and argue for these supply-side policies
to be accompanied by active policies supporting aggregate demand: When the benefits of structural
market reforms take time to materialize, there is room for demand-side macroeconomic policy to
reduce transition costs. Important questions remain open for researchers and policymakers: What
is the optimal policy response to the dynamics triggered by goods and labor market reform? How
does deregulation aﬀect the central bank’s long-run inflation target? And how does optimal policy
change as reforms aﬀect the characteristics of the business cycle?
This paper addresses these questions from the perspective of monetary policy in a monetary
union. We study how deregulation that increases flexibility in product and/or labor markets aﬀects
the long-run inflation target of the welfare-maximizing central bank of a monetary union; how
the central bank responds to the transition dynamics generated by the deregulation; and how
deregulation aﬀects the conduct of optimal monetary policy over the business cycle. We do this in
a two-country, dynamic, stochastic, general equilibrium (DSGE) model of a monetary union with
1

The title on the front page of the February 18, 2012 issue of The Economist (“Over-regulated America”) and the
discussion of increasing regulation of U.S. product markets are indicative of the attention to the issue in the United
States. In August of 2011, in the midst of Europe’s sovereign debt crisis, then European Central Bank President
Jean-Claude Trichet and President-to-be Mario Draghi took the unprecedented step of addressing a letter to the
Italian government making market deregulation a condition for the central bank’s intervention in support of Italian
government bonds. More recently, see President Draghi’s Introductory Statement to the press conference of September 6, 2012 (available at http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120906.en.html), or the European
Commission’s report on the European Union’s Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure of April 10, 2013 (available at
http://ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/publications/occasional_paper/2013/pdf/com(2013)_199_final_en.pdf).
2
In the recent literature, see, for instance, Bertinelli, Cardi, and Sen (2013), Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003),
Cacciatore and Fiori (2011), Dawson and Seater (2011), Ebell and Haefke (2009), Felbermayr and Prat (2011), Fiori,
Nicoletti, Scarpetta, and Schiantarelli (2012), Griﬃth, Harrison, and Macartney (2007), and Messina and Vallanti
(2007).

1

endogenous product creation subject to sunk costs as in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2012)–BGM
below–and search-and-matching frictions in labor markets as in Diamond (1982a,b) and Mortensen
and Pissarides (1994)–DMP below. The model contains the most parsimonious set of ingredients
that allow us to capture key empirical features of product and labor market regulation and reform.
Sunk entry costs in product markets reflect both a technological constraint and barriers to entry
induced by regulation. Deregulation of product markets reduces the size of sunk entry costs (by
cutting “red tape”). In labor markets, deregulation is modeled as a reduction of unemployment
benefits and employment protection (captured by the workers’ bargaining power). We introduce
nominal rigidities in the form of costly price and wage adjustment. We calibrate the model using
parameter values from the literature and to match features of macroeconomic data for Europe’s
Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and we show that the model successfully reproduces several
features of EMU’s business cycles when the union’s central bank follows an interest rate rule that
reproduces the historical behavior of the European Central Bank (ECB). We then study how
deregulation aﬀects the optimal monetary policy chosen by a Ramsey central bank in a variety of
scenarios for the monetary union, including the possibility of product and labor market asymmetries
across countries.
We find that regulation in goods and labor markets has a significant eﬀect on optimal monetary
policy. First, when regulation is high, the Ramsey-optimal policy prescribes a positive long-run
inflation target of 12 percent and significant departures from the historical Taylor rule (which,
in turn, approximates a policy of price stability). Total welfare gains from optimal policy are
not negligible: Implementing the optimal policy increases welfare by approximately 05 percent of
annual steady-state consumption under the historical rule. Second, the optimal response to product
and/or labor market deregulation is more expansionary than historical behavior, with a beneficial
eﬀect on welfare during the transition.3 When the eﬀects of deregulation are fully materialized, the
welfare gap between historical and Ramsey policy is narrower, and price stability is more desirable
both in the long run and over the business cycle, for the country that undertakes reforms. The
welfare gap, however, remains large in the country that does not deregulate its markets. Third, there
are gains from international synchronization of market reforms: The welfare gain from deregulation
under the Ramsey-optimal policy is larger if market reforms are implemented simultaneously across
countries.
3

In the case of joint product and labor market deregulation in one country, the welfare gain from the Ramseyoptimal policy (relative to historical policy) over a five-year horizon is 026 percent of annual pre-deregulation steadystate consumption in the country that deregulates and 046 percent in the other.

2

The intuition for our results is straightforward. We show that high regulation in goods and
labor markets implies that steady-state markups are too high and job creation too low. Ineﬃciency
wedges with respect to the first-best allocation are sizable. Regulation makes cyclical unemployment
fluctuations too volatile, which amplifies their welfare cost. The Ramsey policymaker uses positive
long-run inflation to mitigate long-run ineﬃciencies, and (s)he uses departures from price stability
over the cycle to stabilize job creation (at the cost of more volatile product creation).
Deregulation (even asymmetric across countries) reduces real distortions in goods and labor
markets. Since the benefits take time to materialize, the Ramsey central bank expands monetary
policy more aggressively than the historical ECB to generate lower markups and boost job creation along the transition. Once the beneficial eﬀects of reforms are fully materialized, there is less
need of positive long-run inflation to close ineﬃciency gaps, and price stability over the cycle is
less costly for economies that deregulated their markets. International spillovers from asymmetric
deregulation across countries are positive but small. As a result, the costs of the historical policy of
near-price stability continue to be relatively high in rigid countries, at approximately 05 percent of
annual steady-state consumption. The welfare benefits of optimal policy depend on the union-wide
pattern of deregulation. Asymmetric deregulation introduces a new policy tradeoﬀ for the Ramsey
central bank, because optimal policy must strike a balance between countries that diﬀer in the
desirability of price stability both in the long run and over the cycle. Internationally synchronized
reforms remove this tradeoﬀ, resulting in larger welfare gains from optimal policy: Market reforms
are beneficial for welfare under both historical and Ramsey-optimal policy, but they are more beneficial if monetary policy is chosen optimally, and the benefit increases if reforms are synchronized.
From the perspective of deregulating countries, the welfare benefit of optimal policy relative to
the historical Taylor rule is larger if optimal policy is implemented in a symmetrically deregulated
monetary union.
Before discussing how our paper contributes to the literature, we note what the paper does not
do. While the recent crises have re-heated the debate on market reform, this debate pre-dates the
crises (for instance, Blanchard and Giavazzi’s, 2003, seminal article). Therefore, we do not cast our
exercise in terms of a crisis response–in which deregulation may be implemented as part of the
response to a crisis–and our results on monetary policy do not provide a lens to interpret the ECB’s
behavior during Europe’s sovereign debt crisis.4 We assume that deregulation lowers producer entry
4
The zero lower bound on interest rates is among the concerns for current monetary policymaking in the Euro Area.
We verified that this constraint never binds in our exercises. For the implications of this constraint for structural
reforms in Europe, see Eggertsson, Ferrero, and Raﬀo (2013). However, their model does not feature producer entry

3

costs, unemployment benefits, and employment protection in the European countries in our model
to the corresponding levels in the United States. We abstract from optimal regulation, fiscal policy
considerations (including fiscal aspects of market regulation), and strategic interactions between
policymakers, and we assume full commitment in all our policy exercises, including full commitment
to permanent deregulations. (The assumption of commitment in our analysis of monetary policy is
standard practice in the literature on Ramsey-optimal policy.) We also abstract from distributional
consequences of reforms. While these are important topics for future research, our choices were
motivated by the goal of obtaining a set of intuitive, benchmark results.
Our paper contributes to the recent literature that studies how endogenous entry and product
variety aﬀect business cycles and optimal policy in closed and open economies.5 In this literature,
our work is most closely related to Cacciatore and Fiori (2011), who study the consequences of
product and labor market deregulation in a flexible-price BGM-DMP model.6 We extend Cacciatore
and Fiori’s model to a two-country, monetary-union framework with sticky prices and wages to
study the interaction of deregulation and monetary policy. We share the finding of a positive
optimal inflation target with Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2011)–BFG below: As in that paper,
an ineﬃciency wedge in product creation is among the reasons for the Ramsey central bank to use
positive long-run inflation, but our model features a wider menu of sources of ineﬃciency, with
the labor margin aﬀected by distortions that are absent in BFG. These labor market distortions
would imply a positive optimal inflation target even if product creation were eﬃcient in our model.
Moreover, diﬀerently from BFG, we find that the interaction of distortions in our model results in
sizable departures from price stability over the business cycle.
The paper is also related to the vast literature on monetary transmission and optimal monetary
dynamics and DMP labor market frictions. They treat reforms as exogenous reductions in price and wage markups
in a standard two-country New Keynesian model of a monetary union.
5
On entry and product variety over the cycle in closed-economy models, and related evidence, see BGM and
references therein. Cacciatore and Fiori (2011) and Shao and Silos (2008) extend the BGM model to incorporate
DMP search-and-matching frictions. Colciago and Rossi (2011) augment the BGM-DMP framework to consider
the consequences of Bertrand or Cournot competition between large firms. Entry over the business cycle in open
economies is a key mechanism in Cacciatore (2010), Contessi (2010), Ghironi and Melitz (2005), Rodríguez-López
(2011), and Zlate (2010), among others. On optimal policy with endogenous producer entry, see Bergin and Corsetti
(2008, 2013), Bilbiie, Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2011), Cacciatore and Ghironi (2012), Chugh and Ghironi (2011), Faia
(2012), and Lewis (2010), among others. Auray and Eyquem (2011) and Cavallari (2011) study the role of monetary
policy for shock transmission in two-country versions of the BGM model, but they do not analyze optimal monetary
policy. Auray and Eyquem find that policies of price stability in each country imply welfare costs relative to interest
rate rules with moderate responses to output.
6
Cacciatore and Fiori extend the analysis of Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) to a DSGE framework. This allows
Cacciatore and Fiori to study the transition dynamics following goods and labor market deregulation, as well as
its eﬀects on the business cycle. A result of their exercise is that deregulation reduces the persistence and overall
volatility of fluctuations, but amplifies the impact eﬀect of shocks.

4

policy in New Keynesian models.7 In particular, we contribute to the strand of this literature that
incorporates labor market frictions. Arseneau and Chugh (2008) study optimal monetary (and
fiscal) policy in a DMP model with sticky nominal wages; Faia (2009) focuses on the case of sticky
prices; while Thomas (2008) considers both wage and price rigidity. Diﬀerent from us, Faia and
Thomas find that zero long-run inflation is optimal (because the steady state is not distorted in
Thomas’ exercise, while DMP distortions and the eﬀect of monopoly power on equilibrium labor are
not suﬃcient to motivate positive long-run inflation in Faia’s sticky-price setup). Optimal long-run
inflation can be positive in Arseneau and Chugh, depending on the scenario they consider. All three
papers, like us, find that it is optimal to deviate from price stability over the business cycle, but
deviations are small in Faia and Thomas.8 Blanchard and Galí (2010) modify the standard DMP
framework by replacing vacancies with a hiring cost, and they combine sticky prices with rigid real
wages.9 Our result that a policy of price stability is costly in highly regulated economies is consistent
with Blanchard and Galí’s findings on the consequences of labor market imperfections for optimal
monetary policy. Finally, by allowing for asymmetries between countries in our monetary union,
we contribute to the study of optimal monetary policy in economies with potentially heterogeneous
regions or sectors.10 While we cast our model and discussion in terms of a two-country monetary
union and we choose EMU for our calibration, it is straightforward to re-cast the model (and
re-calibrate it) to apply its lessons to the United States (itself a monetary union of states with
potentially asymmetric state-level regulations).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 describes
monetary policy: We consider a historical rule for the ECB’s interest rate setting and the Ramseyoptimal policy. To build intuition for the tradeoﬀs facing the Ramsey authority, Section 4 discusses
the distortions and ineﬃciency wedges that characterize the market economy. Section 5 studies
optimal monetary under high regulation. Section 6 addresses the consequences of deregulation for
monetary policy. Section 7 discusses the benefits from international synchronization of reforms.
Section 8 concludes.
7

See Galí (2008), Walsh (2010), Woodford (2003), and references therein.
Larger volatility of inflation arises in Arseneau and Chugh’s sticky-wage DMP model with exogenous government
spending and Ramsey-optimal monetary and tax policy. Government spending alone has been shown to imply
deviations from price stability in a variety of environments. See Adão, Correia, and Teles (2003), Khan, King, and
Wolman (2003), and Woodford (2003, Ch. 6.5).
9
See Galí (2011), Galí, Smets, and Wouters (2011), and Zanetti (2007) for an alternative to DMP search-andmatching frictions in New Keynesian models emphasizing indivisible labor and workers’ monopoly power.
10
Aoki (2001) and Benigno (2004) focus on heterogeneity in nominal rigidity.
8

5

2

The Model

We model a monetary union that consists of two countries, Home and Foreign. Foreign variables
are denoted with a superscript star. We use the subscript  to denote quantities and prices of a
country’s own goods consumed domestically, and the subscript  to denote quantities and prices
of exports. We focus on the Home economy in presenting our model, with the understanding that
analogous equations hold for Foreign. We abstract from monetary frictions that would motivate a
demand for cash currency in each country, and we model our monetary union as a cashless economy
following Woodford (2003).
Each economy in the union is populated by a unit mass of atomistic households, where each
household is an extended family with a continuum of members along the unit interval. In equilibrium, some family members are unemployed, while others are employed. As common in the
literature, we assume that family members perfectly insure each other against variation in labor
income due to changes in employment status, so that there is no ex post heterogeneity across
individuals in the household (see Andolfatto, 1996, and Merz, 1995).
Household Preferences
The representative household in the Home economy maximizes the expected intertemporal utility
P
−
function  ∞
[( ) −  ( )], where  ∈ (0 1) is the discount factor,  is a consump= 
tion basket that aggregates domestic and imported goods as described below,  is the number of

employed workers, and  denotes hours worked by each employed worker. Period utility from
consumption, (·), and disutility of eﬀort, (·), satisfy the standard assumptions.
∗ of Home and Foreign consumption
The consumption basket  aggregates bundles  and 

varieties in Armington form with elasticity of substitution   0:
¸ 
∙
−1
−1
1
1
∗ −1


 = (1 − )   +   


0    1

A similar basket describes consumption in the Foreign country. In each country’s consumption
basket, 1 −  is the weight attached to the country’s own output bundle and captures the degree
of home bias in preferences. Preferences are biased in favor of domestic goods whenever  
12. The consumption-based price index that corresponds to the basket  is given by  =
h
i 1
1−
∗1− 1−
+ 
. Departures of  from 12 induce deviations from purchasing power
(1 − )
6

parity in our model, implying  6= ∗ (except in a symmetric steady state).
Following BGM, the number of consumption goods available in each country is endogenously
determined. Denote with Ω and Ω∗ the overall numbers of Home and Foreign goods over which
∗ are defined. At any given , only subsets of goods Ω
the preference aggregators  and 


⊂ Ω and Ω∗ ⊂ Ω∗ are actually available for consumption at Home.
∗ take a translog form following Feenstra (2003a,b).
We assume that the aggregators  and 
∗ (and
As a result, the elasticity of substitution across varieties within each sub-basket  and 
∗ and 

 in the Foreign consumption basket) is an increasing function of the number of goods

available. The translog assumption allows us to capture the pro-competitive eﬀect of goods market
deregulation on (flexible-price) markups. As shown in BGM and Cacciatore and Fiori (2011), lower
entry barriers in production of goods result in increased entry, a larger number of available goods,
and–by inducing higher substitutability–lower markups.1112
Translog preferences are characterized by defining the unit expenditure function (i.e., the price
index) associated with the preference aggregator. Let  () be the price of a variety  produced
and sold at Home, and ∗ (∗ ) the price of a variety  ∗ produced in the Foreign country and
exported to Home. The unit expenditure function on the basket of domestic goods  is given by:

ln  =

1
2
+

µ

1
1
−
 ̃


2

Z

¶
Z

1
+


∈Ω  0 ∈Ω

Z

ln  ()

∈Ω

ln  ()(ln  () − ln  ( 0 ))0 

where   0,  is the total number of Home products available at time , and ̃ is the mass of
11
As argued in BGM, a demand-, preference-based explanation for time-varying, flexible-price markups is empirically appealing because the data show that most entering and exiting firms are small, and much of the change in
the product space is due to product switching within existing firms, pointing to a limited role for supply-driven
competitive pressures in markup dynamics.
12
Translog preferences have been found to have appealing empirical properties in a variety of contexts. BGM
show that translog preferences and endogenous producer entry result in markup dynamics that are remarkably close
to U.S. data. Bergin and Feenstra (2000, 2001) find that a translog expenditure function makes it possible for
macro models to generate empirically plausible endogenous persistence by virtue of the implied demand-side pricing
complementarities. Rodríguez-López (2011) obtains plausible properties for exchange rate pass-through, markup
dynamics, and cyclical responses of firm-level and aggregate variables to shocks. For a review of applications of the
translog expenditure function in the trade literature, see Feenstra (2003b).

7

∗ is instead given by:
Ω . The unit expenditure function on the basket of imported goods 

∗
ln 

=

1
2
+

µ

1
1
−
∗

̃ ∗


2∗

Z

¶
Z

1
+ ∗


∗ ∈Ω∗  ∗0 ∈Ω∗

Z

ln ∗ (∗ ) ∗

 ∗ ∈Ω∗

ln ∗ ( ∗ )(ln ∗ ( ∗ ) − ln ∗ ( ∗0 )) ∗  ∗0 

where ∗ is the total number of Foreign products available at time , and ̃ ∗ is the mass of Ω∗ .13
Production
In each country, there are two vertically integrated production sectors. In the upstream sector,
perfectly competitive firms use labor to produce a non-tradable intermediate input. In the downstream sector, monopolistically competitive firms purchase intermediate inputs and produce the
diﬀerentiated varieties that are sold to consumers in both countries. This production structure
greatly simplifies the introduction of labor market frictions in the model.
Intermediate Goods Production
There is a unit mass of intermediate producers. Each of them employs a continuum of workers.
Labor markets are characterized by search and matching frictions as in the DMP framework. To hire
new workers, firms need to post vacancies, incurring a cost of  units of consumption per vacancy
posted. (Results are not aﬀected significantly if we assume quadratic costs of vacancy posting.) The
probability of finding a worker depends on a constant-return-to-scale matching technology, which
converts aggregate unemployed workers,  , and aggregate vacancies,  , into aggregate matches,
 = 1−   where   0 and 0    1. Each firm meets unemployed workers at a rate
 ≡   . As in Krause and Lubik (2007) and other studies, we assume that newly created
matches become productive only in the next period. For an individual firm, the inflow of new hires
in  + 1 is therefore   , where  is the number of vacancies posted by the firm in period . In
equilibrium,   =  .
13

Since we will abstract from producer heterogeneity and endogenous determination of the range of traded consumption variety, the total number of Home (Foreign) varieties available to Home (Foreign) consumers will also be the
number of varieties imported by Foreign (Home). This will imply (Ω ) = (Ω ), (Ω ) = (Ω ),
(Ω∗ ) = (Ω∗ ), and (Ω∗ ) = (Ω∗ ). Ghironi and Melitz (2005) introduce heterogeneity and
endogenous determination of the traded set in an international macroeconomic model with C.E.S. Dixit-Stiglitz
preferences.

8

Firms and workers separate exogenously with probability  ∈ (0 1).14 Separation happens only
between firms and workers who were active in production in the previous period. As a result the
law of motion of employment,  (those who are working at time ), in a given firm is given by
 = (1 − )−1 + −1  −1 .
As Arsenau and Chugh (2008), we use Rotemberg’s (1982) model of nominal rigidity and assume
that firms face a quadratic cost of adjusting the hourly nominal wage rate,  . The real cost of
changing the nominal wage between period  − 1 and  is  2 2 per worker, where  ≥ 0 is in
units of consumption, and   ≡ ( −1 ) − 1 is the net wage inflation rate. If  = 0, there is no
cost of wage adjustment.
The representative intermediate firm produces output  =     , where  is exogenous aggregate productivity. The assumption of a unit mass of intermediate producers ensures that 
is also the total output of the intermediate sector. We assume that  and ∗ follow a bivariate
(1) process in logs, with Home (Foreign) productivity subject to innovations  (∗ ). The diagonal elements of the autoregressive matrix Φ, Φ11 and Φ22 , measure the persistence of exogenous
productivity and are strictly between 0 and 1, and the oﬀ-diagonal elements Φ12 and Φ21 measure
productivity spillovers. The productivity innovations  and ∗ are normally distributed with zero
mean and variance-covariance matrix Σ∗ .
Intermediate goods producers sell their output to final producers at a real price  in units of
consumption. Intermediate producers choose the number of vacancies,   , and employment,  , to
maximize the expected present discounted value of their profit stream:


∞
X
=



− 



µ
¶

 2
  −   −    
    −

2

where  denotes the marginal utility of consumption in period , subject to the law of motion
of employment. Future profits are discounted with the stochastic discount factor of domestic
households, who are assumed to own Home firms.
Combining the first-order conditions for vacancies and employment yields the following job
creation equation:
14

Endogenous separation would require the introduction of worker heterogeneity. In principle, this would make it
possible to study the consequences of reductions in firing costs as in Cacciatore and Fiori (2011). However, introducing
worker heterogeneity in the presence of nominal wage stickiness would pose a complicated technical challenge. While
abstracting from these ingredients is a limit in the light of policy debates (for instance, in Italy), we conjecture based
on Cacciatore and Fiori’s results that the additional complication would not alter our main messages.

9

½
∙
¸¾

+1
 2

=   +1 (1 − )
+ +1 +1 +1 −
+1 −  +1 

+1
+1
2

(1)

where  +1 ≡ +1  is the one-period-ahead stochastic discount factor. The job creation
condition states that, at the optimum, the vacancy creation cost incurred by the firm per current
match is equal to the expected discounted value of the vacancy creation cost per future match,
further discounted by the probability of current match survival 1 − , plus the future profits from
the time- match. Profits from the match are the diﬀerence between the future marginal revenue
product from the match and its wage cost, including nominal wage adjustment costs.
Wage and Hours The nominal wage is the solution to an individual Nash bargaining problem,
and the wage payment divides the match surplus between workers and firms. Due to the presence
of nominal rigidity, we assume that bargaining occurs over the nominal wage rather than the real
wage, following Arseneau and Chugh (2008), Gertler, Sala, and Trigari (2008), and Thomas (2008).
With zero costs of nominal wage adjustment ( = 0), the real wage that emerges would be identical
to the one obtained from bargaining directly over the real wage. This is no longer the case in the
presence of adjustment costs.
We relegate the details of wage determination to the Appendix. We show there that the equilibrium sharing rule can be written as    = (1 −  ) , where   is the equilibrium bargaining
share of firms,  is worker surplus, and  is firm surplus (see the Appendix for the expressions).
As in Gertler and Trigari (2009), the equilibrium bargaining share is time-varying due to the presence of wage adjustment costs. Absent these costs, we would have a time-invariant bargaining share
  = , where  is the weight of firm surplus in the Nash bargaining problem. Importantly, wage
rigidity implies that   is procyclical, and its steady-state level is an increasing function of wage
and product price inflation.
The bargained wage satisfies:
¶
µ
¶
 2
( )
+  + (1 −   )    −  

2
½
∙
¸¾


+  +1 +1 (1 − )(1 −   ) − (1 −  −  )(1 −  +1 )
 +1


 =  


µ

(2)

where ( ) +  is the worker’s outside option (the utility value of leisure plus an unemployment benefit ), and  is the probability of becoming employed at time , defined by  ≡
  . With flexible wages, the third term in the right-hand side of this equation reduces to
10

¡
¢
(1 − )    +1 +1 , or, in equilibrium,  (1 − )   . In this case, the real wage bill per worker

is a linear combination–determined by the constant bargaining parameter –of the worker’s outside option and the marginal revenue product generated by the worker (net of wage adjustment

costs) plus the expected discounted continuation value of the match to the firm (adjusted for the
probability of employment). The stronger the bargaining power of firms (the higher ), the smaller
the portion of the net marginal revenue product and continuation value to the firm appropriated
by workers as wage payments, while the outside option becomes more relevant. When wages are
sticky, bargaining shares are endogenous, and so is the distribution of surplus between workers and
firms. Moreover, the current wage bill reflects also expected changes in bargaining shares.
As common practice in the literature, we assume that hours per worker are determined by
firms and workers in a privately eﬃcient way to maximize the joint surplus of the employment
relation,  +  . (See, among others, Thomas, 2008, and Trigari, 2009.) Maximization yields a
standard intratemporal optimality condition for hours worked that equates the marginal revenue
product of hours per worker to the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure:
  =   , where  is the marginal disutility of eﬀort.
Final Goods Production
In each country, there is a continuum of monopolistically competitive final-sector firms, each of
them producing a diﬀerent variety.15 Final goods are produced using domestic intermediate inputs,
and they are sold domestically and abroad.16
The producer of final good  at Home faces the following domestic and Foreign demands for
its output:
 () = (1 − ) ln
 () =  ln

µ

µ

̄
 ()

̄
 ()

¶

¶


 ()


 ()

µ

µ





∗

¶−

¶−

 

∗ 

(3)

(4)

15
Following the convention in BGM, Ghironi and Melitz (2005), and much macroeconomic literature, we refer to an
individual final-good producer as a firm. However, as discussed in BGM and Ghironi and Melitz (2005), final-sector
productive units in the model are best interpreted as product lines at multi-product firms whose boundaries we leave
unspecified by exploiting continuity. In this interpretation, producer entry and exit capture the product-switching
dynamics within firms documented by Bernard, Redding, and Schott (2010).
16
We do not assume separate productivity shocks in the final production sector, which implies that marginal
production cost in this sector is simply  . However, if we re-cast intermediate-sector firms as the “labor-intensive”
departments of (integrated) final-sector firms,  measures the eﬀectiveness of labor in final goods production.

11

where
ln ̄ =

1
1
+
 

Z

ln  ()

and

ln ̄ =

1
1
+
 

∈Ω

Z

ln  ()

∈Ω

are the maximum prices that a domestic producer can charge in the Home and Foreign markets while
still having a positive market share. In the demand expressions (3) and (4),  and ∗ denote
aggregate demand of the final consumption basket at Home and abroad, recognizing that aggregate
demand of the final basket in each country includes sources other than household consumption.
Aggregate demand in each country takes the same Armington form as the country’s consumption
basket, with the same elasticity of substitution   0 between demand sub-bundles of Home and
∗ at Home, and  ∗ and 
Foreign products ( and 
 in Foreign), which take the same translog


form as the sub-bundles in consumption. This ensures that the consumption price index and the
price sub-indexes for the translog consumption aggregators in each country are also the price index
and sub-indexes for aggregate demand of the final basket and sub-bundles.
Absent trade costs, and since all goods are traded in the model, the law of one price holds,
implying that:  () =  () and ̄ = ̄ . Diﬀerently from Bergin and Feenstra (2001),
translog preferences do not imply pricing-to-market in our model. This happens because producers
face the same elasticity of substitutions across domestic and export markets when all goods are
traded.17 The only diﬀerence implied by translog preferences relative to the C.E.S. case is that
the symmetric elasticity of substitution is not constant, but it varies in response to changes in the
number of competitors.
Total demand for final Home producer  can then be written as:
 () +  () =  ln

µ

̄
 ()

¶


 ()

µ




¶− h
i
(1 − ) +  ∗ 

We introduce price stickiness by following Rotemberg (1982) and assuming that final producers
must pay a quadratic price adjustment cost Γ () ≡  2 () ()( () +  ())2, where
 ≥ 0 determines the size of the adjustment cost (prices are flexible if  = 0) and   () ≡
( ()−1 ()) − 1.18 When a new final-good firm sets the price of its output for the first time,
17

See the Appendix for the proof. The absence of trade barriers from our model is consistent with the operation
of the European Union’s Single Market. Transition to the euro narrowed price dispersion across country markets
(Martin and Méjean, 2013), supporting the law of one price as a reasonable first approximation to reality.
18
The total real adjustment cost can be interpreted as the bundle of goods that the firm needs to purchase when
implementing a price change. The size of this bundle is assumed to be larger when the size of the firm (measured by

12

we appeal to symmetry across producers and interpret the  − 1 price in the expression of the price
adjustment cost as the notional price that the firm would have set at time  − 1 if it had been
producing in that period. An intuition for this simplifying assumption is that all producers (even
those that are setting the price for the first time) must buy the bundle of goods Γ () when
implementing a price decision.19

h
³
´
i
Total real profits are given by  () =  () 1 −  2 ()2  −  ( () +  ()).

All profits are returned to households as dividends. Firms maximize the expected present discounted
∞
X
value of the stream of current and future real profits: 
[(1 − )]− (  )  (). Future
=

profits are discounted with the Home household’s stochastic discount factor, as Home households

are assumed to own Home final goods firms. As discussed below, there is a probability  ∈ (0 1)
that each final good producer is hit by an exogenous, exit-inducing shock at the end of each period.
Therefore, discounting is adjusted for the probability of firm survival.
Optimal price setting implies that the (real) output price  () ≡ ()  is equal to a
markup  () over marginal cost  :  () =  () . The endogenous, time-varying markup
 () is given by  () ≡  () [( () − 1) Ξ ], where  () = − ln ( () +  ())  ln  ()
denotes the price elasticity of total demand for variety , and:

Ξ ≡ 1 −  2 ()
2
⎧
⎫
⎨
⎬
(  () + 1)   ()

h
³
´i
+

+1 () +1 ()++1 ()
⎭
 () − 1 ⎩ − 
+1 (1 − ) ( +1 () + 1)  +1 ()  ()
 ()+ ()


There are two sources of endogenous markup variation in our model: First, translog preferences

imply that substitutability across varieties increases with the number of available varieties. As a
consequence, the price elasticity of total demand facing producer  increases when the number
of Home producers is larger. Second, price stickiness introduces an additional source of markup
variation as the cost of adjusting prices gives firms an incentive to change their markups over time
its revenue) increases.
19
As noted in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008a), this assumption is consistent with both Rotemberg (1982)
and our timing assumption below. Specifically, new entrants behave as the (constant number of) price setters in
Rotemberg, where an initial condition for the price is dictated by nature. In our framework, new entrants at any time
 who start producing and setting prices at  + 1 are subject to an analogous assumption. Moreover, the assumption
that a new entrant, at the time of its first price decision, knows what will turn out to be the average Home product
price last period is consistent with the assumption that entrants start producing only one period after entry, hence
being able to observe the average product price during the entry period. Symmetry of the equilibrium will imply
−1 () = −1 ∀. Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008a) show that relaxing the assumption that new price setters
are subject to the same rigidity as incumbents yields significantly diﬀerent results only if the average rate of product
turnover is unrealistically high.

13

in order to smooth price changes across periods. When prices are flexible ( = 0), only the first
source of markup variation is present, and the markup reduces to  ()( () − 1).
Given the law of one price, the real export price (relative to the Foreign price index ∗ ) is given
by  () ≡  ()∗ =  ()∗ =  () =  ()  , where  is the consumptionbased real exchange rate:  ≡ ∗  .
Producer Entry and Exit Prior to entry, final sector firms face a sunk entry cost  in
units of intermediate input.20 Sunk entry costs reflect both a technological constraint ( ) and
administrative costs related to regulation ( ), i.e.,  ≡  +  . In every period , there is
an unbounded mass of prospective entrants in the final goods sector in each country. Prospective
entrants are forward-looking and form rational expectations of their future profits  in any period
   subject to the exogenous probability  of incurring an exit-inducing shock at the end of each
period. Following BGM and Ghironi and Melitz (2005), we introduce a time-to-build lag in the
model and assume that entrants at time  will start producing only at  + 1. Prospective entrants
compute their expected post-entry value  , given by the expected present discounted value of the
P
−
stream of per-period profits  :  =  ∞
(  )  . Entry occurs until
=+1 [ (1 − )]

firm value is equalized to the entry cost, leading to the free entry condition  =   .21 Our

assumptions on exit shocks and the timing of entry and production imply that the law of motion
for the number of producing Home firms is given by  = (1 − )(−1 + −1 ).
Household Budget Constraint and Intertemporal Decisions
The representative household can invest in two types of assets: shares in mutual funds of finalsector and intermediate-sector firms and a non-contingent, internationally traded bond denominated
in units of the common currency.22 Investment in the mutual fund of final-sector firms in the
stock market is the mechanism through which household savings are made available to prospective
entrants to cover their entry costs. Since there is no entry in the intermediate sector (and, therefore,
no need to channel resources from households for the financing of such entry), we do not model
trade in intermediate-sector equity explicitly, but simply assume that the profits of intermediate
20
This assumption replicates the assumption in BGM and Ghironi and Melitz (2005) that the same input is used
to produce existing varieties and create new ones.
21
This condition holds as long as the mass of new entrants  is positive. We verify that this condition is never
violated in our exercises.
22
For simplicity, we assume extreme home bias in equity holdings and rule out international trade in firm shares.
See Hamano (2011) for a version of the Ghironi-Melitz (2005) model with international trade in equities.

14

sector firms are rebated to households in lump-sum fashion.23
Let  be the share in the mutual fund of Home final-sector firms held by the representative
household entering period . The mutual fund pays a total profit in each period (in units of
currency) that is equal to the total profit of all firms that produce in that period,    . During
period , the representative household buys +1 shares in a mutual fund of  +  firms (those
already operating at time  and the new entrants). Only a fraction 1 −  of these firms will produce
and pay dividends at time  + 1. Since the household does not know which firms will be hit by the
exogenous exit shock  at the end of period , it finances the continuing operation of all pre-existing
firms and all new entrants during period . The date  price of a claim to the future profit stream of
the mutual fund of  +  firms is equal to the average nominal price of claims to future profits
of Home firms,   .
Let +1 denote nominal bond holdings at Home entering period  + 1. To induce steady-state
determinacy and stationary responses to temporary shocks in the model, we follow Turnovsky (1985)
and, more recently, Benigno (2009), and we assume a quadratic cost of adjusting bond holdings
 (+1  )2 2 (in units of Home consumption). This cost is paid to financial intermediaries whose
only function is to collect these transaction fees and rebate the revenue to households in lump-sum
fashion.
The Home household’s period budget constraint is:

+1 + 
2

µ

+1


¶2

+   + +1 ( +  )   =

(1 +  )  +    ( +  ) +    +   (1 −  ) +  +  +  
where  is the nominal interest rate on the internationally traded bond (the policy instrument of
the monetary union’s central bank),  is a lump-sum transfer (or tax) from the government, 
is a lump-sum rebate of the cost of adjusting bond holdings from the intermediaries to which it
is paid, and  is a lump-sum rebate of profits from intermediate goods producers.24 We use the
23
Even if intermediate producers are perfectly competitive, our assumptions on the labor market imply that their
profits are not zero. To understand this, note that as long as the wage negotiated by workers and firms is inside the
bargaining set (and, therefore, smaller than or equal to the firm’s outside option), the surplus from a match that goes
to the firm is positive. Since all workers are identical, the total surplus of the intermediate sector is positive, and so
is the profit rebated to households.
24
In equilibrium,
2





 +1
 = −  (1 −  ) ,  = 
, and  =      −
  −  −  2  
2


2

15

timing convention in Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (1995) for the nominal interest rate: +1 is the interest
rate between  and  + 1, and it is known with certainty in period .
Let +1 ≡ +1  denote Home real bond holdings. Euler equations for bond and share
holdings are:
1 +  +1


¸
+1
1

=  (1 + +1 ) 
 (1 +  +1 )
¸
∙
+1
=  (1 − ) 
(+1 + +1 ) 

∙

where   ≡ ( −1 ) − 1 is net consumer price inflation. As expected, forward iteration of the
equation for shares and absence of speculative bubbles yield the expression for firm value used in
the free entry condition above.25 We present the details of the symmetric equilibrium of our model
economy in the Appendix, and we limit ourselves to presenting the law of motion for net foreign
assets below.
Net Foreign Assets and the Trade Balance
Bonds are in zero net supply, which implies the equilibrium condition +1 +  ∗+1 = 0 in all
periods. We show in the Appendix that Home net foreign assets are determined by:
+1 =

1 + 
∗
 +    − ∗  ∗ 

1 +  

Denoting the real interest rate with  , we have 1 +  = (1 +  )  (1 +   ), and the change in net
foreign assets between  and +1 is determined by the current account: +1 − =  ≡   +  ,
∗ .
where   is the trade balance:   ≡    − ∗  ∗ 

3

Monetary Policy

To close the model described in the previous section, we must specify the behavior of monetary
policy. We compare the Ramsey-optimal conduct of monetary policy to a representation of historical
behavior for the central bank, captured by a standard rule for interest rate setting in the spirit
of Taylor (1993), Woodford (2003), and much other literature. Before describing this interest-rate
setting rule, however, we must address an issue that concerns the data that are actually available
25

We omit the transversality conditions that must be satisfied to ensure optimality.

16

to the central bank in its historical policymaking, and hence the empirically-relevant variables that
enter the theoretical representation of historical policy. We turn to this issue next.
Data-Consistent Variables and Historical Monetary Policy
In the presence of endogenous producer entry and preferences that exhibit “love for variety,” variables measured in units of consumption do not have a direct counterpart in the data. This point is
highlighted by Ghironi and Melitz (2005). As the economy experiences entry of Home and Foreign
firms, the welfare-consistent aggregate price index  can fluctuate even if product prices remain
constant. In the data, however, aggregate price indexes do not take these variety eﬀects into account.26 To resolve this issue, we follow Ghironi and Melitz (2005) and BGM and introduce the
1

data-consistent price index ̃ ≡ Ω−1  , where Ω is an adjustment for product variety defined by:
Ω ≡ (1 − ) exp

Ã

̃ − 
2 ̃

!

+  exp

Ã

̃ ∗ − ∗
2̃ ∗ ∗

!



where exp() denotes the exponential of  to avoid confusion with the notation for firm value.
Given any variable  in units of consumption, we then construct its data-consistent counterpart
1

as  ≡  Ω−1 . (Additional details are in the Appendix.)
The European Central Bank has a mandate of price stability defined in terms of a (harmonized)
index of consumer price inflation. Since we will calibrate the model to features of EMU, this
motivates our specification of the historical rule for interest-rate setting as a rule in which policy
responds to movements in a country-weighted average of data-consistent CPI inflation and dataconsistent GDP gaps relative to the equilibrium with flexible wages and prices:
h
¢ ³  ´ i1−
¡
1 + +1 = (1 +  ) (1 + ) 1 + ̃ 
̃


1

1

(5)
1

∗1

2
∗2

2
2
where ̃ 
 ≡ ̃  ̃  is data-consistent, union-wide CPI inflation, and ̃ ≡ ̃ ̃ is the data1

∗1

consistent, union-wide GDP gap. (All union-wide variables below are defined as  ≡ 2  2 .)
Table 1 summarizes the key equilibrium conditions of the model, including the policy rule
(5). We rearranged some equations appropriately for transparency of comparison to the planner’s optimum obtained below, which we will use to build intuition for the tradeoﬀs facing the
Ramsey policymaker. The table contains 21 equations that determine 21 endogenous variables of
26

There is much empirical evidence that gains from variety are mostly unmeasured in CPI data, as documented
most recently by Broda and Weinstein (2010).

17

interest:   ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗     ∗ ∗    ∗      ∗      ∗  +1   and
+1 . (Other variables that appear in the table are determined as described above.)
Ramsey-Optimal Monetary Policy
The Ramsey authority maximizes aggregate welfare under the constraints of the competitive economy. Let {Λ1   Λ20 }∞
=0 be the Lagrange multiplier associated to the equilibrium conditions in
Table 1 (excluding the interest-rate setting rule).27 The Ramsey problem consists of choosing
∗
   +1  +1 }∞
{    ∗      ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗    ∗  +1  +1
=0 

and {Λ1   Λ20 }∞
=0
to maximize:
0

∞
X
=0





∙

¸
1
1
∗
∗
∗
( ( ) −   ( )) + ( ( ) −   ( ))
2
2

(6)

subject to the constraints in Table 1 (excluding the interest rate rule).28
As common practice in the literature, we write the original non-stationary Ramsey problem in
a recursive stationary form by enlarging the planner’s state space with additional (pseudo) co-state
variables. Such co-state variables track the value to the planner of committing to the pre-announced
policy plan along the dynamics.
The Ramsey planner uses its policy instrument (the interest rate) to address the consequences
of a set of distortions that exist in the market economy. To understand these distortions and the
tradeoﬀs they create for optimal policy, it is instructive to compare the equilibrium conditions of
the market economy summarized in Table 1 to those implied by the solution to a first-best, optimal
planning problem. This allows us to define ineﬃciency wedges for the market economy (relative to
the planner’s optimum) and describe Ramsey policy in terms of its implications for these wedges.
27

We assume that the other variables that appear in the table have been substituted out by using the appropriate
equations and definitions above.
28
In the primal approach to Ramsey policy problems described by Lucas and Stokey (1983), the competitive
equilibrium is expressed in terms of a minimal set of relations involving only real allocations. In the presence of sticky
prices and wages, it is impossible to reduce the Ramsey planner’s problem to a maximization problem with a single
implementability constraint.

18

4

Ineﬃciency Wedges

In this section, we discuss the sources of distortion in the market economy by comparing the market
outcome to the first-best allocation chosen by a benevolent social planner for the monetary union
as a whole. We present the details of the planning problem in the Appendix. Table 2 summarizes
the equilibrium conditions for the eﬃcient allocation.
Comparing the equilibrium conditions in the decentralized economy (Table 1) to those for the
planned economy (Table 2) allows us to identify the distortions at work in our model and define
ineﬃciency wedges relative to the eﬃcient allocation. Table 3 summarizes the distortions that
characterize the decentralized economy.
Our model features several sources of distortion: Some are familiar ingredients in New Keynesian
macroeconomics; Others arise from our microfoundation of product and labor market dynamics
and frictions. The distortions aﬀect five margins of adjustment and the resource constraint for
consumption output:
• Product creation margin: Comparing the term in square brackets in equation (7) in
Table 1 to the term in square brackets in equation (7) in Table 2 implicitly defines the
ineﬃciency wedge along the market economy’s product creation margin (see the Appendix for details). The wedge Σ  is a combination of several distortions. Bilbiie, Ghironi,
and Melitz (2008b) show that time-variation of markups is ineﬃcient. In our model, the
markup is time-varying because of translog preferences and sticky prices. We summarize
this source of ineﬃciency with the distortion eﬀect Υ ≡ −1  − 1. Moreover, both
price stickiness and translog preferences imply that the (time-varying) net markup is not
aligned with the benefit of product variety to consumers, resulting in the misalignment ef´
³
fect Υ ≡ −1 1 − 1 −  2 2 − 1(2 ). These distortions are at work in Bilbiie,
Fujiwara, and Ghironi (2011–BFG, as denoted in the Introduction). The product creation

margin in our model is distorted also by the existence of a non-technological component,  ,
of the overall entry cost,  , which results in the regulation distortion Υ ≡  .29 Absent
these distortions (Υ = Υ = Υ = 0), the product creation wedge Σ  is equal to 1.
• Job creation margin: Comparing the term in square brackets in equation (9) in Table 1
29
Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) and Chugh and Ghironi (2011) consider the case  = − 
  and discuss
in
a
firstor
second-best
environment,
respectively. We
the determination of optimal product creation subsidies  

focus on the consequences of an exogenous deregulation that reduces non-technological barriers to entry, abstracting
from the issue of optimal entry subsidies (or taxes).

19

to the term in square brackets in equation (9) in Table 2 implicitly defines the ineﬃciency
wedge along the market economy’s job creation margin (see the Appendix for details; equation
(11) in Table 1 determines the real wage in the market economy). The wedge Σ is also
a combination of several distortions. Monopoly power distorts the job creation decision by
inducing a suboptimally low return from vacancy posting, captured by Υ ≡ (1 ) −
1. Failure of the Hosios condition (for which equality of the firm’s bargaining share and
the vacancy elasticity of the matching function is necessary for eﬃciency) is an additional
distortion in this margin, measured by Υ ≡   − . This is aﬀected both by the flexiblewage value of the bargaining share (, which can be diﬀerent from ) and the presence
of wage stickiness, which makes the equilibrium bargaining share endogenous to inflation.
Therefore, sticky wages are suﬃcient to generate a wedge between private and social returns
to vacancy posting. Moreover, sticky wages distort job creation also by aﬀecting the outside
option of firms through the additional term Υ  ≡  2 2. Finally, unemployment benefits
increase the workers’ outside option above its eﬃcient level: Υ ≡ . (As for product market
regulation, we do not discuss the optimal determination of unemployment benefits, and we
simply take  as exogenous.) When Υ = Υ = Υ = Υ  = 0, the real wage is
determined by

( )
 = 
+ (1 − )   +  (1 − )   


and the job creation wedge Σ is equal to 1.
• Labor supply margin: With endogenous labor supply, monopoly power in product markets
induces a misalignment of relative prices between consumption goods and leisure. This is the
distortion that characterizes standard New Keynesian models with monopolistic competition.
Following established practice, we define the associated wedge as the reciprocal of the markup:
Σ ≡ 1 , which is time-varying for the presence of translog preferences and sticky prices.
This distortion is at work also in BFG. Eﬃciency along this margin requires Σ = 1 (or
Υ = 0). (The prescription of price stability that arises from many New Keynesian models in
which price stickiness is the only cause of markup variation can be interpreted as a prescription
of smoothing the dynamics of the wedge Σ .)
• Cross-country risk sharing margin: Incomplete markets imply ineﬃcient risk sharing
between Home and Foreign households, resulting in the distortion Υ ≡ ( ∗   )  .
The departure of relative consumption from the perfect risk sharing outcome is also aﬀected by
20

the costs of adjusting bond holdings (the distortion Υ ≡  +1 and its Foreign mirror image
in the Euler equations for Home and Foreign holdings of bonds). We summarize the combined
eﬀect of these distortions with the financial ineﬃciency wedge Σ ≡ ( ∗   )  =
Υ . Eﬃciency along this margin requires Σ = 1.
• International relative price margin: Adjustment of international relative prices in the
model is summarized by the condition that ties real exchange rate dynamics to relative in´
³
flation in consumer price indexes:  −1 = 1 +  ∗  (1 +   ). With sticky wages and
prices, as long as the model does not satisfy the conditions such that a fixed exchange rate is
optimal, monetary union distorts this margin of adjustment by removing adjustment through
the nominal exchange rate.30 Unfortunately, this distortion cannot be summarized by an
analytically defined wedge relative to the planner’s optimum, because the planned economy
does not feature nominal rigidity. (A consequence of this is that there is no expression for
this distortion in Table 3.)
• Consumption resource constraint: Sticky wages and prices and “red tape” imply diversion of resources from consumption and creation of new product lines and vacancies, with the
distortions Υ  ≡  2 2, Υ  ≡  2 2, and Υ . The associated wedge (defined by the
sum of these distortions: Σ   ≡ Υ  + Υ  + Υ  ) is zero under flexible wages and
prices, and without “red tape” in product creation.
The market allocation is eﬃcient only if all the distortions are eliminated and the associated
ineﬃciency wedges are closed at all points in time. Eﬃciency can be achieved only if the following
two conditions are jointly satisfied: (i) Countries are fully symmetric at each point in time; and
(ii) governments in each country have access to an appropriate set of distortionary and lump-sum
fiscal instruments that are optimally chosen together with monetary policy. Full symmetry across
countries is required to overcome the consequences of financial market incompleteness and the fixed
nominal exchange rate. Optimal fiscal policy realigns benefit from variety and markup, eliminates
the eﬀects of monopoly power, and sets unemployment benefits and product regulation (as modeled
in our paper) to zero.31 In the symmetric case, optimal monetary policy would then set producer
price inflation to zero (which would also ensure zero wage inflation under full symmetry). Since we


With flexible exchange rates, it would be  −1 = 1 + ∗   [(1 +  ) −1 ], where  is the nominal
exchange rate (units of Home currency per unit of Foreign currency). Note that this distortion from the irrevocably
fixed exchange rate is at work also when asset markets are complete.
31
See Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) and Chugh and Ghironi (2011) for discussions of optimal fiscal policy in
the BGM model.
30

21

abstract from optimal fiscal policy and focus on asymmetric shocks, it follows that we work in a
second-best environment in which the eﬃcient allocation cannot be achieved. In this second-best
environment, the Ramsey central bank optimally uses its leverage on the economy via the stickyprice and sticky-wage distortions, trading oﬀ their costs (including the resource costs) against the
possibility of addressing the distortions that characterize the market economy under flexible wages
and prices. As we show below, although the model features multiple distortions, several of them
have the same qualitative implications for optimal policy. Therefore, the Ramsey central bank
actually faces a small number of policy tradeoﬀs–with intuitive policy implications–both in the
long run and over the business cycle.

5

Optimal Monetary Policy with High Market Regulation

We begin our discussion of optimal policy by characterizing the Ramsey-optimal monetary policy in
the presence of high market regulation. First, we discuss the tradeoﬀs that determine the long-run
policy outcome and the Ramsey allocation over the business cycle. Then we turn to a numerical
illustration that substantiates these intuitions. In all the figures below, the impulse responses of the
ineﬃciency wedges that we plot show the percent changes of the wedge deviations from eﬃciency.
Tradeoﬀs and Intuitions
Optimal Monetary Policy in the Long Run
It is immediate to verify that long-run inflation is always symmetric across countries regardless of
symmetry or asymmetry of the calibration. This result follows from the presence of a common
nominal interest rate in the monetary union and the steady-state Euler equations of households:
1 +  = 1 +   = (1 + ) = 1 +  ∗ = 1 +  ∗ . Moreover, wage inflation is always equal to producer
price inflation:   =  .
Our interest in this section is in how the Ramsey central bank determines the optimal common
inflation rate   to address the distortions discussed in Section 4. To begin understanding policy
incentives in the long run, notice that a symmetric long-run equilibrium with constant endogenous
variables eliminates some of these distortions: A constant markup removes the markup variation
distortion from the product creation margin (Υ = 0); Symmetry across countries removes the
risk-sharing distortion of incomplete markets, and constant, zero net foreign assets eliminate the
eﬀect of asset adjustment costs; Finally, symmetry also eliminates the international relative price

22

distortion of monetary union by implying  = 1 (as a result of symmetry, Υ = Σ = 1 and
Υ = 0).
All the remaining steady-state distortions but the costs of wage and price adjustment require
a reduction of markups. As discussed in Bilbiie, Ghironi, and Melitz (2008b) and BFG, translog
preferences imply that the steady-state, flexible-price markup is higher than the benefit of product
variety to the consumer. Ceteris paribus, this results in suboptimal product creation. Smaller
net markups contribute to realigning the firms’ incentive for product creation and the consumers’
benefit from variety. Moreover, a smaller markup narrows the wedge in labor supply and results in
increased vacancy posting by firms. A decrease in steady-state markups can be achieved by means
of positive net inflation. At the same time, since   =   , positive inflation implies a departure
from the Hosios condition (the steady-state level of   rises above ), increasing the bargaining
power of firms. Compared to the zero inflation outcome, the Ramsey authority chooses a positive
long-run inflation rate that reduces the ineﬃciency wedges in product creation (Σ  ), job creation
(Σ ), and labor supply (Σ ). However, the Ramsey authority must trade the beneficial welfare
eﬀects of reducing these distortions against the costs of non-zero inflation implied by allocating
resources to price and wage changes and by the departure from the Hosios condition.
Optimal Monetary Policy over the Business Cycle
Stochastic fluctuations in aggregate productivity modify the policy tradeoﬀs facing the Ramsey
authority by reintroducing the distortions eliminated by symmetry and absence of time variation
in steady state. Moreover, Ramsey-optimal long-run policy does not close the remaining steadystate ineﬃciency wedges completely. Thus, the Home and Foreign economies fluctuate around a
steady state where markups and unemployment are ineﬃciently high. As a result, shocks trigger
larger fluctuations in product and labor markets (in both economies) than in the eﬃcient allocation:
Both producer entry and unemployment are suboptimally volatile.
What are the policy tradeoﬀs facing the Ramsey central bank over the business cycle? First,
as in steady state, there is a tension between the beneficial eﬀects of manipulating inflation and its
costs. Second, there is a tradeoﬀ between stabilizing price inflation (which contributes to stabilizing
markups) and wage inflation (which stabilizes unemployment) in the country aﬀected by a shock.
Therefore, it is impossible to stabilize unemployment and markups jointly. Third, there is a tension
between stabilizing the Home and Foreign economies in response to asymmetric shocks.
These three policy tradeoﬀs explain why a policy of price stability can be suboptimal: Under this
23

policy, wage inflation is too volatile, and markup stabilization correspondingly too strong. Following
fluctuations in aggregate productivity, sticky wages and positive unemployment benefits generate
real wage rigidities, i.e., a positive (negative) productivity shock is not fully absorbed by the rise
(fall) of the real wage, aﬀecting job creation over the cycle. Higher Home productivity pushes the
real wage above its steady-state level, as the real value of existing matches has increased. Under a
policy of price stability, the eﬀect of wage stickiness is magnified, since the real wage becomes even
more rigid. Firms post too many vacancies and, in equilibrium, nominal wage adjustment costs are
too large.32
Numerical Illustration
We now present the results of a numerical exercise that substantiates the intuitions above and allows
us to evaluate the welfare gains from implementing optimal policy relative to the ECB’s historical
behavior. We interpret periods as quarters and calibrate the model to match Euro Area macroeconomic data from 1985:Q1 to 2007:Q4. Table 4 summarizes the calibration, which is assumed
symmetric across countries. (Variables without time indexes denote steady-state levels. Following
standard practice, we set parameter values so that the model replicates long-run features of the
data in the zero-inflation steady state.) A detailed description of our calibration is in the Appendix. There, we also provide a detailed discussion of the impulse responses to a Home productivity
shock and the second-moment properties of the model under the historical policy. We show that
the model successfully replicates several features of the Euro Area business cycle, including (at
least qualitatively) moments that represent a traditional challenge for international business cycle
models. The Appendix presents also a summary of results obtained from a sensitivity analysis
on the values of several key parameters. Our results are robust to the alternative calibrations we
consider.
Long Run
Table 5 shows that the optimal long-run target for net inflation under the high regulation scenario
of our historical calibration is indeed positive and equal to 120 percent–in the range of the ECB’s
mandate. (All results in Table 5 and the following tables are annualized.) The finding of an optimal
positive long-run inflation is in contrast with the prescription of near zero inflation delivered by
32
Notice, however, that a policy that completely stabilizes wage inflation is also suboptimal. In this case, there
would be too much inflation and markup volatility, and the response of unemployment would be too small.

24

the vast majority of New Keynesian models. While the costs of inflation outweigh the benefits of
reducing other distortions in those models, this is no longer the case with a richer microfoundation
of product and labor markets.33
Table 5 also presents the welfare gain from implementing the long-run optimal policy relative
to the ECB’s historical behavior. We measure the long-run welfare gains of the Ramsey policy
in the two countries (which are equal by symmetry) by computing the percentage increase ∆
in consumption that would leave the household indiﬀerent between policy regimes. To compute
this welfare gain avoiding spurious welfare reversals, we assume identical initial conditions across
diﬀerent monetary policy regimes and include transition dynamics in the computation. Specifically,
we assume that all the state variables are set at their steady-state levels under the historical policy at
time  = −1, regardless of the monetary regime from  = 0 on. (Details on our welfare computations
are in the Appendix.) Table 5 shows that the welfare gains from the Ramsey-optimal policy amount
to approximately 021 percent of annualized steady-state consumption.34
Business Cycle
Figure 1 (dashed lines) shows impulse responses to a Home productivity increase under the Ramseyoptimal policy. Solid lines present the responses under the historical policy, explained in detail in
the Appendix. The figure includes the impulse response of investment, defined as  ≡   .
Consistent with the intuition above, the Ramsey authority generates a smaller increase in wage
inflation and a larger departure from price stability (disinflation) at Home relative to the historical
rule (which implements a policy of near price stability, defined as zero deviation of inflation from
trend). Both prices and wages fall in Foreign. Unemployment falls at Home, but the optimal
policy causes it to rise in Foreign. Historical ECB behavior (and price stability) result in positive
employment comovement across countries. In contrast, the Ramsey authority pushes unemployment
rates in opposite directions by engineering wage disinflation rather than inflation in the Foreign
country and a reduction in Foreign firms’ bargaining share. This results in higher unemployment in
the relatively less productive economy. In the Home country, producers have a weaker incentive to
post vacancies as more stable wage inflation implies that their eﬀective bargaining power rises by
33

A similar result arises in BFG’s closed economy model with a Walrasian labor market and flexible wages. Cacciatore and Ghironi (2012) show that labor market frictions and sticky wages are suﬃcient to generate significant
departures from zero optimal long-run inflation under flexible exchange rates. We experimented with lower values
of the price stickiness parameter  and found higher values of optimal long-run inflation as its cost decreases. Price
indexation generates the same result in BFG.
34
Our results are not sensitive to the choice of (identical) initial conditions for the state variables.

25

less than under the historical policy. Lower job creation translates into smaller employment gains,
which reduces domestic aggregate demand for Home and Foreign goods. Trade linkages and risk
sharing imply positive comovement of GDP and consumption across countries under both historical
and optimal policies. While the standard New Keynesian prescription of price stability amounts to
a prescription of procyclical monetary policy, with expansion in response to favorable productivity
shocks to mimic the flexible-price equilibrium, optimal policy in our monetary union with multiple
distortions is more countercyclical than historical behavior. The Ramsey central bank induces a
larger drop in inflation (and markups) in both countries following an expansionary shock at Home
(and it expands more aggressively in the opposite case of a contractionary shock).35
Table 6 shows that the welfare loss from not implementing optimal policy over the business cycle
is 019 percent of annualized, steady-state consumption: Optimal departures from price stability
lower the cost of business cycles from 094 percent of steady-state consumption under the historical
policy to 075 percent. Overall, the implementation of optimal monetary policy over the cycle and
in the long run increases welfare by approximately 05 percent of steady-state consumption under
the market status quo.

6

Optimal Monetary Policy and Market Deregulation

How does market deregulation aﬀect optimal monetary policy? Structural policy changes pose a
set of challenges for the central bank. First, reforms have permanent eﬀects that may alter the
optimal long-run inflation target. Second, monetary policy can shape the dynamic adjustment to
the new long-run equilibrium during the transition period. Third, deregulation aﬀects the way
economies respond to aggregate shocks, with consequences for the optimal conduct of monetary
policy over the business cycle. Finally, new policy tradeoﬀs emerge for the central bank if deregulation is asymmetric across members of the monetary union, raising the question of desirability of
coordinated reforms. We use numerical illustrations to substantiate the general intuitions that we
weave in the discussion below.
In our exercises, product market deregulation is interpreted as a permanent decrease of regulatory barriers to product creation,  . Labor market reform is instead a permanent reduction of
unemployment benefits, , and employment protection, proxied by the workers’ bargaining power
35

In the standard New Keynesian model, higher inflation is associated with a falling markup. The contemporaneous
occurrence of falling inflation and markups in our model is a result of labor market frictions that induce marginal
costs to rise in the impact period of expansionary shocks. It follows that markups must fall to ensure falling output
prices.

26

parameter 1 −  as in Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003). We treat deregulations as unanticipated,
permanent policy shocks that are fully implemented in the impact period.36 We assume that the
policy parameters  , , and 1 −  are lowered to the corresponding U.S. levels, a standard benchmark for flexible markets. Pissarides (2003) reports that it takes (on average) 9 days to fulfill entry
requirements in the U.S. The implied value of  is 016. Unemployment benefits, , are tied to the
average replacement rate  (). The U.S. replacement rate documented by OECD (2004) is 054.
To pin down the change in workers’ bargaining power 1 − , we use the fact that U.S. employment
protection legislation indexes reported by OECD (2004), adjusted for worker coverage by our own
calculations, are approximately one third of those for European countries. The implied value of
1 −  is 025, not far from the estimates in Flinn (2006).
Dynamic Adjustment and Long-Run Eﬀects of Market Deregulation
We begin by studying the optimal monetary policy response to Home market deregulation during
the transition dynamics and in the long run.37 Given the large size of the deregulation shocks,
we compute the responses to these shocks without relying on local approximations by using the
Newton-type algorithm first proposed by Laﬀargue (1990). The details of the algorithm can be
found in Juillard (1996).
Product Market Deregulation
To understand the optimal monetary policy response to product market deregulation, it is useful
first to inspect the dynamic adjustment and new long-run equilibrium under historical policy. As
shown in Figure 2 (solid lines), a reduction in barriers to entry at Home generates profitable investment opportunities and product creation. Under financial autarky, this would require households to
cut consumption and increase savings to finance the expansion in entry: Since incumbents and new
entrants are not more productive, expansion of entry after deregulation requires higher saving under
financial autarky, as noted by Ghironi and Melitz (2005). With an open capital account, increased
36

Deregulations involving changes in legislation are likely anticipated by the time they happen, and deregulations
may be implemented over time. However, our assumption is a useful benchmark in the absence of information on the
duration of parliamentary debates, legislative processes, and implementation periods.
37
It could be argued that the initial scenario we consider–in which both countries start at high levels of regulation
and one of them deregulates–captures features of the dynamics after Germany’s structural reforms initiated by then
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder in 2003. The current debate in Europe would have the countries with rigid markets
catch up with Germany. Our model does not capture the tax reductions that were part of the German experience.
We explored the scenario in which Foreign deregulates its markets starting from a situation in which Home’s markets
are already flexible. The dynamics of the Foreign country in that case are very similar to those of the Home country
described below. Details are available on request.

27

entry can also be financed by borrowing from abroad. As a result, the deregulating economy runs
a current account deficit during the first part of the transition.38 Consumption rises on impact at
Home as part of the external borrowing is used to increase current consumption in anticipation of
higher permanent future income. Producer entry boosts job creation, lowering unemployment, and
wages increase. The initial eﬀect of a product market reform is inflationary, which erodes markups
on impact. Financial and trade linkages imply significant spillovers to Foreign along the transition.
As Foreign consumers invest at Home, Foreign consumption falls, and unemployment rises. Furthermore, Home’s terms of trade (  ≡  ∗ ) improve in response to the deregulation, with
a negative wealth eﬀect abroad.
In the second part of the transition, the larger number of available domestic products lowers
markups at Home, boosting GDP, consumption and job creation. In turn, the Foreign economy
recovers due to increased demand for its products at Home.
How do the responses to deregulation change under the Ramsey-optimal policy? As before,
we assume that initial conditions are given by the rigid steady state under the historical policy
(which features zero inflation). Figure 2 (dashed lines) shows that the Ramsey policy generates
higher consumption and lower unemployment in the first two years after the reform. The Ramsey
allocation initially induces smaller product creation by increasing inflation, i.e., reducing the real
present discounted value of entry. This happens because the economy starts from a situation in
which markups are too high, Υ  0, and incumbents are too small, Υ  0. However, the
Ramsey planner anticipates that the new long-run equilibrium will feature lower markups and a
larger number of producers of more significant size. Therefore, the optimal policy reduces markups,
boosts incumbent firm size, and increases employment at Home in anticipation of these long-run
eﬀects. Relative to historical policy, the Ramsey-optimal policy reduces the job creation wedge Σ
during the transition to the new long-run equilibrium. The product creation wedge Σ  , instead,
falls on impact but is then temporarily widened. This happens because the short-run increase in
inflation translates into lower product creation in the immediate aftermath of the deregulation.
Employment, GDP, and consumption in the Foreign, rigid economy are also favorably aﬀected
by the Ramsey policy on impact due to the larger demand for Foreign goods in the deregulating
economy. The optimal policy reduces the job creation wedge during the transition also in Foreign.
38

The current account initially deteriorates across all deregulation scenarios we consider. Policymakers (for instance,
ECB President Mario Draghi in his September 6, 2012 press conference) and academic literature (for instance,
Corsetti, Martin, and Pesenti, 2013) often refer to market reforms as a way to improve competitiveness and rebalance
external positions. Our results show that the beneficial eﬀects of structural reforms may come at the cost of weaker
current accounts at least initially.

28

Similar to Home, the product creation wedge falls on impact, but then increases, associated with
lower product creation in the relatively less attractive business environment during the transition.
Finally, notice that both Home and Foreign benefit from improved risk-sharing under the Ramseyoptimal policy, i.e., the ineﬃciency wedge Σ is reduced at each point in time relative to the
historical policy.
As time passes, the diﬀerences between Ramsey policy and historical rule vanish, at least in
the deregulating economy. In the long run, Home product market deregulation reduces (or leaves
virtually unaﬀected) all Home and Foreign ineﬃciency wedges with the exception of cross-country
risk-sharing. The optimal long-run inflation target remains positive but is smaller than under high
regulation.
To understand this result, it is useful to inspect how deregulation aﬀects ineﬃciency wedges in
the long run. First, recall that the markup is constant in steady state, and so Υ = 0. Moreover,
under the historical long-run zero net inflation, the Hosios condition implied by our calibration
ensures that  =  and Υ = Υ = Υ = 0. Finally, product market regulation does not
change the value of unemployment benefits, leaving Υ unaﬀected. Thus, three distortions remain
at the zero-inflation steady state: Υ = ( − 1) − 1 (2 ), the misalignment between the consumers’ benefit from variety and the profit incentives for new entrants; Υ = (1) − 1, measuring
the monopoly power distortion on labor supply and job creation; and Υ = ( ∗   ) , the
incomplete markets distortion (because the deregulation created an asymmetry across countries).
As barriers to entry fall, the number of products in the economy increases. With zero net inflation, the fall in markups due to increased competition is larger than the reduction in the consumers’
¢
¡
benefit from variety, since Υ  = −1 2 2  0. It follows that lower regulatory costs re-

duce the misalignment between benefit from variety and incentives for product creation. Moreover,
¢
¡
the reduction in markups also reduces the distortion Υ ,since Υ  = −1  2  0. In-

termediate input producers have stronger incentives to post vacancies, households have stronger
incentives to supply eﬀort, and employment and hours get closer to the respective eﬃcient levels.

Finally, given the asymmetric nature of the reform, the incomplete markets wedge is wider by
construction. Absent complete markets, the increase in Home consumption is not fully shared by
Foreign.
Long-run responses under the Ramsey-optimal policy are very similar to those under the historical rule because the reduction in the first two distortions dominates the planner’s incentives
and results in lower steady-state optimal inflation (107 percent, as shown in Table 5).
29

Table 5 shows that product market reform is highly beneficial for the deregulating country
already under the historical policy, as welfare gains amount to 5 percent of annualized consumption
at Home. There is a modest prosper-thy-neighbor eﬀect, as welfare rises by approximately 02
percent of steady state consumption in Foreign.39
Table 5 also reveals that the welfare gains from implementing the optimal policy response to
deregulation are positive but not large, in particular for the reforming country (the relative gain
is approximately 01 percent of steady state consumption). In other words, welfare gains from the
optimal policy along the transition have little impact on the lifetime welfare eﬀect of the reform,
which is dominated by the reduction of long-run ineﬃciency wedges operated by the deregulation.
The welfare gain from Ramsey policy is also reduced in Foreign, but to a smaller extent: Product
market distortions in the rigid economy are still in place, and welfare gains from non-zero long-run
inflation are more significant at 02 percent of steady-state consumption.
Before turning to the eﬀects of labor market reform, it is worth briefly discussing a potential
policy tradeoﬀ posed by asymmetric deregulation in a monetary union. As noted above, long-run
inflation rates are equalized across countries regardless of asymmetric regulation. This suggests
that, in the presence of asymmetric reforms, the Ramsey authority faces–at least in principle–an
additional tradeoﬀ: While a flexible product market requires less inflation, the rigid member of
the monetary union still benefits from a higher long-run inflation target. As a result, the optimal
policy must strike a balance between these two opposing needs. Table 5 shows that the Ramsey
central bank makes both countries better oﬀ. Even if Ramsey inflation is not as high as without any
deregulation, Home’s reform has positive international spillovers that reduce the need for inflation
abroad.
Labor Market Deregulation
We now study the consequences of a Home labor market reform in which unemployment benefits,
, and employment protection legislation, , are lowered to their corresponding U.S. levels. As
before, we begin by describing the dynamic adjustment and the long-run equilibrium under the
historical monetary policy. As shown by Figure 3 (solid lines), labor market reform immediately
boosts aggregate consumption, since households immediately increase demand in anticipation of
39

We find that market deregulation improves welfare at Home and abroad across all the exercises we perform.
However, the welfare eﬀects of the reforms are not clear-cut ex ante: Although each individual form of regulation
is distortionary in the model, it is the interaction of regulatory and other distortions with monetary policy that
determines the welfare outcome in our second-best environment.

30

higher future income. Diﬀerent from product market reform, producer entry drops in the aftermath
of labor market deregulation. As vacancy posting increases, the expected cost of filling a vacancy
rises, pushing up the equilibrium price of intermediate inputs. This makes producer entry more
costly. In a sense, incumbent firms have a competitive advantage relative to potential entrants
since they do not have to incur the sunk cost to benefit from the labor market reform.
The international adjustment to an asymmetric labor market reform also does not involve costs
for the non-reforming trading partner. A larger increase in Home’s aggregate demand generates
positive spillovers for Foreign consumption and employment. These positive eﬀects are short-lived,
however. As time passes, falling wages in the flexible economy lower marginal costs, and terms of
trade depreciation induces expenditure switching toward Home goods. Current account deficit in
the first part of the transition allows Home households to sustain higher consumption in anticipation
of the long-run increase in income.
The adjustment under the Ramsey-optimal policy implies smaller markups and higher employment along the transition. This results in a smaller wedge in job creation margin, with a temporary
increase in the product creation wedge, both at Home and Foreign. The intuition mirrors that for
product market reform. Regardless of the nature of deregulation, the Ramsey authority ensures
that inflationary pressure stimulates job creation and reduces markups along the first part of the
transition, before the positive eﬀects of deregulation are fully materialized. The eﬀects of Ramsey
policy in the Foreign economy are large and positive during the transition, since consumption and
employment comove positively with Home.
Table 5 shows that labor market reform is highly beneficial for the deregulating country, with
a welfare gain of approximately 35 percent of steady-state consumption. Moreover, the reform
generates some positive welfare eﬀects also in the Foreign economy. To understand this result,
notice that changes in labor market regulation directly aﬀect two distortions: The reduction in
unemployment benefits brings the workers’ outside option closer to the (real) costs of labor eﬀort,
lowering real wages and stimulating vacancy posting. The increase in the firms’ bargaining power,
instead, implies that  is now greater than the elasticity of matches to vacancies, , a departure
from the Hosios condition. It turns out that the labor market reform is beneficial even if the Hosios
condition is violated post-deregulation. In our second best environment, the rigid, distorted steady
state features suboptimally low job creation: The increase in  brings employment closer to the
social optimum.
As before, the discrepancies between Ramsey and historical allocations vanish in the long run.
31

As time passes, the need to stimulate vacancy posting and reduce markups is reduced since deregulation per se reduces ineﬃciency wedges. Table 5 shows that the optimal level of long-run inflation
falls in response to asymmetric labor market deregulation. Mirroring product market deregulation,
the welfare gain from implementing the optimal monetary policy in response to the labor market
deregulation is not large for the reforming economy. The positive eﬀects of smaller long-run distortions dominate results, narrowing the welfare gap between historical and Ramsey policy at Home.
The Ramsey policy instead remains relatively more desirable in the Foreign country.
Product and Labor Market Deregulation
Figure 4 presents the adjustment following joint deregulation in goods and labor markets. The
dynamic adjustment qualitatively mirrors that to product market reform. Quantitatively, the
positive eﬀect on consumption and employment is reinforced on impact and in the long run. Table
6 shows that joint market reform is more beneficial than deregulation of product or labor market
alone, even if there is some substitutability across reforms, since the welfare gain is smaller than
the sum of the gains from individual reforms.40 The relative gain from Ramsey policy (with respect
to the historical rule) becomes even smaller for the reforming country since reform of both markets
further reduces real distortions in the new long-run equilibrium.
Deregulation and Optimal Monetary Policy over the Business Cycle
Market deregulation aﬀects domestic and international adjustment to aggregate shocks. As a result,
it alters the policy tradeoﬀs facing the central bank over the business cycle. In this section, we
study these eﬀects and evaluate their consequences for policy.
Product Market Deregulation
Figure 5 contrasts the eﬀects of a one percent Home productivity shock before and after Home
product market deregulation under the historical policy rule. When barriers to entry are relaxed,
the economy fluctuates around a steady state with a larger number of firms, smaller markups,
and smaller producer-level profits. Therefore, the present discounted value of entry varies by
less (in percentage of the steady state) in response to aggregate disturbances, dampening markup
fluctuations and product market dynamics. This eﬀect, combined with a tighter labor market
40

See Cacciatore and Fiori (2011) for a detailed discussion of substitutability across reforms. The result is consistent
with the empirical evidence in Fiori, Nicoletti, Scarpetta, and Schiantarelli (2012).

32

after the deregulation, implies that the employment response to shocks is also muted. (Notice
that productivity shocks put less pressure on nominal wage inflation after the deregulation, since
the increase in the surplus from existing matches is smaller.) Computing the second moments of
business cycles in the post-deregulation environment shows that volatility and persistence of output
and employment fall in the reforming country, but the eﬀect on Foreign dynamics and international
business cycles is very small. (See the Appendix for details.)
The welfare cost of business cycles falls significantly in the more flexible economy–by approximately 20 percent (Table 6)–while it falls only slightly in the rigid country. This is explained
by the fact that Home markups are less volatile with a flexible product market, resulting in less
volatile employment. In contrast, the welfare costs of business cycles in the Foreign economy are
not significantly aﬀected since they remain dominated by domestic rigidities.
Turning to the Ramsey-optimal policy, Figure 6 shows that the Ramsey authority becomes less
aggressive after the deregulation. Deregulation (even if asymmetric across countries and limited
to product markets) ameliorates domestic and international policy trade-oﬀs. At Home, a more
flexible product market dampens volatility for the same reasons as under historical policy. Moreover,
stabilization of cyclical fluctuations at Home requires less Foreign wage deflation because Home
demand for Foreign goods is higher to begin with, and the resource switching eﬀect of Ramsey
policy is mitigated.
Table 6 shows that deregulation narrows the welfare gap between historical and Ramsey-optimal
policy at Home as deregulation reduces the need for policy activism. The welfare gain from Ramsey
policy increases slightly in the country that remains rigid.
Labor Market Deregulation
Home labor market reform aﬀects the propagation of aggregate shocks through the cyclical behavior
of the workers’ outside option. Labor market flexibility makes job creation less responsive to shocks:
Lower unemployment benefits and smaller worker bargaining power imply that adjustment takes
place increasingly through the real wage, reducing job flows over the cycle. Table 6 shows that
the welfare eﬀects of the reform mimic those of product market deregulation. Under the historical
policy rule, the welfare cost of business cycles falls by almost 50 percent. The rigid country (Foreign)
benefits slightly more from optimal policy following deregulation, while the gain from optimal policy
becomes significantly smaller for Home.

33

Product and Labor Market Deregulation
Table 6 shows that deregulation of both product and labor markets at Home has a larger welfare
eﬀect than individual reforms. Deregulation of both markets accomplishes the most significant
moderation of Home’s aggregate fluctuations (see the Appendix for details), and the welfare cost
of business cycles under the historical policy is lowest at 0.54 percent of steady-state consumption.
The welfare gain from Ramsey-optimal policy is correspondingly minimized. At the same time,
however, the welfare gain from optimal policy is further magnified in the rigid country.
To summarize, across all scenarios, asymmetric deregulation across countries reduces the benefit
from optimal policy in the country that deregulates but increases it in the country that remains
rigid. The intuition is straightforward: The flexible economy has less need of an active policy that
takes distortions explicitly into account. The focus of Ramsey-optimal activism correspondingly
shifts toward the rigid country, which increases its gain from optimal policy.

7

International Coordination of Reforms

To what extent can coordination (i.e., synchronization) of market reforms improve welfare and
how does it aﬀect monetary policy? We have seen that asymmetric deregulation is beneficial
for both members of our model monetary union. Reforms by one country alone are suﬃcient to
improve domestic and international policy tradeoﬀs facing the Ramsey central bank. However,
asymmetric deregulation translates in heterogeneous real rigidities across countries, posing, at least
in principle, an additional challenge for the conduct of monetary policy. In the long run, the Ramsey
authority targets a single union-wide inflation rate, trading oﬀ asymmetric needs of inflation across
heterogenous countries. Over the cycle, optimal policy is relatively less aggressive for the flexible
country compared to the rigid one. When the two economies are simultaneously hit by similar
shocks, inflation stabilization may be too strong (weak) in the flexible (rigid) country. Symmetric
market deregulation across countries could then further improve policy tradeoﬀs. To address this
issue, we repeat the same policy experiments of Section 6 assuming that both countries undertake
deregulation in goods and labor markets. Tables 5 and 6 summarize the results. (For brevity, we
do not present impulse responses. They are available upon request.)
We find that there are gains from international coordination of reforms due to improved stabilization of aggregate fluctuations. In particular, synchronized reforms eliminate the heterogeneous
needs of inflation stabilization in rigid and flexible countries. In the long run, the reduction in

34

inflation is larger with symmetric deregulation. From a welfare perspective, the addition of Foreign
deregulation has a small impact on the gain from optimal monetary policy relative to historical
behavior for Home, although Home benefits more significantly from Foreign deregulation for given
monetary policy regime. Foreign gains significantly from deregulation for given monetary policy,
with smaller gains from Ramsey-optimal policy relative to the historical policy, as expected.

8

Conclusions

We studied the implications of market deregulation for the conduct of optimal monetary policy
in a monetary union. A key message of the paper is that high levels of regulation in goods and
labor markets generate sizable static and dynamic distortions that call for active monetary policy
in the long run and over the business cycle. A policy of strict price stability is costly in terms of
welfare. Expansionary monetary policy can reduce transition costs by generating lower markups
and stimulating job creation in the aftermath of market reforms. However, once the economies in
the monetary union have reached the new long-run equilibrium, real distortions in product and
labor markets are reduced, and the need for inflation to correct market ineﬃciencies correspondingly mitigated. Finally, we showed that there is an international dimension of deregulation, as
asymmetric product and labor market reforms across countries can generate new policy tradeoﬀs
for a welfare maximizing monetary authority. Coordination of reforms can mitigate these tradeoﬀs.
Our paper provides a formal analysis of the interaction between market reforms and aggregate
demand policies touched upon in the policy literature (Barkbu, Rahman, Valdés, and Staﬀ, 2012),
and it sheds additional light on the costs of a narrow focus on price stability in highly regulated
economies (Blanchard and Galí, 2010). Important avenues for future research include explicit
analysis of deregulation as part of the response to crises, optimal regulation, fiscal policy, strategic
policy interactions, the possibility of imperfect commitment, and distributional issues.

Appendix
A. Wage Determination
Let  be the real value of an existing, productive match for a producer, determined by:

 =    −



 −  2 +   +1 (1 − )+1 

2
35

(7)

Intuitively,  is the per-period marginal value product of the match,    , net of the wage bill
and costs incurred to adjust wages, plus the expected discounted continuation value of the match
in the future.41
Next, denote with  the worker’s asset value of being matched, and with  the value of
being unemployed. The value of being employed at time  is given by the real wage bill the worker
receives plus the expected future value of being matched to the firm. With probability 1 −  the
match will survive, while with probability  the worker will be unemployed. As a result:

 =

©
ª

 +   +1 [(1 − )+1 + +1 ] 


(8)

The value of unemployment is given by:
 =

©
ª
( )
+  +   +1 [ +1 + (1 −  )+1 ] 


(9)

In this expression, ( ) is the utility gain from leisure in terms of consumption,  is an unemployment benefit from the government (financed with lump sum taxes), and  is the probability
of becoming employed at time , equal to the ratio between the total number of matches and the
total number of workers searching for jobs at time :  ≡   .
Equations (8) and (9) imply that the worker’s surplus  ≡  −  is determined by:

 −
 =


µ

¶
¡
¢
( )
+  + (1 −  −  )  +1 +1 


(10)

Nash bargaining maximizes the joint surplus  1− with respect to  , where  ∈ (0 1) is the
firm’s bargaining power. The first-order condition implies:

where:



+ (1 − )
= 0



∙
¸
 
 +1


=− −
+ (1 − )  +1 (1 +  +1 )



−1


(11)

(12)

41
Note that equations (1) and (7) together imply that there is a diﬀerence between the value of an existing match
to the producer and the vacancy creation cost per match today (which becomes productive tomorrow), reflecting the
expected discounted change in the per-period profitability of the match between today and tomorrow. If matches
were productive immediately, it would be  =  .

36

and:


= 



(13)

   = (1 −  ) 

(14)

The sharing rule can then be rewritten as:

where:
  =


³
´


 − (1 − ) 

 

(15)

Equation (14) shows that, as in Gertler and Trigari (2009), bargaining shares are time-varying
due to the presence of wage adjustment costs. Absent wage adjustment costs, we would have
  = −  and a time-invariant bargaining share   = .
Equation (2) in the main text for the bargained wage implies that the value of a match to a
producer can be rewritten as:
∙
½
∙
¸¾
µ
¶¸

 2
( )

 =     −   −
+  +  +1 +1 (1 − )  + (1 −  −  )(1 −  +1 )
2

+1
(16)
¡
¢
The second term in the right-hand side of this equation reduces to [1 −  − (1 − )  ]   +1 +1
when wages are flexible. The firm’s equilibrium surplus is the share  of the marginal revenue

product generated by the worker, net of wage adjustment costs and the worker’s outside option,
plus the expected discounted future surplus, adjusted for the probability of continuation, 1 − ,
and the portion appropriated by the worker, (1 − )  . Sticky wages again introduce an eﬀect of
expected changes in the endogenous bargaining shares.

B. No Pricing to Market
Focus first on the case of flexible prices. A Home firm selling at Home chooses  () to maximize:



∞
X
=

[(1 − )]

−

subject to:
 () = (1 − ) ln




µ

µ

¶
 ()
−   ()


̄
 ()

37

¶


 ()

µ




¶−

 

The optimal price of domestic sales is determined by:
∙
µ
¶¸
̄
 ()
= 1 + ln
 

 ()

(17)

When selling abroad, the firm chooses  () to maximize:



∞
X
=

−

[(1 − )]

subject to:
 () =  ln

µ




µ
¶
 ()
−   ()

∗

̄
 ()

¶


 ()

µ


∗

¶−

∗ 

and the optimal export price is determined by:
∙
µ
¶¸
̄
 ()
= 1 + ln
 

 ()

(18)

Pricing-to-market arises if  () 6=  () in equilibrium, but the Armington form of the
consumption aggregator implies that this never happens. To see this, recall first the definition of
the reservation prices (the maximum prices that can be charged while still having positive market
share):

ln ̄ =

1
1
+
 

Z

ln  ()

Z

ln  ()

∈Ω

ln ̄ =

1
1
+
 

∈Ω

In the symmetric equilibrium, all firms that serve the Home market are also exporters. It follows
that:
ln ̄ =

1
+ ln  


As a result:
ln

µ

̄


¶

=

and

ln ̄ =

1
= ln


µ

̄


1
+ ln  

¶



Substituting this into the optimal price equations (17) and (18), we have:

=


µ
¶

1
1+

 =


38

Thus, there is no pricing-to-market under flexible prices. This happens because the Armington
aggregator implies that the ratios of reservation prices to optimal prices for Home producers in the
Home and Foreign markets depend only on the identical number of Home firms that serve domestic
and export markets.
The extension to the sticky-price case is straightforward under the assumption that prices are
sticky in the currency of producers, an assumption that is always satisfied in a monetary union.

C. Symmetric Equilibrium
The aggregate stock of employed labor in the Home economy in period  is determined by  =
(1 − )−1 + −1 −1 . Furthermore, symmetry across final producers implies that  () =  =
1 +  . Hence,  () =  and  () =  .42 Wage inflation and consumer price inflation are
¢
¡

tied by 1+  =  −1
(1 +   ), where  denotes the real wage,   , at time . Producer
¡
¢
price inflation and consumer price inflation are such that 1 +   =  −1 (1 +   ). Home
³
´
and Foreign consumer price inflation are such that 1 +   = (−1  ) 1 +  ∗ .
The equilibrium price index satisfies:
"

1 = (1 − )  exp

Ã

̃ − 
2 ̃ 

!#1−

+

"

∗ exp

Ã

̃ ∗ − ∗
2̃ ∗ ∗

!#1−



where exp() denotes the exponential of .
Labor market clearing requires:

 =

   ( +  )
+

 
 

Aggregate demand of the consumption basket must be equal to the sum of consumption, the
costs of posting vacancies, and the costs of adjusting wages and prices:
 =  +  +

 2

   +  2  ( +  ) 
2
2

We define GDP, denoted with  , as total income: the sum of labor income, dividend income
from final producers, and profit income from intermediate producers. Formally:  ≡ (  )   +
42
The (flexible-price) price elasticity does not depend on ∗ because of the assumption of an Armington aggregator
of Home and Foreign sub-bundles. This same assumption implies that the price elasticity facing a Foreign producer
in both markets depends on ∗ , but not  .

39

  +  .

D. The Law of Motion for Net Foreign Assets
Recall the representative household’s budget constraint:


+1 + 
2

µ

+1


¶2

+   + +1 ( +  )   =

(19)

(1 +  ) +    ( +  ) +    +  (1 −  ) +  +  +  
In equilibrium,  = +1 = 1 for all . The budget constraint of the government implies:
 = − (1 −  )
Moreover,

and:



= 
2

µ

+1


¶2



µ
¶

 2
=      −   −  −    

2

Therefore:

+1 +   +   = (1 +  ) +   ( +  ) +      −   −   2  
2

(20)

It is possible to simplify the consolidated budget constraint of the economy further. To begin,
notice that:
¢
¡

 =  −  ( +  ) −  2 ( +  )  
2

It follows that, after substituting and rearranging, equation (20) can be rewritten in real terms as:

+1 =

⎡

 2
2   

¡
¢
 +   +  +
1 + 
 +   −  ( +  ) +     − ⎣
1 +  
+ 2  2 ( +  )  

Next, recall the expression for Home’s aggregate demand of the consumption basket:
 =  +  +

 2

   +  2  ( +  ) 
2
2
40

⎤

⎦  (21)

Then, equation (21) becomes:
+1 =

¡
¢
¢
¡
1 + 
 +   −  ( +  ) +     −  +   
1 +  

Finally, recall that free entry implies  =   , and labor market clearing requires   ( +  )+
   =     . It follows that home’s net foreign assets entering period  + 1 are determined by the gross interest income on the asset position entering period  plus the diﬀerence between
home’s total production and total demand (or absorption) of consumption:
+1 =

1 + 
 +   ( +  ) −  
1 +  

(22)

A similar equation holds in Foreign:
∗+1 =

¡ ∗
¢
1 +  ∗
∗
− ∗ 
 + ∗ ∗ 
+ 
∗
1 +  

(23)

Now, multiply equation (23) by  and subtract the resulting equation from (22). Recall that
³
´
1 +   = (−1  ) 1 +  ∗ and use the bond market clearing condition +1 +  ∗+1 = 0 in

all periods. It follows that:
+1 =

¡ ∗
¢¤ 1 ¡ 
¢
1 + 
1£
∗
−
 +
+ 
  ( +  ) − ∗  ∗ 
 −  ∗ 
1 +  
2
2

(24)

This is the familiar result that net foreign assets depend positively on the cross-country diﬀerential
in production of final consumption output and negatively on relative absorption.
Notice next that home absorption of consumption must equal absorption of consumption output
from home firms and output from foreign firms:
∗
∗
 =    + ∗ ∗ 
=    + ∗  ∗ 


where we used the fact that ∗ =  ∗ . Similarly,
∗
∗
+    = ∗ ∗ 
+ 
∗ = ∗ ∗ 


 


where we used  =   . Substituting these results into equation (24) yields net foreign assets

41

as a function of interest income on the initial asset position and the trade balance:
+1 =

1 + 
∗
 +    − ∗  ∗ 

1 +  

E. Data-Consistent Variables
We follow Ghironi and Melitz (2005) and BGM, and we construct an average price index ̃ as:
1

̃ = Ω−1  
where  is the welfare-based price index:
1
⎧
"
Ã
"
Ã
!#1−
!#1− ⎫ 1−
⎬
⎨
∗
∗
̃ − 
̃ − 
 = (1 − )  exp
+  ∗ exp

⎭
⎩
2 ̃ 
2̃ ∗ ∗

and Ω is the variety eﬀect:

Ω ≡ (1 − ) exp

Ã

̃ − 
2 ̃

!

+  exp

Ã

̃ ∗ − ∗
2̃ ∗ ∗

!



The average price index ̃ is closer to the actual CPI data constructed by statistical agencies than
the welfare-based index  , and, therefore, it is the data-consistent CPI implied by the model. In
turn, given any variable  in units of consumption, its data-consistent counterpart is:
 ≡

 

=
1 
̃
−1
Ω

F. Social Planner Allocation
∗   ∗ 
∗
∞
The benevolent social planner chooses {      ∗    ∗    ∗    
 
+1  +1 }=0

to maximize the welfare criterion (6) subject to six constraints (three for each economy). In the list
∗    and  ∗ denote the sub-bundles of country-specific
of variables chosen by the planner,   



final goods that enter the Armington aggregator for total absorption of consumption output (
and ∗ ) in each country. As usual, we present relevant equations for the Home economy, with
the understanding that analogous equations hold in Foreign.
The first constraint is that intermediate inputs are used to produce final goods and create new

42

product lines:
   = exp

Ã

̃ − 
2 ̃

!

( +  ) +

µ

¶
+1
−   
1−

(25)

where the exponential term converts units of consumption sub-bundles into units of intermediate
inputs. Note that the only entry cost that is relevant to the social planner is the technological
component of the overall entry cost  facing firms in the decentralized economy. We denote
the Lagrange multiplier associated to the constraint (25) with  , which corresponds to the social
marginal cost of producing an extra unit of intermediate output.
The second constraint is that total output can be used for consumption and vacancy creation:
¸ 
∙
−1
−1
1
1
∗ −1




 +  = (1 − )  +  


(26)

The Lagrange multiplier associated to this constraint,   , represents the social marginal utility of
consumption resources. In the social planner’s environment,  =  +  . Note that, as for
the technological cost of product creation  , we assume that the cost of vacancy posting 
is a feature of technology–the technology for job creation–that characterizes also the planner’s
environment. (This is a standard assumption in the literature on the DMP model.)
Finally, the third constraint is that the stock of labor in the current period is equal to the
number of workers that were not exogenously separated plus previous period matches that become
productive in the current period:

 = (1 − )−1 + (1 − −1 )1− −1


(27)

The Lagrange multiplier associated to this constraint,   , denotes the real marginal value of a match
to society.
The first-order condition for consumption implies that   =  . The demand schedules for
∗
Home output are obtained by combining the first-order conditions with respect to  ,  , 
∗ :
and 



"


= (1 − )
exp


Ã

̃ − 
2̃ 

!#−

 



"


=  ∗ exp


Ã

̃ − 
2̃ 

!#−

∗ 

(28)

Using the results in (28) and the analogs for Foreign output, it is possible to re-write equation (26)

43

as:

"


exp
1 = (1 − )


Ã

̃ − 
2 ̃ 

!#1−

"

∗
+
exp


Ã

̃ ∗ − ∗
2 ̃ ∗ ∗

!#1−

The optimality condition for +1 equates the cost of creating a new product to its expected
discounted benefit:
  = (1 − )

(

"

+1 +1 + exp

Ã

̃ − +1
2̃ +1

!

1
2+1

µ

+1 + +1
+1

¶#)



(29)

The first-order conditions for vacancies and employment yield:

= 


½

∙ µ
¶
¸¾
 +1
 (+1 )

+1
+1 +1 −

+ [1 −  − (1 − ) +1 ]


 +1
 +1
+1

(30)

where  ≡   =  [(1 −  ) ]1− is the probability of filling a vacancy implied by the matching

function  =  (1 −  )1−  , and  ≡   (1 −  ) =  [ (1 −  )] is the probability for a

worker to find a job. Equation (30) shows that the expected cost of filling a vacancy  must be
equal to its (social) expected benefit. The latter is given by the value of output produced by one
worker net of the disutility of labor, augmented by the continuation value of the match.
Finally, the first-order condition for hours implies  =   .
Table 2 summarizes the equilibrium conditions for the planned economy. To facilitate the
comparison between planned and market economy, we define the following relative prices for the
planner’s equilibrium:  ≡    , ∗ ≡ ∗  ∗ ,  ≡   ∗ , and ∗ ≡ ∗   . Defining

the social real exchange rate as  ≡  ∗   , the planner’s outcome is characterized by optimal
risk sharing:  =  ∗   . Moreover, the law of one price holds also in the planned economy
 =   and ∗ =  ∗ . Finally, recall that  represents the aggregate demand for Home
goods at Home. The amount of output produced by each Home firm for the Home market is given
³
´
̃ −
by  = exp 2
  . Analogously, the amount of output produced by each Home firm
̃ 
³
´
̃−
for the export market is  = exp 2
  .
̃


G. Ineﬃciency Wedges
Comparing the term in square brackets in equation (7) in Table 1 to the term in square brackets
in equation (7) in Table 2 implicitly defines the ineﬃciency wedge along the market economy’s

44

product creation margin. Specifically, the product creation wedge is defined as:

Σ  ≡

(

(1 − ) 

µ

+1


¶− 

∙
¸)−1
+1 +1
1
+
(+1 + +1 )



2+1 

where all variables are evaluated at the decentralized allocations under Ramsey-optimal policy and
historical policy.
Similarly, comparing the term in square brackets in equation (9) in Table 1 to the term in
square brackets in equation (9) in Table 2 implicitly defines the ineﬃciency wedge along the market
economy’s job creation margin:

Σ

( µ
Ã
"
!
#)−1
¶
1+
+1   (1 +   )
+1 −  

≡ 

+1 +1 +1 −

+ [1 −  − (1 − ) +1 ]


+1
(+1 )− 

where all variables are evaluated at the decentralized allocations under Ramsey-optimal policy and
historical policy.
The impulse responses of these wedges show the percent variations of the wedge deviations from
eﬃciency. Formally, we plot the response of (|Σ  − 1| − |Σ  − 1|)  (|Σ  − 1|), and similarly
for the job creation wedge. We consider absolute values because what matters is the deviation from
eﬃciency (be it positive or negative).

H. Calibration
We set the discount factor  to 099, implying an annual real interest rate of 4 percent. The
1− 

period utility function is given by  = 

1+ 

(1 −   ) −  

 (1 +   ). The risk aversion

coeﬃcient   is equal to 2, while the Frisch elasticity of labor supply 1  is set to 02, a value
consistent with empirical micro estimates.43 To calibrate the translog parameter, , we proceed as
follows. In Ghironi and Melitz’s (2005) model with Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) preferences, the elasticity
of substitution across product varieties is set to 38 following Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum
(2003). We set  so that our model with translog preferences implies the same steady-state markup
as Ghironi and Melitz’s calibration.44 As Ghironi and Melitz, we set substitutability between Home
43

The value of this elasticity has been a source of controversy in the literature. Students of the business cycle tend to
work with elasticities that are higher than microeconomic estimates, typically unity and above. Most microeconomic
studies, however, estimate this elasticity to be much smaller, between 01 and 06. For a survey of the literature,
see Card (1994). Our results are not aﬀected significantly if we hold hours constant at the optimally determined
steady-state level.
44
This implies a 36 percent markup of price over marginal cost. It may be argued that this is too high. However,
in our model, free entry ensures that firms earn zero profit net of entry cost. This means that firms price at average

45

and Foreign goods in the consumption aggregator, , to 38.45 The degree of home bias 1 −  is set
to 08, a conventional value in the literature. To ensure steady-state determinacy and stationarity
of net foreign assets, we set the bond adjustment cost  to 00025 as in Ghironi and Melitz (2005).
The scale parameter for the cost of adjusting prices, , is equal to 80, as in Bilbiie, Ghironi,
and Melitz (2008a). We choose , the scale parameter of nominal wage adjustment costs, so that
the model reproduces the volatility of unemployment relative to GDP observed in the data. This
implies  = 60.
We keep technological entry costs not related to bureaucratic procedures constant:  =  in
all periods. Following Barseghyan and DiCecio (2011), we assume that  is 18 percent of quarterly
output. As a proxy for goods market regulation in the Euro Area, we consider a weighted average
of regulation costs across member countries, with weights equal to the contributions of individual
countries’ GDPs to Euro Area total GDP. To calibrate the initial value of entry costs related to
regulation,  , we use Pissarides’s (2003) index of entry delay, which computes the number of
business days that it takes (on average) to fulfill entry requirements. Following Ebell and Haefke
(2009), we convert this index in months of lost output. The implied cost of regulation is 69 percent
of quarterly steady-state output.
We set unemployment benefits, , so that the model reproduces the average replacement rate,
 (), for the Euro Area reported by OECD (2004). The elasticity of the matching function,
, is equal to 06, as estimated by Blanchard and Diamond (1989) and used in much subsequent
literature. The flexible-wage bargaining share of firms, , is equal to , so that the Hosios condition
holds in a steady state with zero wage inflation. The exogenous separation rate between firms
and workers, , is 6 percent, as reported in Campolmi and Faia (2011). To pin down exogenous
producer exit, , we target the portion of worker separation due to plant exit. This number ranges
between 25 and 55 percent in EMU members (see Haltiwanger, Scarpetta, and Schweiger, 2008).
We choose a midpoint of these estimates so that the exit of plants accounts for 40 percent of overall
job destruction. This yields a value for  (0026) that is very close to the calibration in BGM
(0025).
Two labor market parameters are left for calibration: the scale parameter for the cost of vacancy
posting, , and the matching eﬃciency parameter, κ. As common practice in the literature,
we calibrate these parameters to match the steady-state average job finding probability and the
cost (inclusive of the entry cost). Thus, although our calibration implies a fairly high markup over marginal cost, it
delivers plausible results with respect to pricing and average cost.
45
The conventional choice of 15 for this Armington elasticity does not alter any of our main results significantly.

46

probability of filling a vacancy across EMU countries. The former is 45 percent (Hobijn and Şahin,
2009), while the latter is 70 percent, in line with estimates reported by ECB (2002) and Weber
(2000). With this calibration, the model generates a 12 percent steady-state unemployment rate,
which is not distant from the EMU average of 98 percent plus a plausible adjustment for job
searchers not included in unemployment rate statistics.
For the bivariate productivity process, we set persistence and spillover parameters consistent
with Baxter (1995) and Baxter and Farr (2005), implying zero spillovers across countries and persistence equal to 0999. We refer to this as Baxter calibration below. We perform sensitivity analysis
by considering also values in Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992, 1994), with lower persistence at
0906 and positive spillovers at 0088 (BKK calibration below). We set the standard deviation of
productivity innovations at 00068 to match the absolute volatility of Euro Area GDP, but leave
the covariance of innovations at the standard 019 percent of Baxter (1995) and Backus, Kehoe,
and Kydland (1992, 1994).46
Finally, the parameter values in the historical rule for the ECB’s interest rate setting are those
estimated by Gerdesmeier and Roﬃa (2003). The inflation and GDP gap weights are 193 and
0075, respectively, while the smoothing parameter is 087.

I. Model Properties
Impulse Responses
Figure A.1 (solid lines) shows impulse responses to a one-percent innovation to Home productivity
under the historical rule for ECB interest rate setting.47 Focus on the Home country first. Unemployment ( ) does not respond on impact, but it falls in the periods after the shock. The higher
expected return of a match induces domestic intermediate input producers to post more vacancies
on impact, which results in higher employment in the following period. Firms and workers (costly)
46

Using the 073 percent standard deviation of innovations in Baxter (1995) and Backus, Kehoe, and Kydland (1992,
1994) does not alter any of our main results. Only the absolute volatility of GDP is aﬀected and, as a consequence,
the absolute magnitude of welfare costs of business cycles (for given regulation level). We also experimented with
the bivariate productivity process for the Euro Area in Canzoneri, Cumby, Diba, and Mykhaylova (2006), which is
roughly similar to that estimated for France and Germany by Collard and Dellas (2002). The key diﬀerence is that
this process features less persistent productivity (076). While the performance of the model remains quite good,
this parametrization results in excessively smooth consumption relative to the data and a less satisfactory match
of international correlations. Our own estimation of bivariate productivity processes for Germany versus diﬀerent
combinations of France, Italy, and Spain yielded results in between the Baxter and BKK calibrations. We settled on
the Baxter calibration as benchmark given the stronger consensus for very persistent productivity processes in the
literature on quantitative international business cycle models.
47
Dashed lines show responses under the Ramsey-optimal policy (discussed below). For comparability, all responses
in the figure are computed around the Ramsey-optimal steady state.

47

renegotiate nominal wages because of the higher surplus generated by existing matches, and wage
inflation (  ) increases. Wage adjustment costs make the eﬀective firm’s bargaining power procyclical, i.e.,   rises. To understand why this happens, recall equations (12), (13), and (15).
Notice that   is the change in firm surplus due to a change in nominal wages. The first term
in the expression (12) for   reflects the fact that, when the nominal wage increases by one
dollar, the nominal surplus is reduced by the same amount (times the number of worked hours);
the second term is the wage adjustment cost paid by the firm; and the last term represents the
expected savings on future wage adjustments if wages are renegotiated today. When the first two
eﬀects are larger than the third one, the firm’s bargaining share rises. Intuitively,   shifts upward
to ensure optimal sharing of the cost of adjusting wages between firms and workers. Other things
equal, the increase in   dampens the response of the renegotiated equilibrium wage, amplifying
the response of job creation to the shock.
Employment and labor income rise in the more productive economy, boosting aggregate demand
for final goods and household consumption ( ). The larger present discounted value of future
profits generates higher expected return to product creation, stimulating producer entry ( ) and
investment ( ≡   ) at Home. Price stickiness and increased substitutability across a larger
number of available domestic varieties result in mildly countercyclical final producer markups ( ).
Product creation falls temporarily in the Foreign country as resources are shifted to Home
to finance increased entry in the more productive economy. Accordingly, Home runs a current
account deficit in response to the shock ( falls on impact), as Home households borrow from
abroad to finance higher investment in new products. Although Foreign households cannot hold
shares in the mutual portfolio of Home firms (since only bonds are traded across countries), the
return on bond holdings is tied to the return on share holdings in Home firms by no-arbitrage
between bonds and shares within each country. Therefore, Foreign households share the benefit of
higher Home productivity by shifting resources to Home via lending. Moreover, Home’s terms of
trade (  ≡  ∗ ) depreciate, i.e., Home goods become relatively cheaper. This shifts world
demand toward Home goods (expenditure switching), but also generates a positive wealth eﬀect for
Foreign households, whose consumption rises. In contrast to the results of standard international
real business cycle (IRBC) models, the combination of expenditure switching and resource shifting
is not suﬃcient to imply negative comovement of GDP ( ) and employment across countries.
The increase in aggregate demand at Home (which falls on both domestic and imported goods)
is strong enough to ensure that trade linkages generate positive comovement of GDP and labor
48

market variables. Interestingly, the adjustment in the Foreign economy takes place mostly along
the intensive margin, as the reduction in Foreign product creation is short-lived and followed by a
very mild increase as demand stimulates some entry in the Foreign final sector.
The historical policy rule yields muted responses of Home and Foreign producer price inflation
(  and  ∗ ) to the shock. In fact, the adjustment of the economy closely mimics that under a
policy of zero deviations of area-wide producer price inflation from its long-run target.48
Second Moments
Table A.1 presents model-implied, HP-filtered second moments under the Baxter calibration of
the bivariate productivity process (normal fonts) and the alternative BKK calibration (italics).
Bold fonts denote data moments. Area-wide moments are computed from the AWM database;
cross-country correlations are averages of bilateral correlations between the four largest Euro Area
economies.
The model correctly reproduces the volatility of area-wide consumption, investment, and real
wages relative to GDP and generates first-order autocorrelations in line with the data. It also correctly captures the cyclicality of employment and is not far from its persistence.49 This successful
performance is a result of the model’s strong propagation mechanism. Investment volatility is lowered relative to the excessive volatility generated by a standard IRBC framework because product
creation requires hiring new workers. This process is time consuming due to search and matching
frictions in the labor market, dampening investment dynamics. In contrast, consumption is more
volatile than in traditional models as shocks induce larger and longer-lasting income eﬀects.
With respect to the international dimension of the business cycle, the model successfully reproduces a ranking of cross-country correlations that is a challenge for standard IRBC models:
Although lower than in the data, GDP correlation is larger than consumption correlation. This
result depends both on model features and the parametrization of technology shocks. As shown in
Figure 1, an increase in Home productivity generates Foreign expansion through trade linkages, as
demand-side complementarities more than oﬀset the eﬀect of resource shifting to the more productive economy. Moreover, absent technology spillovers, Foreign consumers have weaker incentives to
increase consumption on impact, which reduces cross-country consumption correlation.
48

Impulse responses for a policy of strict producer price stability are available upon request.
The absolute volatility of GDP and unemployment is matched by construction. The close match between dataand model-implied real wage moments provides indirect support for our calibration of the nominal wage adjustment
cost.
49

49

As shown in Table A.1, results are largely unaﬀected under the BKK calibration of exogenous
shocks. The only exception is the magnitude and ranking of cross-country GDP and consumption
correlations: The correlation of consumption is now higher than that of GDP. This result is explained by the Foreign permanent income eﬀect of productivity spillovers, which induces Foreign
households to increase consumption on impact in anticipation of future higher domestic productivity.50

J. Welfare Computations
Long-Run Policy
We compare welfare under the continuation of historical policy from  = 0 on (which implies
continuation of the historical steady state) to welfare under the optimal long-run policy from  = 0
on (which implies a transition between the initial implementation at  = 0 and the Ramsey steady
state). We measure the long-run welfare gains of the Ramsey policy in the two countries (which
are equal by symmetry) by computing the percentage increase ∆ in consumption that would leave
the household indiﬀerent between policy regimes. In other words, ∆ solves:
∞
X
=0

³
´  £¡1 +
  
  
 

=


∆
100

¢

¤
     )

1−

As noted in the main text, we assume identical initial conditions for state variables (the steadystate levels under historical policy) across diﬀerent monetary policy regimes and include transition
dynamics in the computation to avoid spurious welfare reversals.
Policy over the Cycle
As for the long-run optimal policy, we compare policy regimes by computing the welfare gains
for the two countries from optimal policy in the monetary union over the cycle. Specifically, we
compute the percentage ∆ of steady-state consumption that would make households indiﬀerent
between living in a world with uncertainty under monetary policy , where  =  or ,
50

Importantly, however, the model generates positive and sizable GDP comovement regardless of the productivity
parametrization. Standard IRBC models predict negative or negligible cross-country GDP correlation under the BKK
calibration. Resource-shifting and the permanent income hypothesis dominate dynamics in those models.

50

and living in a deterministic Ramsey world:
0

∞
X






(  
  )

=0

=



£¡
1+

∆
100

¢

¤
     )

1−

First-order approximation methods are not appropriate to compute the welfare associated with
each monetary policy arrangement. The solution of the model implies that the expected value
of each variable coincides with its non-stochastic steady state. However, in an economy with
a distorted steady state, volatility aﬀects both first and second moments of the variables that
determine welfare. Hence, we compute welfare by resorting to a second-order approximation of the
policy functions.
Deregulation and Welfare in the Long Run
To measure the desirability of reform we compute the percentage increase ∆ in steady-state consumption relative to the status quo (no deregulation and historical policy) that leaves households
indiﬀerent between implementing the reform or not:
∞
X

  (    
 )=

=0



£¡

1+

∆
100

¤
     )

1−

¢

where  stands for status quo and  denotes the monetary regime ( =  or ).

K. The Business Cycle Eﬀects of Market Reform
See tables A.2-A.4.

L. Sensitivity Analysis
We perform sensitivity analysis by considering alternative values for the parameters whose calibration is relatively controversial in the literature. For household preferences, we investigate the
role of a unitary intertemporal elasticity of substitutions ( = 1), a lower elasticity of substitution
between Home and Foreign goods ( = 15), absence of home bias ( = 05), and a higher Frisch
elasticity (1  = 4, as typically assumed in the business cycle literature). We evaluate the importance of nominal rigidity by considering smaller values for the scale parameters of price and wage
adjustment costs ( =  = 20). Finally, we consider an alternative value for the elasticity of the
matching function ( = 04, a mid-point of the estimates reported by Petrongolo and Pissarides,
51

2006). We consider the eﬀect of changing one parameter value at a time relative to the benchmark
calibration.
The main results of the paper are extremely robust to the alternative parameter values we
consider.51 The parameter value that aﬀects our results most significantly is the elasticity of the
matching function, . Specifically, for any given level of market regulation, a lower value of 
reduces the gap between Ramsey-optimal policy and historical policy both in the long run and
over the business cycle (the diﬀerences between the two policy regimes, however, remain sizable
in absolute terms). In the long run, a smaller value of  lowers the optimal long-run inflation
target. Intuitively, when the elasticity of the matching function is below the bargaining power of
firms (  ), there is a stronger tension between using positive long-run inflation to increase the
bargaining power of firms (which stimulates job creation) and the cost of this policy (which widens
the departure from the Hosios condition introduced by setting   ). Over the business cycle,
instead, the historical policy of (near) price stability is less costly because unemployment is less
volatile when  is smaller, i.e., the need to use inflation to stabilize unemployment is mitigated,
and the Ramsey-optimal policy implies less volatile inflation for any level of regulation.

References
[1] Adão, B., I. Correia, and P. Teles (2003): “Gaps and Triangles,” Review of Economic Studies
70: 699-713.
[2] Andolfatto, D. (1996): “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American Economic Review 86: 112-132.
[3] Aoki, K. (2001): “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to Relative Price Changes,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 48: 55-80.
[4] Arsenau, D. M., and S. K. Chugh (2008): “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy with Costly
Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55: 1401-1414.
[5] Auray, S., and A. Eyquem (2011): “Do Changes in Product Variety Matter for Fluctuations
and Monetary Policy in Open Economies?” International Finance 14: 507-539.
[6] Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1992): “International Real Business Cycles,”
Journal of Political Economy 100: 745-775.
[7] Backus, D. K., P. J. Kehoe, and F. E. Kydland (1994): “Dynamics of the Trade Balance and
the Terms of Trade: The J Curve?” American Economic Review 84: 84-103.
[8] Barkbu, B., J. Rahman, R. Valdés, and Staﬀ (2012): “Fostering Growth in Europe Now,” IMF
Staﬀ Discussion Note 12/07.
51

Tables and figures are available on request.

52

[9] Barseghyan, L., and R. DiCecio (2011): “Entry Costs, Industry Structure, and Cross-Country
Income and TFP Diﬀerences,” Journal of Economic Theory 106: 1828-1851.
[10] Baxter, M. (1995): “International Trade and Business Cycles,” in Grossman, G. M., and K.
Rogoﬀ, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 1801-1864.
[11] Baxter, M., and D. D. Farr (2005): “Variable Factor Utilization and International Business
Cycles,” Journal of International Economics 65: 335-347.
[12] Benigno, P. (2004): “Optimal Monetary Policy in a Currency Area,” Journal of International
Economics 63: 293-320.
[13] Benigno, P. (2009): “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration,” Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking 41: 121-149.
[14] Bergin, P. R., and G. Corsetti (2008): “The Extensive Margin and Monetary Policy,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 55: 1222-1237.
[15] Bergin, P. R., and G. Corsetti (2013): “‘Competitive Stabilizations’: Strategic Monetary Policy
and Coordination with a Production Relocation Externality”, mimeo, University of California,
Davis and Cambridge University.
[16] Bergin, P. R., and R. C. Feenstra (2000): “Staggered Price Setting and Endogenous Persistence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 45: 657-680.
[17] Bergin, P. R., and R. C. Feenstra (2001): “Pricing-to-Market, Staggered Contracts, and Real
Exchange Rate Persistence,” Journal of International Economics 54: 333-359.
[18] Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, J. B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity in
International Trade,” American Economic Review 93: 1268-1290.
[19] Bernard, A. B., S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott (2010): “Multi-Product Firms and Product
Switching,” American Economic Review 100: 70-97.
[20] Bertinelli, L., O. Cardi, and P. Sen (2013): “Deregulation Shock in Product Market and
Unemployment,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 37: 711-734.
[21] Bilbiie, F. O., I. Fujiwara, and F. Ghironi (2011): “Optimal Monetary Policy with Endogenous
Entry and Product Variety,” NBER WP 17489.
[22] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2012): “Endogenous Entry, Product Variety and
Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 120: 304-345.
[23] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2008a): “Monetary Policy and Business Cycles
with Endogenous Entry and Product Variety,” in Acemoglu, D., K. S. Rogoﬀ, and M. Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2007, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, pp.
299-353.
[24] Bilbiie, F. O., F. Ghironi, and M. J. Melitz (2008b). “Monopoly Power and Endogenous
Product Variety: Distortions and Remedies.” NBER WP 14383.
[25] Blanchard, O. J., and P. A. Diamond (1989): “The Beveridge Curve,” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 20: 1-76.
53

[26] Blanchard, O. J., and F. Giavazzi (2003): “Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods and Labor Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVIII: 879-907.
[27] Blanchard, O. J., and J. Galí (2010): “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian
Model with Unemployment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2: 1-30.
[28] Broda, C., and D. E. Weinstein (2010): “Product Creation and Destruction: Evidence and
Price Implications,” American Economic Review 100: 691-723.
[29] Cacciatore, M. (2010): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with Labor Market
Frictions,” mimeo, HEC Montréal.
[30] Cacciatore, M., and G. Fiori (2011): “The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Goods and Labor Markets
Deregulation,” mimeo, HEC Montréal and North Carolina State University.
[31] Cacciatore, M., and F. Ghironi (2012): “Trade, Unemployment, and Monetary Policy,” mimeo,
HEC Montréal and Boston College.
[32] Campolmi, A., and E. Faia (2011): “Labor Market Institutions and Inflation Volatility in the
Euro Area,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 35: 793-812.
[33] Canzoneri, M. B., R. E. Cumby, B. T. Diba, and O. Mykhaylova (2006): “New Keynesian Explanations of Cyclical Movements in Aggregate Inflation and Regional Inflation Diﬀerentials,”
Open Economies Review 17: 27-55.
[34] Card, D.(1994): “Intertemporal Labor Supply: An Assessment,” in Sims, C., ed., Advances in
Econometrics, Sixth World Congress, Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.
[35] Cavallari, L. (2011): “Firms’ Entry, Monetary Policy and the International Business Cycle,”
mimeo, University of Rome III.
[36] Chugh, S. K., and F. Ghironi (2011): “Optimal Fiscal Policy with Endogenous Product Variety,” NBER WP 17319.
[37] Collard, F., and H. Dellas (2002): “Exchange Rate Systems and Macroeconomic Stability,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 49: 571-599.
[38] Colciago, A., and L. Rossi (2011): “Endogenous Market Structures and Labour Market Dynamics,” Bank of Finland Research Discussion Papers 12-2011.
[39] Contessi, S. (2010): “International Macroeconomic Dynamics, Endogenous Tradedness and
FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
[40] Corsetti, G., P. Martin, and P. Pesenti (2013): “Varieties and the Transfer Problem,” Journal
of International Economics 89: 1-12.
[41] Dawson, J. W., and J. J. Seater (2011): “Federal Regulation and Aggregate Economic
Growth,” mimeo, Appalachian State University and North Carolina State University.
[42] Diamond, P. A. (1982a): “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search Equilibrium,” Review
of Economic Studies 49: 217-227.
[43] Diamond, P. A. (1982b): “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal
of Political Economy 90: 881-894.
54

[44] Dixit, A. K., and J. E. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
Diversity,” American Economic Review 67: 297-308.
[45] Ebell, M., and C. Haefke (2009): “Product Market Deregulation and the U.S. Employment
Miracle,” Review of Economic Dynamics 12: 479-504.
[46] ECB (2002): “Labor Market Mismatches in the Euro Area,” European Central Bank.
[47] Eggertsson, G., A. Ferrero, and A. Raﬀo (2013): “Can Structural Reforms Help Europe?”
mimeo, Brown University, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
[48] Faia, E. (2009): “Ramsey Monetary Policy with Labor Market Frictions,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 56: 570-581.
[49] Faia, E. (2012): “Oligopolistic Competition and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 36: 1760-1774.
[50] Feenstra, R. C. (2003a): “A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models, without Constant Price Elasticity,” Economics Letters 78: 79-86.
[51] Feenstra, R. C. (2003b): Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[52] Felbermayr, G., and J. Prat (2011): “Product Market Regulation, Firm Selection, and Unemployment,” Journal of the European Economic Association 9: 278-317.
[53] Fiori, G., G. Nicoletti, S. Scarpetta, and F. Schiantarelli (2012): “Employment Outcomes and
the Interaction between Product and Labor Market Deregulation: Are They Substitutes or
Complements?” Economic Journal 122: F79-F104.
[54] Flinn, C. J. (2006): “Minimum Wage Eﬀects on Labor Market Outcomes under Search, Bargaining, and Endogenous Contact Rates,” Econometrica 74: 1013-1062.
[55] Galí, J. (2008): Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the
New Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[56] Galí, J. (2011): “The Return of the Wage Phillips Curve,” Journal of the European Economic
Association 9: 436-461.
[57] Galí, J., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2011): “Unemployment in an Estimated New Keynesian
Model,” NBER WP 17084.
[58] Gerdesmeier, D., and B. Roﬃa (2003): “Empirical Estimates of Reaction Functions for the
Euro Area,” ECB WP 206.
[59] Gertler, M., L. Sala, and A. Trigari (2008): “An Estimated Monetary DSGE Model with Unemployment and Staggered Nominal Wage Bargaining,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
40: 1713-1764.
[60] Gertler, M., and A. Trigari (2009): “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash Wage
Bargaining,” Journal of Political Economy 117: 38-86.

55

[61] Ghironi, F., and M. J. Melitz (2005): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXX: 865-915.
[62] Griﬃth, R., R. Harrison, and G. Maccartney (2007): “Product Market Reforms, Labour
Market Institutions and Unemployment,” Economic Journal 117: 142-166.
[63] Haltiwanger, J., S. Scarpetta, and H. Schweiger (2008): “Assessing Job Flows Across Countries:
The Role of Industry, Firm Size and Regulations,” NBER WP 13920.
[64] Hamano, M. (2011): “International Equity and Bond Positions in a DSGE Model with Variety
Risk in Consumption,” mimeo, University of Luxembourg.
[65] Hobijn, B., and A. Şahin (2009): “Job-Finding and Separation Rates in the OECD,” Economics Letters 104: 107-111.
[66] Juillard, M. (1996): “Dynare: A Program for the Resolution and Simulation of Dynamic
Models with Forward Variables through the Use of a Relaxation Algorithm,” CEPREMAP
WP 9602.
[67] Khan, A., R. G. King, and A. L. Wolman (2003): “Optimal Monetary Policy,” Review of
Economic Studies 70: 825-860.
[68] Krause, M. U., and T. A. Lubik (2007): “The (Ir)Relevance of Real Wage Rigidity in the New
Keynesian Model with Search Frictions,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54: 706-727.
[69] Laﬀargue, J.-P. (1990): “Résolution d’un Modèle Macroéconomique avec Anticipations Rationnelles,” Annales d’Economie et de Statistique 17.
[70] Lewis, V. (2010): “Optimal Monetary Policy and Firm Entry,” mimeo, Ghent University.
[71] Lucas, R. E. Jr., and N. L. Stokey (1983): “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy
Without Capital,” Journal of Monetary Economics 12: 55-93.
[72] Martin, J., and I. Méjean (2013): “Price Dispersion and the Euro: Micro Heterogeneity and
Macro Implications,” International Review of Economics and Finance 26: 70-86.
[73] Messina, J., and G. Vallanti (2007): “Job Flow Dynamics and Firing Restrictions: Evidence
from Europe,” Economic Journal 117: 279-301.
[74] Merz, M. (1995): “Search in the Labor Market and the Real Business Cycle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 36: 269-300.
[75] Mortensen, D. T., and C. A. Pissarides (1994): “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies 61: 397-415.
[76] Obstfeld, M., and K. Rogoﬀ (1995): “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of Political
Economy 103: 624-660.
[77] OECD (2004): Employment Outloook, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
[78] Petrongolo, B., and C. A. Pissarides (2006): “Scale Eﬀects in Markets with Search,” Economic
Journal 116: 21-44.

56

[79] Pissarides, C. A. (2003): “Company Startup Costs and Employment,” in Aghion, P., R. Frydman, J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern
Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
pp. 479-504.
[80] Rodríguez-López, J. A. (2011): “Prices and Exchange Rates: A Theory of Disconnect,” Review
of Economic Studies 78: 1135-1177.
[81] Rotemberg, J. J. (1982): “Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,” Review of
Economic Studies 49: 517-531.
[82] Shao, E., and P. Silos (2008): “Firm Entry and Labor Market Dynamics,” mimeo, San Francisco State University and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
[83] Taylor, J. B. (1993): “Discretion vs. Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214.
[84] Thomas, C. (2008): “Search and Matching Frictions and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Journal
of Monetary Economics 55: 936-956.
[85] Trigari, A. (2009): “Equilibrium Unemployment, Job flows and Inflation Dynamics,” Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking 41: 1-33.
[86] Turnovsky, S. J. (1985): “Domestic and Foreign Disturbances in an Optimizing Model of
Exchange Rate Determination,” Journal of International Money and Finance 4: 151-171.
[87] Walsh, C. E. (2010): Monetary Theory and Policy, 3rd Edition, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[88] Weber, A. (2000): “Vacancy Durations–A Model for Employer’s Search,” Applied Economics
32: 1069-1075.
[89] Woodford, M. (2003): Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
[90] Zanetti, F. (2007): “A Non-Walrasian Labor Market in a Monetary Model of the Business
Cycle,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31: 2413-2437.
[91] Zlate, A. (2010): “Oﬀshore Production and Business Cycle Dynamics with Heterogeneous
Firms,” International Finance Discussion Paper 2010-995, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System.

57

TABLE 1: MODEL SUMMARY

h
³
h
³ ∗ ∗ ´i1−
´i1−
̃−
∗ exp ̃ −
1 = (1 − )  exp 2
+


 
̃
2 ̃ ∗ ∗
´i1−
h
³ ∗  ∗ ´i1−
h
³

̃ −
̃−
1 = (1 − ) ∗ exp 2̃ ∗ ∗
+  exp 2
̃ 
³ 
´
+1
   =   ( + )+ 1− −  
³ ∗
´
+1
∗
∗ ∗ ∗ =  ∗ (∗ +∗ )+ 1−
− ∗ 
 = (1 − )−1 +−1 −1

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

∗
∗ = (1 − )∗−1 + ∗−1 −1
n
h
³
´
io

 +1

1
 2
1
−
(
1 = (1 − )   +1 +1
+
−

+

)
+1
+1




+1
2 
n
h +1
³
´³
´io
∗
∗+1
∗ +1
∗
∗
1
 ∗2
∗
∗
1
−

1 = (1 − )   +1 ∗
+
−

+

∗
∗
∗
∗
+1
+1
+1 

+1
2 

n
h
³
´io


+1
1 =   +1 (1 − ) +1
+  +1 +1 +1 − +1
+1 − 2  2+1
n
h
³
´io
∗
+1
∗
∗
 ∗2
∗ ∗
∗
1 =   ∗+1 (1 − ) ∗ +  ∗+1 +1
−

−

∗
+1
+1 +1
2 +1
´+1
³
¢
¡
(
)


 2
  =    +  + (1 −   )    − 2  
n
h
io

+  +1 +1 (1 − )(1 −   ) − (1 −  −  )(1 −  +1 )  
+1
³ ∗
´
¡ ∗ ∗ ∗  ∗2 ¢
∗ ∗
( )
∗
∗
∗
+ (1 −   )    − 2  
∗  =    ∗  + 
n
h
io
∗
∗
(1 − )(1 −  ∗ ) − (1 −  − ∗ )(1 −  ∗+1 ) ∗ 
+  ∗+1 +1

(6)

  =  

(13)

∗   ∗  = ∗ ∗

(14)

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)

(12)

+1

  =


 

−1

(15)

 ∗ =

∗
∗
−1

(16)

 ∗

h
³
´ ³
´ i1−

̃
1 + +1 = (1 +  ) (1 + ) 1 + ̃ 

³
´

1
1 +  +1 =  (1 + +1 )  +1
1+ +1
³
´
 ∗ +1
1
1 −   +1 =  (1 + +1 )   ∗ 1+∗
 

1+
1+  

(18)
(19)

+1

1+ ∗

−1 = 1+ 

+1 =

(17)

∗
+    − ∗  ∗ 

(20)
(21)

Note:   ∗    ∗   ∗    ∗    ∗   ∗  ∗   ∗      ∗      ∗    
are the 21 endogenous variables determined by these equations. Other variables that
appear in the table are determined as described in the text.

58

TABLE 2: SOCIAL PLANNER

h
³
h
³ ∗ ∗ ´i1−
´i1−
̃−
∗ exp ̃ −
1 = (1 − )  exp 2
+



 
̃
2̃ ∗ ∗
´i1−
h
³ ∗  ∗ ´i1−
h
³
̃ −
̃ −
1 = (1 − ) ∗ exp 2̃ ∗ ∗
+  1  exp 2
̃
³ 
´
+1
   =  ( +  ) + 1− −  
³ ∗
´
∗ +  ∗ ) + +1 −  ∗  ∗
∗ ∗ ∗ = ∗ (



1−

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)


 = (1 − )−1 + (1 − −1 )1− −1

(5)

∗
∗ )1−  ∗
∗ = (1 − )−1
+ (1 − −1
−1
n
h
io
+1 +1
1
1 = (1 − )   +1 
+
(
+

)
+1
+1

2+1 

n
h ∗
³
´io
∗+1 +1
∗
1
∗
∗

1 = (1 − )   +1 ∗
+
+

∗
∗
∗
+1
+1

2+1 
n
h ³ 
´
io
(
)

+1
1 =   +1   +1 +1 +1 − +1
+ [1 −  − (1 − ) +1 ] +1
½
∙
µ
¶
¸¾
¤ ∗
£
 (∗+1 )
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
∗
1 =   +1   +1 +1 +1 −  ∗
+ 1 −  − (1 − ) +1 ∗

(6)

 +1

+1


 =  
∗ 
∗
∗
 ∗  =  
 ∗
 = 

(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)

Note:   ∗    ∗   ∗    ∗   ∗    ∗   are the 13 endogenous variables
determined by these equations. Other variables that appear in the table are determined
as described in the text.

59

TABLE 3: DISTORTIONS

Υ ≡
Υ

−1


−1
³
≡ −1 1 −

Υ ≡ 
Υ ≡

1


1


´

− 2  2 −

time-varying markup∗ , product creation
1
2

−1

misalignment between markup and benefit from variety∗ , product creation
regulation costs, product creation, resource constraint
monopoly power and time-varying markup∗ , job creation and labor supply

Υ ≡  − 

failure of the Hosios condition∗∗ , job creation

Υ ≡ 

unemployment benefits, job creation

Υ ≡

incomplete markets, risk sharing

 ∗ 
 

Υ ≡  +1

Υ  ≡ 2  2
Υ  ≡ 2  2
∗

cost of adjusting bond holdings, risk sharing
wage adjustment costs, resource constraint and job creation
price adjustment costs, resource constraint

From translog preferences and sticky prices.

∗∗

From sticky wages and/or  6= .

60

TABLE 4: CALIBRATION

Parameter

Value

Risk Aversion



2

Frisch Elasticity

1  =

02

Discount Factor



=

099

Elasticity Matching Function



=

06

Flexible-Wage Firm Bargaining Power



=

06

Unemployment Benefit



=

038

Exogenous Worker Separation

 =

006

Vacancy Cost

=

028

Matching Eﬃciency

=

058

Home and Foreign Goods Substitutability

=

38

Home Bias



Translog Substitutability Parameter



=

062

Producer Exit



=

0026

Producer Entry Cost, Technology

 =

042

Producer Entry Cost, Regulation

 =

120

Price Adjustment Cost

 =

80

Wage Adjustment Cost

=

60

Historical Policy, Interest Rate Smoothing

 =

087

Historical Policy, Inflation Response

 =

193

Historical Policy, GDP Gap Response

 =

0075

Bond Adjustment Cost

 =

00025

Productivity Persistence

Φ11 = Φ22 =

0999

Productivity Spillover

Φ12 = Φ21 =

0

=

=

02

Productivity Innovations, Standard Deviation

00068

Productivity Innovations, Correlation

0253

61

TABLE 5: WELFARE EFFECTS OF REFORMS — NON STOCHASTIC STEADY STATE

Market Reform

∆Welfare (Historical)

∆Welfare (Ramsey)

Home

Foreign

Home

Foreign

0%

0%

0.21%

0.21%

1.20%

Asymmetric PMR

5.00%

0.22%

5.09%

0.41%

1.07%

Asymmetric LMR

3.32%

0.21%

3.44%

0.39%

1.00%

Asymmetric JOINT

7.38%

0.38%

7.41%

0.55%

0.96%

Symmetric PMR

5.22%

5.22%

5.30%

5.30%

1.00%

Symmetric LMR

3.51%

3.51%

3.61%

3.61%

0.85%

Symmetric JOINT

7.72%

7.72%

7.76%

7.76%

0.76%

Status Quo

Note: PMR
JOINT

Ramsey Inflation

≡ Product Market Reform; LMR ≡ Labor Market Reform;

≡ Product and Labor Market Reform; Asymmetric ≡ Home country reform;

Symmetric

≡ Home and Foreign country reform;

∆Welfare (Historical) ≡ Welfare change under historical policy;
∆Welfare (Ramsey) ≡ Welfare change under Ramsey policy.

62

TABLE 6: WELFARE EFFECTS OF REFORMS – STOCHASTIC STEADY STATE

Market Reform

Welfare Cost (Historical)

Welfare Cost (Ramsey)

Home

Foreign

Home

Foreign

Status Quo

0.94%

0.94%

0.75%

0.75%

Asymmetric PMR

0.78%

0.93%

0.65%

0.72%

Asymmetric LMR

0.55%

0.92%

0.50%

0.70%

Asymmetric JOINT

0.54%

0.92%

0.49%

0.69%

Symmetric PMR

0.77%

0.77%

0.62%

0.62%

Symmetric LMR

0.54%

0.54%

0.46%

0.46%

Symmetric JOINT

0.53%

0.53%

0.45%

0.45%

Note: PMR
JOINT

≡ Product Market Reform; LMR ≡ Labor Market Reform;

≡ Product and Labor Market Reform; Asymmetric ≡ Home country reform;

Symmetric

≡ Home and Foreign country reform;

Welfare Cost (Historical)
Welfare Cost (Ramsey)

≡ Welfare cost of business cycles under historical policy;

≡ Welfare cost of business cycles under Ramsey policy.

63

TABLE A.1: BUSINESS CYCLE STATISTICS

Variable

 

     





1st Autocorr



   )
(




1.32

1.32

1.30

1

1

1

0.91

0.76

0.74

1

1

1




0.68

1.00

0.76

0.51

0.75

0.58

0.89

0.72

0.72

0.87

0.99

0.88




3.30

3.09

4.13

2.50

2.34

3.18

0.89

0.76

0.76

0.94

0.64

0.71



0.50

0.50

0.46

0.38

0.38

0.35

0.92

0.81

0.81

0.88

0.76

0.73




0.50

0.54

0.49

0.38

0.41

0.38

0.85

0.94

0.91

0.16

0.62

0.71

∗ )
(  

0.55

0.29

0.97

∗ )
(  

0.86

0.36

0.41

Bold fonts denote data moments, normal fonts denote moments for the Baxter calibration of productivity,
and italics denote the BKK calibration.

64

TABLE A.2: VOLATILITY

Historical Policy
Status Quo

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

PMR

LMR

JOINT

PMR

LMR

JOINT



1.32

1.28

1.21

1.20

1.27

1.21

1.19



1.00

0.95

0.89

0.88

0.95

0.89

0.88



3.09

3.17

2.60

2.77

3.17

2.60

2.77



0.50

0.44

0.30

0.29

0.43

0.30

0.29

∗

1.32

1.32

1.32

1.31

1.27

1.21

1.19

∗


1.00

1.00

0.99

0.95

0.95

0.89

0.88

∗


3.09

3.08

3.08

3.08

3.17

2.60

2.77

∗

0.50

0.50

0.50

0.50

0.43

0.30

0.29

Ramsey Policy
Status Quo

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

PMR

LMR

JOINT

PMR

LMR

JOINT



1.35

1.11

1.06

1.06

1.02

0.95

0.95



1.59

1.06

0.87

0.87

0.87

0.72

0.72



3.92

3.43

2.79

2.99

3.18

2.70

2.92



0.38

0.34

0.28

0.27

0.29

0.19

0.19

∗

1.35

1.09

0.97

0.96

1.02

0.95

0.95

∗


1.59

1.09

0.90

0.89

0.87

0.72

0.72

∗


3.92

3.23

2.80

2.87

3.18

2.70

2.92

∗

0.38

0.31

0.24

0.23

0.29

0.19

0.19

65

TABLE A.3: PERSISTENCE

Historical Policy
Status Quo

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

PMR

LMR

JOINT

PMR

LMR

JOINT



0.76

0.75

0.70

0.70

0.75

0.70

0.70



0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72



0.76

0.75

0.73

0.71

0.75

0.73

0.71



0.81

0.79

0.69

0.68

0.79

0.69

0.68

∗

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.76

0.75

0.70

0.70

∗


0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

0.72

∗


0.76

0.77

0.76

0.77

0.75

0.73

0.71

∗

0.81

0.81

0.81

0.81

0.79

0.69

0.68

Ramsey Policy
Status Quo

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

PMR

LMR

JOINT

PMR

LMR

JOINT



0.18

0.50

0.64

0.65

0.58

0.66

0.67



-0.08

0.23

0.57

0.58

0.40

0.68

0.69



0.29

0.56

0.77

0.74

0.73

0.82

0.81



0.71

0.77

0.74

0.74

0.77

0.68

0.67

∗

0.18

0.39

0.49

0.48

0.58

0.66

0.67

∗


-0.08

0.12

0.30

0.28

0.40

0.68

0.69

∗


0.29

0.60

0.70

0.71

0.73

0.82

0.81

∗

0.71

0.73

0.74

0.72

0.77

0.68

0.67

66

TABLE A.4: CROSS-COUNTRY CORRELATIONS

Historical Policy
Status Quo

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Asymmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

Symmetric

PMR

LMR

JOINT

PMR

LMR

JOINT

∗ )
(  

0.29

0.29

0.29

0.29

0.29

0.29

0.29

∗ )
(  

0.36

0.36

0.36

0.35

0.35

0.36

0.35

Ramsey Policy
∗ )
(  

0.72

0.42

0.19

0.21

0.16

-0.09

-0.07

∗ )
(  

0.39

0.12

0.07

0.08

0.00

-0.02

0.01

67

C

C*

U

U*

0
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0.15
-0.1

0.1
0.05

-0.2

0
-0.05

-0.3
10

30

N

10

30

N

E

4

2

2

0

0

10

30

π

10

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

30

π

d

0

10

30

10

CA

d*

0
-0.1

-0.2

-0.2

-0.05

-0.3

-0.1

-0.1

-0.15

-0.12

10

30

Σ

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0
10

30

30

Σ

PC

80

-0.04

0

10

-0.06
-0.08

10

30

Σ

PC*

30

Σ

JC*

2
1

-1

0

-2
30

10

JC

0

10

30

-0.02

0.05

-0.4

*

TOT

-0.1

-0.3

30

µ

-2
10

10

µ

E*

-2

30

10

30

10

Figure 1: Home Productivity Shock, High Regulation, Historical Policy (Solid) versus Optimal Policy (Dashed).

30

C

C*

U

U*

0

5

0

2

4
3
2
10

-0.5

1

-2

-1

0

-3

-1.5

30
N

-1

10

30
N

E

10

30
µ

E*

30
µ*

0

40

10

0
-4

20

-10

-2

-6

0

-20

-4

-8

-20

-30
10

30
π

10

30
π

d

1
0.5
0.5
0

30

10

CA

d*

1

1.5

10

30
TOT

0

2

-1

1.5

-2

1

0
10

30
Σ

10

30
Σ

PC

80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
30

30
Σ

PC*

60
40
20
0
-20
-40
10

10

10

30
Σ

JC

JC*

0

-10

-5

10

30

-20

-10

-30

-15
10

30

10

Figure 2: Home Product Market Deregulation, Historical Policy (Solid) versus Optimal Policy (Dashed).

30

C

C*

U

U*

7
4

6

-0.5

-2

-1

5
2

4

-1.5

-4

-2

3

-6

0
10

30
N

10

30
N

E

-2.5
10

30
µ

E*

-20

0

-20

-40
-40

-60
10

30
π

10

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

-2

-2

-4

-4

-6

-6

30
π

d

1.5

10

30

30
Σ

30
TOT

0

0

-0.2

-0.5

-0.4

-1

-0.6
10

30
Σ

PC

10

30
Σ

PC*

10

30
Σ

JC

JC*

-30

100

100
80
60
40
20

10

CA

d*

0
10

30
µ*

0

0

10

-5
-40

-10

50

-15

-50

10

30

-20

-60

0
10

30

10

30

10

Figure 3: Home Labor Market Deregulation, Historical Policy (Solid) versus Optimal Policy (Dashed).

30

C

C*

7

U

U*
0

2

6

-2

-0.5

-4

-1

-6

-1.5

1

5

0

4
10

30
N

10

30
N

E

10

30
µ

E*

0
-4

-10

10

-20

-6

-30

-8

30
π

10

30
π

d

-2
-4
10

30

30
TOT

0
1.5

-1

1
0.5
0.5
0

10

CA

d*

1

1.5

30
µ*

0

40
20
0
-20
-40

10

-2

1

-3

0.5

0
10

30
Σ

10
Σ

PC

80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40

30

10

30
Σ

PC*

Σ

JC

JC*

-40
-5

40

-50

20

-10

-60

-15

0
30

30

0

60

10

10

10

30

10

30

10

Figure 4: Home Product and Labor Market Deregulation, Historical Policy (Solid) versus Optimal Policy (Dashed).

30

C

C*

U

U*

0

0

0.3

0.9

-0.02

-0.1

-0.04

0.28
0.8

0.26
0.24

0.7
10

30

N

10

-0.06

-0.3

-0.08

30

N

E

-0.2

10

*

-0.03

-0.08

0

30

µ

-0.06

2

10

µ

E*

3

30

-0.04

-0.1
-0.5

1

-0.05

-0.12
-0.14

-0.06

-1
10

30

π

10

30

π

d

10

30

CA

d*

0.02

-0.06

-0.05

-0.03

-0.02

-0.04
10

30

Σ

10

1.5

0.5
0
10

30

-0.1

-0.15

-0.12
10

30

Σ

PC*

10

30

Σ

JC

JC*

-1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2

1

-0.08

-0.1
30

Σ

PC

TOT
-0.04

0

0

30

-0.02

0.05
-0.02

10

-2

-0.4

-3
-0.6

-4
-5
10

30

-0.8
10

30

10

Figure 5: Home Productivity Shock, Historical Policy, High Regulation (Solid) versus Low Regulation (Dashed).

30

C

C*

U

U*

0
1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

0.15

-0.05

0.1

-0.1

0.05

-0.15

0
-0.05

10

30

N

10

30

N

E

4

2

2

0

0

10

30

π

10

0

0

-1

-1

-2

-2

30

π

d

10

30

10

CA

d*

0

0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.05

-0.3

-0.3

-0.1

-0.1

-0.15

-0.12

30

Σ

80

60

60

40

40

20

20

0

0
10

30

30

Σ

PC

80

-0.04

0

10

30

-0.02

0.05
-0.1

10

*

TOT

-0.1

-0.4

30

µ

-2
10

10

µ

E*

-2

30

-0.06
-0.08

10

30

Σ

PC*

10

30

Σ

JC

JC*

2

0

1.5
-1

1

-2

0.5
0

10

30

10

30

10

Figure 6: Home Productivity Shock, Optimal Policy, High Regulation (Solid) versus Low Regulation (Dashed).

30

C

Y
1.3

0.95

N

I
3

3

2

2

0.05

1.2
0.9

1.1

0
-0.05

1

0.85

CA

E

1

1

0.9

-0.1
-0.15

10

30

10

C*

30

10

30

Y*

I

10

30

N

*

-0.02

0.35

-0.04

0

0

-0.06

0.28
0.3

-0.5

0.26

30

TOT

E*

0.5
0.3

10

-0.5

-0.08

-1

-0.12

-0.1
0.25
10

30

10

30

10

π

η

U

30

10

30

π

w

10

30

µ

d

0
0.8

3
-0.1

-0.08
-0.02

0.6
2

-0.2
1

0.2

0

0

-0.3
10

30

10

30

-0.12

-0.03

-0.14
-0.04
10

30

π

η*

U*
0

-0.1

0.4

10

30

π

w*

0.01

0.2

-0.04

0

-0.04
0.5

0.1

-0.01
-0.05

-0.02

-0.08

0

0
30

*

-0.03

-0.02

10

30

µ

d*

1

-0.06

10

10

30

-0.03
10

30

-0.06
10

30

Figure A.1: Home Productivity Shock, High Regulation, Historical Policy.

10

30

