NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VULNERABILITY OF MINORITY HOMEOWNERS IN THE HOUSING BOOM
AND BUST
Patrick Bayer
Fernando Ferreira
Stephen L. Ross
Working Paper 19020
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19020
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

We thank the Ford Foundation, Research Sponsors Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center at
Wharton, and the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economic Studies at the University of Connecticut
for financial support. We thank Robert Avery and Erik Hurst for providing detailed comments on the
paper, as well as the participants in the 2012 January meetings of the Weimer School for Advanced
Studies in Real Estate, the NBER Summer Institute and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Gordon
MacDonald, Kyle Mangum, and Yuan Wang provided outstanding research assistance. The analyses
presented in this paper uses information provided by Experian Information Solutions, Inc. Experian
is a service mark and registered trademark of Experian Information Solutions, Inc. However, the substantive
content of the paper is the responsibility of the authors and does not reflects the specific views of any
credit reporting agencies. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19020.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Vulnerability of Minority Homeowners in the Housing Boom and Bust
Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Stephen L. Ross
NBER Working Paper No. 19020
May 2013, Revised February 2015
JEL No. J15,R2
ABSTRACT
This paper examines mortgage outcomes for a large, representative sample of individual home purchases
and refinances linked to credit scores in seven major US markets in the recent housing boom and bust.
Among those with similar credit scores and loan attributes, black and Hispanic homeowners had much
higher rates of delinquency and default in the downturn. There is important heterogeneity within minorities:
black and Hispanics that live in areas with lower employment rates and that have high debt to income
ratios are the driving force behind the observed racial and ethnic differences in foreclosures and delinquencies.
Moreover, these estimated differences are especially pronounced for loans originated near the peak
of the housing boom even after controlling for the effect of origination timing on households’ equity
position. These findings suggest that black and Hispanic homeowners drawn into the market near the
peak were especially vulnerable to adverse economic shocks and raise concerns about homeownership
as a mechanism for reducing racial disparities in wealth.
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Duke University
213 Social Sciences
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
patrick.bayer@duke.edu
Fernando Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu

Stephen L. Ross
University of Connecticut
Department of Economics
341 Mansfield Road, Unit 1063
Storrs, CT 06269-1063
stephen.l.ross@uconn.edu

“We're creating... an ownership society in this country, where more Americans than ever will be
able to open up their door where they live and say, welcome to my house, welcome to my piece of
property.” President George W. Bush, October 2004

1. Introduction
Owning a home has long been viewed as an important mechanism for creating and
storing wealth. Yet purchasing a home has traditionally required a substantial down payment,
limiting access to those with a sufficient amount of initial capital (Englehart, 1996 and
Brueckner, 1986). Motivated by this perspective, a number of public policy programs have had
an explicit goal of expanding homeownership and many politicians have embraced it as a means
of upward mobility.1 Moreover, many commentators have argued that relaxing down payment
constraints would help reduce large racial and ethnic gaps in homeownership and, ultimately,
lead to a reduction in racial and ethnic inequality (Rohe, Van Zandt and MacCarthy, 2002). In
fact, racial and ethnic disparities in wealth dwarf those in income. In 1998, for example, the
median wealth of black and Hispanic renters was less than $3,000 dollars and the 75th percentile
wealth was below $10,000 (Herbert, Haurin, Rosenthal and Duda 2005).2
The expansion of housing credit from the late 1990s to mid-2000s led to historically high
rates of homeownership in the United States for all households, including a peak of 49.7 percent
in 2004 Q2 for blacks and of 50.1 percent in 2007 Q1 for Hispanics, and this increase in
homeownership was largely cheered.

But as the subsequent housing and economic crises

developed, however, the risks of homeownership became increasingly obvious. Delinquency
and foreclosure rates rose sharply, especially in low-income neighborhoods, and many
households not only lost substantial housing wealth but also faced the prospect of lower credit
scores (higher borrowing costs) for years to come. A comparison of mortgage delinquencies and
foreclosures between 2005 and 2009 provides a particularly stark picture of the differential
Belsky, Retsinas and Duda (2005), Herbert, Haurin, Rosenthal and Duda (2005), and Quercia, McCarthy and
Wachter (2003) describe efforts to reduce down payment requirements for low-income borrowers, and Di and Liu
(2007) find evidence of a reduction in the importance of household wealth in the transition to homeownership in
recent years.
2
Oliver and Shapiro (1997) also estimate that the financial assets and net worth of black households nearing
retirement (aged 50-64) were only 14 and 20 percent of those of white households, respectively, while the analogous
figure for income was 67 percent. Also see Deng, Ross and Wachter (2003), Gyourko, Linneman, Wachter (1999),
Duca and Rosenthal (1991, 1994), Wachter, S.M., Megbolugbe (1992), Linneman, Wachter, (1989) on the role of
borrowing constraints in explaining the black-white homeownership gap.

impact of the downturn by race and ethnicity. Figure 1 shows that while all homeowners had
negligible 90-day delinquency and foreclosure rates in 2005 for our sample of seven major
markets, high rates of delinquency and foreclosure and large racial and ethnic differences had
emerged by 2009. More than 1 in 10 black and Hispanic homeowners in our sample had a
delinquent mortgage by 2009, compared to 1 in 25 for white households, and a similar pattern
held for foreclosure rates. By 2010, homeownership rates had fallen to 45.6 percent for blacks
and 47.5 percent for Hispanics.
While researchers have documented the greater exposure of minority households to
employment, income and health shocks (See, for example, Smith (1995), Altonji and Blank
(1999), Shapiro (2004), Shuey and Wilson (2008) and Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller (2012)),
much less is known about the differential impact of credit and financial shocks, especially in
housing markets. We tackle this issue by examining mortgage outcomes by race during the last
housing cycle in a diverse set of U.S. housing markets. The main goal of our analysis is to
properly estimate the differential delinquency and default by minority homeowners in the
housing market bust, accounting for observed differences in credit worthiness, loan
characteristics, other demographics, house type, neighborhood, and lender type, such as prime
and subprime lending.3
Moreover, we test another explanation for high rates of negative credit market outcomes
for minority homeowners during the crisis, i.e., the selection of high-risk households into the
housing market close to the peak of the housing cycle. If we recognize that households sort into
owner-occupancy in part due to both the cost/difficulty of obtaining mortgage credit and the risk
of exposure to future adverse events, then, for a given cost of credit, households with low risk of
adverse events will be more likely to be homeowners.

As the cost of credit falls or the

availability of credit expands, more households will become homeowners, and the newest
homeowners will be drawn from the remaining high risk pool. To the extent that wealth and
liquidity gaps leave minority households especially vulnerable to negative economic shocks, we

The literature also suggests that subprime lending has been an important factor in explaining rising foreclosure
rates in low income and minority neighborhoods. Gerardi and Willen (2009), Reid and Laderman (2009), Edminston
(2009), and Wachter, Russo and Hershaff (2010) show that the housing market crisis and the preceding growth of
subprime lending have disproportionately affected low income and minority neighborhoods. More broadly, Mian
and Sufi (2009) document large increases in foreclosure rates in neighborhoods that had a large volume of subprime
loans and that this growth in subprime loans occurred primarily in neighborhoods with very low income growth.

expect that those minority households drawn into homeownership following a major expansion
of credit are especially likely to default in a subsequent economic downturn.4
There are significant empirical challenges to studying mortgage outcomes by race and
ethnicity. Most directly, data sets linking home purchases and mortgage decisions by race to
detailed risk factors and subsequent loan performance for a representative sample of
homeowners have been essentially non-existent. Most research documenting the distribution and
performance of high cost or subprime loans have used one of two sources: a) Analyses using
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data (Calem, Gillen and Wachter 2004; Avery, Canner
and Cooke 2005; Apgar, Calder and Fauth 2004) typically find significant racial and ethnic
differences in the allocation of high cost credit, but these studies can only control for the
extremely limited borrower and loan attributes in HMDA; b) Proprietary data aggregated across
many lenders (Mayer and Pence 2007; Mayer, Pence and Sherlund 2009; Reid and Laderman
2009; Fisher, Lambie-Hanson and Willen 2010) often capture only a select subset of the
mortgage market and typically do not contain information on borrower race or ethnicity instead
documenting differences at the neighborhood level.
We overcome these issues by first assembling a unique panel data set that links a
representative sample of HMDA data on home purchase and refinance mortgages originated
between May and August in the years between 2004 and 2008, to public records data on housing
transactions and liens for approximately 270,000 homeowners in seven distinct metropolitan
housing markets: Chicago IL CMSA, Cleveland OH MSA, Denver CO MSA, Los-Angeles CA
CMSA, Miami-Palm Beach Corridor, San Francisco CA CMSA, and Washington DC-Baltimore
MD suburban Corridor. These data contain information on all liens as well as the name and
address of the individual purchasing the housing unit or refinancing their mortgage and in many
cases the name of the individual’s spouse, in addition to information about house prices, housing
characteristics, and neighborhood or census tract of the housing unit.
We then provided this rich sample to one of the major credit rating agencies. The credit
rating agency used the name and address to match borrowers to archival credit reporting data,
providing in each year a Vantage credit score plus detailed credit line information from each
For example, Charles and Hurst (2002) suggests that black households may have fewer family resources to draw
on; particularly, they document that, conditional on credit score and income, young black adults are less likely to
purchase homes due in part to the ability or willingness of parents to provide down payment assistance.

individual’s report.

This matched mortgage-housing unit-credit data provides detailed

information on the financial circumstances of each homeowner at the time of mortgage
origination, the terms of the mortgage including whether it was a high-cost loan, and the
performance of the mortgage over the subsequent years.5
Our final panel data has three critical advantages relative to others that have been
analyzed in the recent literature. First, all of the information is matched at the individual rather
than neighborhood level. This allows us to examine how the pricing and performance of loans
varies with the race of the homeowner separately from the racial composition of the
neighborhood. Second, our data set includes a representative sample of all mortgages that were
originated in these markets in the time period. Finally, our data set contains controls for all of
the standard risk factors that are typically considered in mortgage underwriting and pricing
models.
Our empirical results show that black and Hispanic households are more likely to become
delinquent and default on their mortgages than white households with similar credit scores, loan
characteristics, demographics, house type, neighborhood, and lender. Blacks are 3.0 and 1.5
percentage points more likely to enter foreclosure than whites in our home purchase and
refinance samples, respectively; while Hispanics are 3.1 and 2.1 percentage points more likely to
enter foreclosure in the same samples.

These differences are substantial relative to the

unconditional 5.2 and 3.7 percent average foreclosure rates in the home purchase and refinance
samples, and represent approximately 1/3 of the unconditional racial and ethnic differences in the
home purchase samples and 1/2 of the unconditional differences in the refinance sample. Most
of this decline in the unconditional racial and ethnic differences arise from including general
controls for observable mortgage risk factors in our econometric model, as opposed to controls
associated with subprime lending.
Next, we include in our model a series of contemporaneous controls that represent
information that may not have been available to the lender at the time of mortgage origination.
These controls include county by credit year fixed effects, contemporaneous measures of
negative equity based on county level price indices, and the interaction of the negative equity
Bhutta and Canner (2013) provide the one exception in the literature that documents racial and ethnic differences
in foreclosure controlling for borrower credit scores by merging HMDA data with data from a credit reporting
agency, but they are only able to control for the overall amount of the primary mortgage because they do not observe
either subordinate debt or the value of the home securing that debt.

variables with race and ethnicity specific measures of county employment rates. These controls
decrease conditional racial differences in foreclosure by approximately 50 percent and decrease
conditional ethnic differences in foreclosure by between 10 and 20 percent. The decline in racial
and ethnic differences arises entirely from the use of race specific employment rates.
Controlling for county level employment rates does not erode the racial and ethnic differences in
foreclosure. The foreclosure and delinquency differences are explained by the lower rates of
employment among blacks, and to some extent Hispanics, and the higher rates of foreclosure
among all households with negative equity and in counties with low employment rates for their
group.
We then attempt to identify which borrowers are responsible for the observed racial and
ethnic differences in delinquency and foreclosure. For African-Americans home buyers, we find
that all racial differences are concentrated among borrowers with subprime credit scores and
high debt expense to income ratios. Ethnic differences are somewhat higher for high debt
expense to income ratio loans, but subprime credit does not seem to matter. Furthermore, ethnic
differences in foreclosure are concentrated among Hispanic borrowers in counties with low
employment rates for Hispanics. While as noted earlier within county employment rate
differences between Hispanic and whites does not explain ethnic differences, the effect of
exposure to low employment rates has a much larger effect on Hispanic homeowners than on
white homeowners.

A similar, but more modest phenomenon, is observed for black

homeowners. The larger impact of county level employment rates on the foreclosure risk of
minority borrowers is consistent with those borrowers being less able to manage the economic
distress created by economic downturns, even after controlling for differential exposure to loans
with risky terms and contemporaneous levels of negative equity and employment risk.
We already noted that recent home purchases have higher foreclosure and delinquency
rates than the refinance sample – which by definition are composed of homeowners that were
drawn into the housing market much earlier. As a final test of our hypothesis concerning the
vulnerability of recent minority homebuyers, we examine whether the timing of the selection into
the housing market has an effect on delinquency and foreclosure. We find that racial and ethnic
differences are largest for home purchase originations in 2006, the peak of the housing boom
according to the Case-Shiller price index, even after controlling for the subsequent higher rates
of negative equity for borrowers who purchased near the peak of the housing market. The

pattern is similar, but less strong, for the refinance sample. We also examine racial and ethnic
differences for a subsample of refinance mortgages that were originally purchased between 1998
and 2008 and subsequently refinanced in our sample period. For this subsample, racial and
ethnic differences in foreclosure are tiny for homes that were originally purchased from 1998 to
2000, but substantial for homeowners who originally purchased their homes between 2001 and
2007, i.e., those drawn into the market during the credit expansion, with the largest effects
arising between 2004 and 2007. These home purchase timing effects are largest for minority
borrowers with high debt to income ratios and who are exposed to low employment rates.
Taken together, our results provide strong evidence that minority households drawn into
homeownership late in the recent housing market boom were especially vulnerable in the
subsequent downturn in ways that are not explained by (i) borrower characteristics observed at
origination, (ii) exposure to different lenders or loans, (iii) performance of local labor and
housing markets. These results call into question the idea of encouraging homeownership as a
general mechanism for reducing racial disparities in wealth. To the extent that increases in
homeownership are driven by the entry of especially vulnerable households into the owneroccupied market, such a push may backfire, leaving vulnerable households in a difficult financial
situation and adversely affecting their wealth and credit-worthiness for years.
There are important caveats to our results. First, we do not directly observe household
savings or wealth, which might help to explain why some households are able to manage adverse
economic shocks more easily than others. Future work could more explicitly measure whether
the estimated differences in mortgage outcomes by race reported here are primarily due to
differences in wealth. Another limitation of our analysis is that our study period only covers the
recent housing crisis. While Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller (2012) shows similar patterns by race
for negative labor market shocks in a number of recent recessions, there is a chance that the
recent housing market boom and bust may be unique in history.
The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. The next section presents the data used
in the analysis. Section 3 presents the main results from our analyses of credit outcomes, and
section 4 shows heterogeneity in those estimates. Section 5 presents additional analyses by the
year of mortgage origination or home purchase. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data

Our data set is based on public Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data from
between 2004 and 2008 and proprietary housing transaction/lien and assessor’s databases
purchased from Dataquick.6 We begin with a convenience sample of seven major housing
markets where Dataquick has information on refinance mortgages going back to at least 2004:
Chicago IL CMSA, Cleveland OH MSA, Denver CO MSA, Los-Angeles CA CMSA, MiamiPalm Beach Corridor, San Francisco CA CMSA, and Washington DC-Baltimore MD suburban
Corridor. We restrict our HMDA data to home purchase or refinance mortgages on owneroccupied, 1-4 family properties.

In the Dataquick sample, we eliminate non-arm’s length

transactions, transactions where the name field contains the name of a church, trust, or where the
first name is missing, and transactions where the address could not be matched to a 2000 Census
tract or the zip code was missing (this last step eliminates very few records due to the high
quality of the name and address records in the assessor files). The HMDA and Dataquick data
are then merged based on year, loan amount, name of lender, state, county, and census tract. We
obtain high quality matches for approximately 50% of our HMDA sample.7 As we show in Table
1 below, this criteria does not impact the representativeness of our final sample.
Next, we draw a sample of mortgages to provide to a credit-reporting agency. These
mortgages were sampled from May through August so that the March 31st archival credit report
for the year of the mortgage provides appropriate information on the borrowers’ credit quality
prior to obtaining the mortgage. We oversample mortgages to minority borrowers, mortgages to
white borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods, and high cost mortgages as
designated in HMDA as high rate spread loans. In order to maximize the number of minority
loans given the likelihood of sample saturation, we first draw the following oversamples based
on race and ethnicity: 500 in each site, year and group (400 for 2004)8 selected randomly from
mortgages to black borrowers, mortgages to Hispanic borrowers, and mortgages to white
borrowers in minority or low-income neighborhoods. We then split the remaining sample into

6

Data provided by DataQuick Information Systems, Inc. www.dataquick.com. The property transaction data is
collected by Dataquick or by intermediaries from county assessor’s offices and contains a population of all sales and
liens of all types including refinance mortgages, home improvement loans, and home equity lines of credit..
7
The key factor limiting the match rate is the lender name because the lender of record in the local assessor’s data
often differs from the respondent in HMDA. Less restrictive match criteria can yield a match rate around 90%, but
in order to be conservative we restricted ourselves only to instances where we successfully match on lender name.
8
The smaller sample in 2004 is driven by budgetary restrictions because costs depend upon the number of records,
and earlier years imply more records because we follow every borrower from the origination year until 2009.

rate spread and non-rate spread loans drawing 1000 borrowers associated with rate spread loans
in each year and site (800 for 2004) and 2714 borrowers (2286 for 2004) from the non-rate
spread sample in each year and site.

Weights are developed based on the probability of

9

selection, and each site receives equal weight in the pooled sample.10
This sample is provided to Experian Information Solutions, Inc.11 who matches the name
and address of each borrower and co-borrower to archival credit report data from March 31st
preceding the mortgage transaction and March 31st for every year that follows this transaction
through 2009. Our match rate for the pre-mortgage archive is 81.4 and 84.5 percent in the home
purchase and refinance samples, respectively. For years following the mortgage, the match rate
rises by 4 to 5 percentage points. In many cases, these individuals also may not have been found
by the credit reporting agencies when the lender requested a report in which case lack of a score
matches the information that the lender would have had when approving and pricing the loan, but
lenders can enter by hand additional information that is not available to us such as social security
number or previous addresses.12
Table 1 illustrates the impact of our match process on the sample mean on race and
ethnicity of the borrower, whether the primary mortgage is a high cost or rate spread loan, which
is defined as a 3 percentage point or more spread between the mortgage Annual Percentage Rate
(APR) and the interest rate on 10 year treasury notes (the APR includes both the interest or note
rate on the loan and the effect of closing costs on the cost of credit.), loan amount, family income
of the borrower, and census tract variables including median income, percent black, Hispanic and
Asian resident, and percent of properties owner-occupied. The first column shows the mean for
the entire HMDA sample for our seven sites where each site receives equal weight in the mean.
The second column shows the mean for our HMDA-Dataquick match, and the third column
9

The sampling is explicitly based on 8 strata for each site: black borrowers, Hispanic borrowers, white borrowers in
minority or low-income neighborhoods, and all other borrowers divided into rate spread and non-rate spread loans.
All loans from the same strata and year receive equal weight.
10
We have a convenience sample of housing markets so it would be inappropriate to weight based on the number of
mortgages. In any stratified sampling scheme, Los Angeles, which dominates our sample in terms of total number
of HMDA mortgages, would be selected with certainty while housing markets like Denver and Cleveland would be
assigned to a stratum with other similarly sized and located metropolitan areas and if chosen would receive a higher
weight (offsetting the smaller number of mortgages) based on the probability of being selected from the stratum.
11
Experian is a service mark and registered trademark of Experian Information Solutions, Inc.
12
For home purchase mortgages, we only observe the address of the new housing unit, but in practice this does not
present a major problem for the credit data match because the archival data can be matched based on current and
several past addresses and in practice we observe only a small difference between the home purchases and refinance
match rate.

restricts our sample to mortgages between May and August. The fourth column shows the
weighted mean for the sample of mortgages that was provided to the credit reporting agency.
The last column in Table 1 shows the weighted means on these common variables for just the
subsample where the name and address was matched to the minimum amount of credit line data
in order to generate a record. The sample composition is quite stable except for a moderate
decline in share white and moderate increase in loan amount between columns 1 and 2 associated
with the difficulty of matching lender names between HMDA and the Dataquick provided
assessor files. While our HMDA-DataQuick match algorithm loses 50 percent of the HMDA
mortgages, the composition of the match sample is quite similar to the composition of the
population of mortgages, and the other aspects of our sample construction have virtually no
impact on the composition of mortgages over key attributes.
Table 2 shows the weighted means for our final samples of post mortgage credit reports
for the home purchase and refinance subsamples that were successfully merged to pre-mortgage
credit report data.13 The first two columns show the mean and standard deviation for our sample
of home purchase mortgages, and the last two columns show these values for refinance
mortgages. From the contemporaneous credit history data, we obtain number of 90 to 180 day
mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures in the last 12 months. From the pre-mortgage data, we
obtain these same outcomes prior to the mortgage and the borrowers’ (or if unavailable
coborrower’s) Vantage score. The first credit report observation following the mortgage is used
to obtain monthly mortgage payment, which when combined with HMDA income is used to
calculate the mortgage payment to income ratio.14 The monthly mortgage payment is combined
with debt payments from the pre-mortgage credit data and HMDA income to calculate debt
payment to income ratio. Finally, age is observed for many borrowers and coborrowers in the
credit history files.
The HMDA data contains whether the loan is a high cost or exceeds a standard rate
spread above treasury rates, borrower race and ethnicity, gender, loan amount, applicant income,

13

The samples sizes in Table 2 are substantially larger than the samples size in the final column of Table 1 because
each mortgage in Table 1 will have one post mortgage credit report observation for every year between the year after
origination and the final year of our data in 2009.
14
The mortgage payment for the current mortgage is only observed in the credit line data from the year following
the mortgage. However, in most instances, borrowers who are matched by the credit reporting agency prior to the
mortgage are also matched in the following year.

and whether a coborrower is present. We use the loan amount to calculate whether the loan is
non-conforming or a jumbo loan, i.e. too large to be purchased by the Government Sponsored
Enterprises, and based on census tract we observe tract racial and ethnic composition, income,
poverty rate, share owner-occupied and the value of median rents to median home price, which is
viewed as a proxy for anticipated housing price appreciation. From the match with transaction
data, we observe the presence and size of subordinate liens, whether the liens are fixed or
variable rate mortgages, the loan to value ratio based on sales price for home purchase mortgages
and on an estimated value based on either previous sales price15 or assessed value for refinance
mortgages when a previous sale is unobserved,16 and detailed property attributes including
whether single family home, a condominium, and number of units on the property.

3. Delinquencies and Foreclosures by Race
In this section, we present empirical estimates for models of two housing market
outcomes, delinquencies and foreclosures. Each mortgage origination contributes one or more
observations based on the origination date.

Specifically, the 2004 originations contribute

housing market outcome observations in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2009, while each 2008
origination contributes only a single post mortgage outcome for 2009. We write those outcomes
d for individual i, of race r, at time of origination s, calendar time t, and MSA m, as:

(1)
where R includes dummies for blacks, Hispanics and Asians, so all estimates are relative to white
households. Xis include the set of pre-mortgage origination variables reported in Table 2.17 Our

15

We use our extensive housing transaction data to develop both a hedonic and repeat sales quarterly price index for
each county. When we observe a previous sale of the property, we simply adjust that earlier sales price to estimate
current value based on the hedonic index. However, the repeat sales index yields quite similar estimates.
16
When a previous sale is not observed, we use the county assessment and adjust that value by the average ratio of
sales price to assessed value for that county and quarter, see Clapp, Nanda and Ross (2008). In California, our
refinance sample is restricted to mortgages where a previous purchase is observed because property assessments are
uninformative as to the value of the underlying property. This restriction is feasible because the Dataquick data in
California contains transactions back to the late 1980s.
17
The loan to value ratio is included as intervals or bins below 0.6, 0.6 to 0.8, 0.8 to 0.84, 0.85 to 0.89, 0.90 to 0.94,
0.95 to 1.00, 1.00 to 1.04, and 1.05 and above. The Vantage scores are included as a series of dummy variables
based on 20 point bins. The mortgage payment and debt to income ratios are also divided into bins. The bins vary in

design relies on the fact that we are controlling for almost all characteristics of borrowers,
houses, and mortgages that were observable by lenders at time of origination.

Especially

noteworthy is the information about credit scores, which in principle means that we will compare
housing outcomes between blacks and whites, for example, with similar creditworthiness and
with similar choices of house type, neighborhoods, and loan characteristics. Finally, the model
also includes year of origination by year of the credit profile indicators

st

to deal with common

trends, as well as housing market fixed effects.
Next, we expand our set of underwriting controls

to include a variety of variables

intended to capture the potential influence of the subprime mortgage market on observed racial
and ethnic differences. The extended model includes a dummy for whether the loan is a high
cost or rate spread loan, as defined in the data section above. Since subprime lending shares are
highly concentrated in a subsample of lenders, we include lender fixed effects, and we also
include neighborhood or census tract fixed effects because subprime lending is also potentially
concentrated in certain cities and neighborhoods. Finally, we include additional controls to
recognize that the impact of key loan terms on borrower outcomes may vary between prime and
subprime borrowers.

We identify borrowers with Vantage scores below 701 as subprime

borrowers18 and then interact the subprime dummy with dummy variables associated with key
thresholds of loan to value ratio, debt to income ratio, mortgage payment to income ratio,19 as
well as with the presence of subordinate debt and whether the primary mortgage has a fixed or
adjustable interest rate.
We also consider a model that includes contemporaneous controls in order to capture
changes in the economic environment during the sample period

(2)

size. For mortgage payment to income ratios, the smallest bins are 0.02 are around the traditional secondary market
criteria of 0.28, and for total debt payment to income ratios the smallest bins are 0.03 around the threshold of 0.36.
18
The credit reporting agencies that developed the Vantage score algorithms describes scores below 701 as nonprime. Further, a Vantage score of 701 is comparable to a FICO score of 660 in that in both cases approximately
30% of individuals have credit scores below these thresholds.
19
The loan to value thresholds used are 0.80, 0.90, 0.95 and 1.00, the debt to income thresholds used are 0.36 and
0.45, and the mortgage payment to income ratio thresholds used are 0.28 and 0.33

Specifically, the model is extended to include housing market by current year fixed effects,
contemporaneous controls for negative equity, and controls for employment risk. The controls
for negative equity are based on original loan to value ratio scaled by changes in the price level
based on a county level hedonic price index that was estimated using all single family
transactions in the county during the sample period. We create a dummy for whether the current
loan to value ratio is between 1.0 and 1.1, 1.1 and 1.3, 1.3 and 1.5, and above 1.5. The literature
on mortgage foreclosure and default suggests that the likelihood of foreclosure and the effect of
negative equity on foreclosure will vary with the employment outcomes of homeowners. We do
not have individual information about employment. Instead, we create measures of local
employment and unemployment rates for prime age (25-54) males for each county, year and
racial/ethnic group using the public use sample of the American Community Survey, where the
employment rate is calculated as the fraction of males in that group who reported being
employed last week. We interact this employment measure with the negative equity dummy
variables. One caveat is that Gyourko and Tracy (2013) demonstrate substantial attenuation bias
in credit outcome models when county level employment rates are used to proxy for actual future
employment outcomes. In our case, however, we find that county employment rates (at least as a
proxy for the risk of unemployment) have strong explanatory power for differential rates of
mortgage delinquency and foreclosure.
The first and fifth columns of Table 3 present the unconditional racial and ethnic
differences in 90-180 day mortgage delinquency and in foreclosure filing, respectively, for the
samples of home purchase and refinance mortgages. The estimates for the home purchase
sample are shown in panel 1 and the estimates for the refinance sample are shown in panel 2.
We find massive differences for both black and Hispanic borrowers of 8.6 and 3.0 for black
home purchase and refinance borrowers and of 9.1 and 4.3 for Hispanic borrowers in the
probability of facing a foreclosure filing, as compared to the 5.2 and 3.7 percent average
foreclosure rates in the home purchase and refinance samples, respectively. Both overall
delinquency and foreclosure rates and racial and ethnic differences in those rates are larger in the
home purchase sample. One possible explanation for this difference is that, on average, the
homes in the refinance sample were purchased earlier. Those homeowners may have had more
time to accumulated housing equity prior to the housing market downturn, or were generally less

vulnerable to housing shocks. We will explore the timing of house purchase in more detail in
section 5.
The next two columns of estimates for the delinquency and foreclosure models include
first the detailed underwriting variables and then in the next column those controls plus the
additional controls for subprime lending including the lender and neighborhood fixed effects (see
appendix Tables A1 and A2 for a complete list of parameter estimates). Blacks are 3.0 and 1.5
percentage points more likely to enter foreclosure than comparable whites in our home purchase
and refinance samples, respectively; while comparable Hispanics are 3.1 and 2.1 percentage
points to enter foreclosure than whites in the same samples after controlling for risk factors
observable at the time of the loan. Comparing columns 1 and 5 to columns 3 and 7 indicates that
these differences represent approximately 1/3 of the unconditional racial and ethnic differences
in the home purchase samples and 1/2 of the unconditional differences in the refinance sample.
For both samples, both outcome variables, and both groups, the main erosion of racial and ethnic
differences in credit market outcomes arises from the inclusion of standard underwriting
controls. The inclusion of lender and neighborhood fixed effects and additional controls for
subprime lending had almost no effect on the estimated racial and ethnic differences with one
exception. The control for whether the loan was high cost or a rate spread loan accounts for the
entire reduction in the estimates between columns 2 and 3 and columns 6 and 7 (see appendix
Table A2. Significantly, the effect associated with having a high cost loan cannot simply arise
from the higher mortgage payments associated with these loans because our model contains
detailed controls for the housing and total debt expense to income ratios faced by households.
Estimates for Asians are also statistically significant, but substantially smaller than the
differences observed for African-Americans and Hispanics and not economically meaningful.
The final pair of columns, columns 4 and 8, in Table 3 presents the estimates for models
that include a series of contemporaneous controls that represent information that may not have
been available to the lender at the time of mortgage origination. These controls further erode the
delinquency and foreclosure differences decreasing racial differences in foreclosure by
approximately 50 percent and decreasing ethnic differences in foreclosure by between 10 and 20
percent. The decline in racial and ethnic differences arises entirely from the use of race specific
employment rates. Racial and ethnic differences are essentially unchanged in models that simply

control for county by year fixed effects or control for the overall county level employment rate.20
The foreclosure and delinquency differences that were not explained by standard mortgage risk
variables are in substantial part explained by the lower rates of employment among blacks during
the recent crisis, and to some extent among Hispanics, and the higher rates of foreclosure among
all households with negative equity and in counties with low employment rates for their group.21
As noted above, racial and ethnic differences in delinquency and foreclosure in the
refinance are smaller than the comparable differences in the home purchase sample. Racial and
ethnic differences continue to be higher in the home purchase sample even after controlling for
mortgage risk factors. Further, in columns 4 and 8, the larger differences in the home purchase
sample cannot be explained simply by the increased time available to homeowners in the
refinance sample to accumulate housing equity prior to the crisis because these models explicitly
control for current loan to value ratios. On the other hand, since foreclosure rates in general are
higher in the home purchase sample, the unexplained differences are a larger share of the
unconditional racial and ethnic differences in the refinance sample than in the home purchase
sample. In columns 3 and 7, where we control for mortgage risk factors, racial and ethnic
differences are about 1/3 of the average rate of foreclosure in the home purchase sample, and 1/2
of the average rate of foreclosure for the refinance sample. For the models that control for
contemporaneous factors, the pattern is the same, but the relative magnitude of the unexplained
differences are much smaller for the home purchase sample.

4. Heterogeneity in the Race Differentials
We first present the time pattern of these race differentials in Figure 2. We estimate these
parameters by interacting the race dummies with calendar year indicators. The top panel of the
figure shows racial and ethnic differences for the home purchase sample and the bottom panel of
the figure shows these differences for the refinance sample. Each figure contains four graphs

Whether race specific or overall county employment rates are used in the model, the estimates indicate that
negative equity and employment rates have powerful and interactive effects. The estimates on the negative equity
dummy variables are large and positive, while the estimates on the interactions with employment rate are negative
and similar in magnitude suggesting that being in negative equity has little or no effect on foreclosure when
employment rates are high, but becomes increasingly important as employment rates fall. See appendix Table A3.
21
The R-squares for these models are not very high in large part because future adverse outcomes are heavily driven
by events that happen after the borrower obtains their mortgage, but also because the fit of linear models tends to be
lower when events are infrequent.

representing the racial differences in each year unconditionally (circle), conditional on traditional
risk factors (diamond), conditional on subprime controls (square), and conditional on
contemporaneous controls (triangle). While the inclusion of additional controls erodes the level
of racial and ethnic differences, the pattern is the same overall for all models and both groups.
Racial and ethnic differences are relatively small or non-existent beginning in 2005, and then
grow rapidly as the crisis proceeds typically peaking at the end of our sample in 2009.
Next we attempt to identify which borrowers are responsible for the observed racial and
ethnic differences in delinquency and foreclosure. In order to accomplish this, we re-estimate
the final models in Table 3, columns 4 and 8, including interactions with key risk factors. We
consider three mortgage risk factors by interacting race and ethnicity with dummy variables for
whether the borrower has a subprime credit score (vantage score below 701), whether the loan is
a high cost or rate spread loan, and whether the debt expense to income ratio is above levels that
were required during this time to be considered for purchase by the Government Sponsored
Enterprises, FreddieMac and Fannie Mae (a ratio above 0.45).

We also estimate models

interacting the race and ethnicity dummies with one minus the group specific, county level
employment rate described above. The models use one minus the employment rate so that the
estimated coefficients on the black and Hispanic dummy variables are for racial and ethnic
differences where employment rates are 100 percent, as opposed to zero percent, which would be
far out of the sample range.
These estimates are shown in Table 4 with the results for the home purchase sample
presented in panel 1 and for the refinance sample in panel 2. Columns 1 and 4 present the
baseline results from columns 4 and 8 in Table 3. Columns 2 and 5 present the results where
race and ethnicity is interacted with the mortgage risk factors. For blacks, racial differences in
foreclosure and delinquency are higher in the home purchase sample for borrowers with
subprime credit scores and high debt to income ratios and in the refinance sample for borrowers
with rate spread loans and high debt to income ratios. Significantly, no racial differences remain
for black borrowers who do not have any of these risk factors. For Hispanics, ethnic differences
in delinquency and foreclosure are larger among borrowers with high debt to income ratios in
both samples, but these effects are smaller than the effects for blacks and most of the ethnic
differences observed in Table 3 remain among Hispanic borrowers who do not have any of these
risk factors.

Columns 3 and 6 present the results where race and ethnicity are both interacted with one
minus the prime age male employment rate, a general unemployment rate that accounts for both
unemployment and labor force participation. For both groups, racial and ethnic differences are
concentrated among borrowers with higher county by group level unemployment rates.
However, the ethnic differences in the impact of employment rates are significantly larger than
the racial differences. In order to give a sense of the magnitude of these effects, we estimate the
racial and ethnic differences for borrowers at low risk of unemployment, i.e. when the
employment rate among prime age males as a share of all prime age males is 96 percent. At this
high employment level, ethnic differences in foreclosure are near zero at 0.005 and 0.006 in the
home purchase and refinance samples, respectively, but racial differences in foreclosure remain
significantly higher at 0.029 and 0.011 for the two samples.

5. Heterogeneity in Mortgage Outcomes by Year of Origination
This section examines the pattern of delinquency and foreclosure risk based on year of
origination. First, we restrict the sample to 2008 and 2009 delinquencies and foreclosures in
order to focus on the crisis period and to avoid confounding the direct effect of origination year
with differences that arise because earlier origination years allow for foreclosure and
delinquency during the pre-crisis period. Table 5 presents the unconditional racial and ethnic
differences by origination year with 2004 originations as the omitted category. For home
purchase originations, there is a substantial increase in the racial and ethnic differences in
foreclosure and delinquency for originations between 2005 and 2007 relative to 2004 with the
largest differences arising for 2006 originations. The pattern for refinance mortgages is less
clear with substantially smaller and less significant differences in the estimate racial and ethnic
effects between originations from 2005 to 2007 and originations in 2004, and no differences at
all in the racial foreclosures differences for refinance mortgages.
As in Figure 2, Figure 3 presents racial and ethnic differences in foreclosure for all four
model specifications presented in Table 3, except Figure 2 presents racial differences by
origination year. The top panel of Figure 3 shows the results for the home purchase sample. In
all models, we get a peak in racial and ethnic differences 2006 at the peak of the housing market.
For the final model indicated by the triangle, these differences arise even after controlling for
contemporaneous housing prices, and so these results cannot simply be driven by the fact that

2006 home purchase mortgages exposed home buyers to the largest declines in housing prices
relative to the purchase price.

Rather, minority homebuyers in 2006 appear to be more

vulnerable to the economic downturn than homebuyers in earlier years or homebuyers after the
onset of the crisis, even after conditioning on detailed credit risk factors associated with the
borrower and the mortgage. The bottom panel of Figure 2 shows the results for the refinance
sample. As noted above, racial differences in foreclosure do not increase for originations in or
near 2006. Ethnic differences in foreclosure for the refinance sample follow the same pattern as
was observed in the home purchase sample, but the effects for 2006 are substantially smaller in
magnitude.
We next use the refinance sample in order to examine home purchase originations over a
longer timeframe. Specifically, we match refinance mortgages with the original home purchases
back to 1998, which is the earliest year for which we observe home purchases in all seven of our
markets. In Table 6, we present the unconditional racial and ethnic differences in foreclosure by
home purchase year relative to mortgage refinancing for homes purchased prior to 2008. While
the sample represents only home purchases that selected into refinance and our model must
control for credit scores observed after the home purchase, our estimates demonstrate the
significance of purchase year for a representative sample of refinance mortgages. Notably, the
origination year coefficients are relatively flat for the first three years of the sample 1998 to
2000. After 2000, we see substantially larger racial and ethnic differences in foreclosures for
homes that were originally purchased closer to the boom, and the largest differences arise
between 2004 and 2006. Unexpectedly, racial and ethnic differences drop for home purchases in
2006 relative to 2005 and 2007, except for the racial differences in delinquency. We do not have
any explanation for this anomaly. Figure 4 presents the racial and ethnic differences by home
purchase year for all four models. As before, the basic pattern of results is robust to including
controls for mortgage risk factors, contemporaneous employment risk, and levels of negative
equity.
Finally, following up on the analyses in Table 4, we examine the effect of home purchase
year for borrowers with key risk factors by interacting year of home purchase with either a
dummy variable for whether the borrower has a high debt to income ratio or with the race and
year specific unemployment rate for the county in which the borrower resides. These results are
shown in Table 7 for the home purchase sample and in Table 8 for the refinance sample. In the

home purchase sample, both blacks and Hispanics have larger racial and ethnic differences in
delinquency and foreclosure in 2005 and 2006 if they had high debt to income ratios with the
effects being largest in 2006, and Hispanics have larger ethnic differences in delinquency and
foreclosure after 2004 if they were exposed to high unemployment rates with the effects being
largest in 2006 and 2007. Similarly for the refinance sample, the effect of having a high debt to
income ratio on racial and ethnic differences in delinquency and foreclosure tends to be largest
for homes purchased between 2001 and 2005, and the effect of exposure to high unemployment
rates on racial and ethnic differences tends to be highest for home purchased between 2002 and
2007.
Overall, these results corroborate the intuition presented in introduction. As credit
expanded during the housing boom, households with higher unobserved risk of defaults and
delinquencies entered the housing market and, empirically, black and Hispanic borrowers were
much more likely to be in this group. The selection of these especially high-risk households into
the market translated into much higher rates of delinquencies and defaults once the recession
started, especially among minority borrowers.

6. Summary and Conclusion
In this paper, we identify large racial and ethnic differences in the likelihood of mortgage
delinquencies and foreclosures in the recent housing market bust and associated recession.
Substantial differences remain after controlling for (i) the borrower, home, loan and market
attributes, including the individual’s credit score, that would have been observed by lenders ex
ante, (ii) differences in lenders, neighborhoods or the significance of loan attributes that might be
associated with subprime lending and (iii) ex post measures of exposure to local housing and
labor market shocks. Collectively, these results imply that the relatively poor mortgage outcomes
for minority borrowers are not simply a function of greater participation in the subprime sector
or greater exposure to neighborhood housing price declines or unemployment rates.
Finally, these differences are concentrated among borrowers who may have difficulty
making mortgage payments during the crisis. Blacks and Hispanics with high debt payment to
income ratios have larger racial and ethnic differences in delinquencies and foreclosures, and in
fact black borrowers who do not have risk factors of this type are no more likely to have a
delinquency or foreclosure than white borrowers. Also, blacks and Hispanics experience much

larger increases in delinquency and foreclosure rates as county employment rates fall during the
crisis than are experienced by equivalent white borrowers.

These effects are largest for

Hispanics, and we do not find any ethnic differences in delinquency and foreclosure in counties
and years with relatively high employment rates for Hispanics.
A further decomposition of our main findings by origination year reveals that the large
estimated racial and ethnic differences in mortgage outcomes are concentrated in mortgages that
were originated in 2005 through 2007. That is, black and Hispanic households drawn into
homeownership at the peak of the credit expansion and housing boom were especially likely to
subsequently become delinquent and default on their mortgages. This finding is again robust to
the inclusion of a broad set of controls for borrower, lender, loan, and neighborhood attributes, as
well as controls for contemporaneous risk factors. This finding is also observed over a longer
time period when examining racial differences by year of home purchase in the refinance
sample. And these effects are more pronounced for borrowers with high debt to income ratios or
with exposure to lower employment rates.
The simple idea discussed earlier that forward looking borrowers sort into
homeownership in part based on their risk of experiencing adverse future events highlights a
potential unified explanation for the full set of empirical results. African-Americans and
Hispanics borrowers appear to be much more vulnerable to changes in market employment rates,
declines in housing prices and having originally high debt expense to income ratios. AfricanAmerican and Hispanic homebuyers near the peak of the housing market and the credit market
expansion have the highest foreclosure rates during the crisis, and these high rates cannot be
explained by the higher rates on negative equity experienced by borrowers who took out loans
when housing prices were at their peak.
Our results complement a recent literature that aims to understand the causes and
consequences of the last housing cycle. For example, while Mian and Sufi (2009) demonstrate a
significant role for subprime lending in explaining overall neighborhood level foreclosure rates,
our analysis implies that subprime lending can explain at most a modest fraction of observed
racial and ethnic differences in credit market outcomes. In addition, tighter underwriting
standards and increased financial oversight arising from recent financial reforms are unlikely to
address these concerns because the observed differences arise after controlling for all traditional

underwriting variables, are based on comparisons within lenders and neighborhoods, and occur
across a broad spectrum of minority borrowers.
Finally, regardless of the ultimate explanation for the observed higher rates of negative
mortgage outcomes, our study raises serious concerns about homeownership as a vehicle for
reducing racial wealth disparities. Our findings suggest instead that homeownership may be
especially risky for households with a low initial level of wealth (savings) or fewer family
resources on which to draw when hit with an adverse economic shock. Because delinquencies
and default have consequences that go beyond the direct loss of housing equity/wealth, they can
contribute substantially to perpetuating the wealth gap across generations. The increased cost of
all subsequent borrowing (through the lower credit scores), in particular, makes future wealth
accumulation much more difficult.

References
Altonji, Joseph G. and Rebecca M. Blank. 1999. Chapter 48, Race and gender in the labor
market, In: Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, Editor(s), Handbook of Labor Economics,
Elsevier, Volume 3, Part C, p. 3143-3259.
Apgar, William, Alegra Calder, and Gary Fauth. 2004. Credit, Capital and Communities: The
Implications of the Changing Mortgage Banking Industry for Community-Based
Organizations. Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies, Harvard University.
Avery, Robert B., Glen B. Canner, and Robert E. Cooke. 2005. “New Information Reported
under HMDA and Its Implications in Fair Lending Enforcement.” Federal Reserve Bulletin
(Summer 2005).
Belsky, Eric S., Nicolas P. Retsinas and Mark Duda. 2007. Chapter 9, The Financial Returns to
Low-Income Homeownership, In: Chasing the American Dream: new perspectives on
affordable homeownership, ed. William M. Rohe and Harry L. Watson, p. 191-212. Ithaca
and London: Cornell University Press.
Bhutta, Neil and Glenn B. Canner. 2013. Mortgage Market Conditions and Borrower Outcomes:
Evidence from the 2012 HMDA Data and Matched HMDA--Credit Record Data.
Federal Reserve Bulletin, 99.
Brueckner, Jan K. 1986. ‘The Downpayment Constraint and Housing Tenure Choice.” Regional
Science and Urban Economics 16, p. 519–525.

Calem, Paul S., Kevin Gillen, and Susan Wachter. 2004. “The Neighborhood Distribution of
Subprime Mortgage Lending.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 29, p. 393410.
Clapp, John, Anupam Nanda and Stephen L. Ross. 2008. “Which School Attributes Matter? The
Influence of School District Performance and Demographic Composition on Property
Values.” Journal of Urban Economics, Volume 63, Issue 2, p. 451-466.
Charles, Kerwin, and Erik Hurst. 2002. “The Transition to Home Ownership and the BlackWhite Wealth Gap.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 84 (2), p. 281–97.
Deng, Yongheng, Stephen L. Ross, and Susan M. Wachter. 2003. “Racial Differences in
Homeownership: The Effect of Residential Location,” Regional Science and Urban
Economics 33 (5), p. 517–556.
Duca, John V., and Stuart S. Rosenthal. 1994. “Borrowing Constraints and Access to OwnerOccupied Housing,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 24, p. 301–322.
Edminston, Kelly D. 2009. “Characteristics of High-Foreclosure Neighborhoods in the Tenth
District.” Economic Review (Quarter 2), p. 51-75.
Engelhart, Gary V. 1996. “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints,” Journal
of Money, Credit, and Banking, 28:2 (May), p. 255-271.
Fisher, Lynn M., Lauren Lambie-Hanson and Paul Willen. 2010. “A Profile of the Mortgage
Crisis in a Low-and-Moderate-Income Community.” FRB of Boston Public Policy
Discussion Paper No. 10-6.
Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul S. Willen. 2010. “Reducing
Foreclosures: No Easy Answers.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual Volume 24, ed. Daron
Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford, p. 89–138. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Gerardi, Kristopher S. and Paul Willen. 2009. “Subprime Mortgages, Foreclosures, and Urban
Neighborhoods.” BE Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, 9 (3), Symposium Article 12.
Foote, Christopher L., Kristopher Gerardi, Paul S. Willen. 2008. “Negative Equity and
Foreclosure: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Urban Economics, Volume 64, Issue 2, p.
234-245.
Gerardi, Kristopher S., Adam H. Shapiro and Paul Willen. 2007. “Subprime Outcomes: Risky
Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures.” FRB of Boston Working Paper
No. 07-15.
Gittleman, Maury and Edward Wolff. 2004. “Racial Differences in Patterns of Wealth
Accumulation.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(1), p. 193-227.

Gyourko, Joseph, Peter Linneman and Susan Wachter. 1999. “Analyzing the Relation among
Race, Wealth, and Homeownership in America.” Journal of Housing Economics 8, p. 63–89.
Gyourko, Joseph and Joseph Tracy. 2013. “Unemployment and Unobserved Credit Risk in the
FHA Single Family Mortgage Insurance Fund.” NBER Working Paper No. 18880.
Herbert, Christopher E., Donald R. Haurin, Stuart S. Rosenthal, and Mark Duda. 2005.
“Homeownership Gaps Among Low Income and Minority Borrowers and Neighborhoods.”
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
http://www.huduser.org/publications/HOMEOWN/HGapsAmongLInMBnN.html.
Hoynes, Hilary, Douglas L. Miller and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. "Who Suffers during
Recessions?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, American Economic Association, vol.
26(3), p. 27-48, Summer.
Linneman, Peter, Susan Wachter, 1989. “The Impacts of Borrowing Constraints on
Homeownership.” AREUEA Journal 17, p. 389–402.
Mayer, Chris and Karen Pence. 2008. “Subprime Mortgages: What, Where and To Whom?”
NBER Working Paper No. 14083.
Mayer, Chris, Karen Pence and Shane M. Sherlund. 2009. “The Rise in Mortgage Defaults.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, volume 23(1), p. 27-50.
Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi . 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence
from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4), p. 1449–
96.
Pendall, Rolf, Arthur C. Nelson, Casey J. Dawkins, and Gerrit J. Knaap. 2005. Chapter 10,
Connecting Smart Growth, Housing Affordability, and Racial Equity, In The geography of
opportunity: Race and housing choice in Metropolitan America, ed. William J. Wilson, p.
219-46. Brookings Institution Press.
Oliver, Melvin and Thomas M. Shapiro. 1997. Black Wealth, White Wealth: A New Perspective
on Racial Inequality, Routledge.
Quercia, Roberto G., George W. McCarthy, and Susan M. Wacther. 2003. “The Impacts of
Affordable Lending Efforts on Homeownership rates.” Journal of Housing Economics 12(1),
p. 29-59.
Reid, Carolina and Elizabeth Laderman. 2009. “The Untold Costs of Subprime Lending:
Examining the Links among Higher Priced Lending, Foreclosures and Race in California.”
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper.

Nicholas P. Retsinas and Eric Belsky. 2006. Building Assets, Building Credit: Creating Wealth
in Low-Income Communities. Washington, DC: JCHS Brookings.
Rohe, William M., Shannon Van Zandt, and George McCarthy. 2002. “Social Benefits and Costs
of Homeownership.” In Low-Income Homeownership, edited by Nicolas P. Retsinas and Eric
S. Belsky, p. 381–406. Cambridge, MA: Joint Center for Housing Studies; Washington DC:
Brookings Institution Press.
Shapiro, Thomas. 2004. The Hidden Cost of Being African American: How Wealth Perpetuates
Inequality, Oxford University Press
Shuey, Kim and Andrea Wilson. 2008. “Cumulative Disadvantage and Black-White Disparities
in Life-Course Health Trajectories.” Research on Aging vol. 30 no. 2, p. 200-225.
Smith, Jeffrey. 1995. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Wealth in the Health and Retirement
Study.” Journal of Human Resources, 30: S, p. 158-83.
Terrell, Henry. 1971. “Wealth Accumulation of Black and White Families: The Empirical
Evidence.” Journal of Finance 26, p. 363-77.
Wachter, Susan M. and Isaac F. Megbolugbe. 1992. “Racial and Ethnic Disparities in
Homeownership.” Housing Policy Debate 3 (2), p. 353–370.
Wachter, Susan M., Karl Russo and Jonathan E. Hershaff. 2010. “Subprime Lending:
Neighborhood Patterns Over Time in US Cities.” Working Paper.
Zhu, Xiao Di and Xiaodong Liu. 2007. “The Importance of Wealth and Income in the Transition
to Homeownership.” http://www.huduser.org/periodicals/cityscpe/vol9num2/

Table 1: Sample Selection of HMDA Variables

HMDA full
sample

DQ High
quality match

DQ High
quality match
May-Aug

Sample,
weighted

Experian
Matched
Sample,
weighted2

Variable

Mean

Stand.
Dev.

Mean

Stand.
Dev.

Mean

Stand.
Dev.

Mean

Stand.
Dev.

Mean1

Stand.
Dev.

Black

0.111

0.339

0.116

0.345

0.114

0.343

0.114

0.343

0.112

0.315

Hispanic

0.174

0.410

0.194

0.427

0.193

0.426

0.192

0.426

0.185

0.388

Asian

0.075

0.284

0.086

0.303

0.085

0.301

0.086

0.303

0.089

0.284

White

0.678

0.505

0.601

0.529

0.605

0.528

0.605

0.528

0.611

0.487

Loan Amount (in 1000s)

247

243

271

221

274

224

274

227

278

211

Applicant Income (in 1000s)

107

142

105

128

105

127

106

132

106

115

Tract Median Income (in 1000s)

59.1

25.6

59.6

25.2

59.7

25.2

59.7

25.2

60.4

23.5

Tract Pct Black

0.126

0.238

0.116

0.225

0.115

0.224

0.115

0.224

0.113

0.204

Tract Pct Hispanic

0.169

0.227

0.165

0.221

0.164

0.220

0.165

0.221

0.163

0.202

Tract Pct Asian

0.063

0.109

0.065

0.112

0.065

0.111

0.065

0.111

0.066

0.104

Number of Observations

9,345,709

4,002,996

1,459,468

273,589

238,785

Notes: The first column presents the means and standard deviations for all Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) home purchase and refinance mortgages in
our seven market areas between 2004 and 2008 where each market is given equal weight in the means. The second column presents the means for the subsample
where we have a high quality match between HMDA and the housing transaction file based on loan amount, type of loan, census tract and lender name, and the
third column is based on further restricting the sample to mortgages originated between May and August. The fourth column presents means for the stratified
sample that was merged to the credit history data weighted by the inverse of the sampling probabilities again with equal weights for each market, and the fifth
column presents weighted means for the subsample that was successfully merged to an established credit history prior to mortgage origination.

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
Credit Data
Mortgage Delinquency 90-180 Days
Foreclosure
Delinquency prior to Mortgage
Foreclosure prior to Mortgage
Vantage Score
Mortgage Payment to Income Ratio
Debt Payment to Income Ratio
Borrower Age

Purchase Sample

Refinance Sample

Mean
0.035
0.053
0.001
0.001
781.3
0.256
0.321
27.1

Std. Dev.
0.214
0.319
0.025
0.037
104.0
0.280
0.336
23.1

Mean
0.030
0.037
0.002
0.006
775.0
0.247
0.348
34.3

Std. Dev.
0.196
0.250
0.046
0.082
109.8
1.064
1.191
24.8

0.151
0.003
0.097
0.089
0.195
0.616
0.643
0.355
105.7
285.9
0.354
0.280
60.04
0.100
0.162
0.065
0.683
0.077
0.0045

0.358
0.054
0.296
0.284
0.397
0.486
0.479
0.478
106.1
210.1
0.478
0.449
23.43
18.340
20.210
10.252
23.892
7.273
0.0019

0.168
0.003
0.086
0.126
0.182
0.604
0.643
0.355
100.6
261.6
0.476
0.189
60.44
12.273
17.116
7.107
69.202
7.962
0.0044

0.374
0.056
0.280
0.331
0.386
0.489
0.479
0.478
108.8
199.2
0.499
0.392
23.54
21.652
20.573
10.756
22.749
7.491
0.0017

0.885
0.428
0.515
0.218
0.001
0.774
15.67
1.80
1.99
2.17
1.17
1.41

0.242
0.495
0.500
0.413
0.035
0.418
575.97
26.19
6.60
6.85
1.58
14.83

0.576
0.016
0.478
0.139
0.001
0.837
15.05
1.77
2.00
2.04
1.22
1.49

0.416
0.127
0.500
0.346
0.034
0.369
397.86
20.12
1.15
1.77
1.33
19.88

HMDA Data
Rate Spread
American Indian
Asian
Black
Hispanic
White
Male
Female
Loan Amount (in 1000s)
Applicant Income (in 1000s)
Coborrower Present
Jumbo Loan
Tract Median Income (in 1000s)
Tract Share Black
Tract Share Hispanic
Tract Share Asian
Tract Share Owner Occupant
Tract Share in Poverty
Tract Rent/Price

Dataquick Data
Loan to Value Ratio
Subordinate Lien
First Lien Adjustable Rate
Condo
Mobile
Single Family
Lot Size (sf in 1000s)
Unit square feet (in 1000s)
Number of Bathrooms
Number of Bedrooms
Number of Stories
Units in Building

Sample Size

327,124

306,213

Notes: The first two columns contain means and standard deviations for our sample of post-mortgage
credit reports for each home purchase mortgage borrower for which a credit score was observed prior to
mortgage origination. The last two columns contain the same information for the post-mortgage reports of
mortgage refinancers.

Table 3. Estimated Differences in Mortgage Outcomes - Delinquency and Foreclosure Rates

Home Purchase Sample
Delinquency
Race
Black

Unconditional Underwriting
0.060***
0.030***
(0.002)
(0.002)

Foreclosure

Subprime
0.023***
(0.002)

Contemporaneous
0.015***
(0.003)

Unconditional Underwriting
0.086***
0.042***
(0.003)
(0.004)

Subprime
0.030***
(0.004)

Contemporaneous
0.017***
(0.004)

Hispanic

0.054***
(0.001)

0.023***
(0.002)

0.019***
(0.002)

0.015***
(0.002)

0.091***
(0.002)

0.038***
(0.002)

0.031***
(0.003)

0.025***
(0.003)

Sample Size
R-Squared

331,608
0.013

331,608
0.057

331,608
0.098

330,912
0.108

331,608
0.016

331,608
0.074

331,608
0.122

330,912
0.137

Refinance Sample
Delinquency
Race
Black
Hispanic

Unconditional Underwriting
0.030***
0.016***
(0.001)
(0.002)
0.031***
(0.001)

0.015***
(0.001)

Foreclosure

Subprime
0.012***
(0.002)

Contemporaneous
0.005**
(0.002608)

0.013***
(0.001)

0.011***
(0.001)

Unconditional Underwriting
0.030***
0.017***
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.043***
(0.002)

0.024***
(0.002)

Subprime
0.015***
(0.003)

Contemporaneous
0.007**
(0.003)

0.021***
(0.002)

0.019***
(0.002)

Sample Size
309,137
309,137
309,137
308,459
309,137
309,137
309,137
308,459
R-Squared
0.005
0.046
0.090
0.096
0.005
0.045
0.095
0.102
Notes: This table presents the estimates for number of 90 to 180 day mortgage delinquencies and number of foreclosures within the last 12 months for the
samples described in Table 2 based on the home purchase and refinance samples, panels 1 and 2 respectively. The first column for each outcome presents
unconditional differences, the second column presents results conditional on detailed controls for pre-origination vantage credit score, loan to value ratio,
mortgage and total debt payment to income ratios, whether interest rate is adjustable, presence of subordinate debt, whether a jumbo loan, borrower income, race,
ethnicity, gender, age, presence of coborrower, census tract demographics and detailed unit attributes, as well as origination year by credit year fixed effects. The
third column presents estimates after adding controls for rate spread loans, lender fixed effects, tract fixed effects, and additional subprime controls, and the
fourth column present estimates after adding county by year fixed effects plus contemporaneous controls for negative equity and employment rates. Standard
errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity, and clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, ** means significant at 5%
level, and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 4A. Race and Ethnicity Interactions – Home Purchase Sample
Delinquency
Race
Black
Hispanic

Baseline
0.015***
(0.002)
0.015***
(0.002)

Black*Subprime
Hispanic* Subprime
Black*Rate Spread
Hispanic*Rate Spread
Black*High DTI
Hispanic*High DTI

Risk Factor
-0.002
(0.003)
0.016***
(0.002)
0.018***
(0.005)
0.000
(0.004)
0.006
(0.004)
-0.006
(0.003)
0.041***
(0.006)
0.010**
(0.004)

Black*Unemp Rate
Hispanic*Unemp Rate
R-squared

0.102

0.108

Foreclosure
Employment
-0.005
(0.005)
-0.032***
(0.003)

0.570***
(0.065)
0.908***
(0.066)
0.109

Baseline
0.017***
(0.004)
0.025***
(0.003)

0.137

Risk Factor
0.000
(0.005)
0.020***
(0.003)
0.035***
(0.008)
0.008
(0.007)
-0.011
(0.007)
0.002
(0.005)
0.058***
(0.009)
0.021***
(0.007)

0.137

Employment
-0.001
(0.007)
-0.056***
(0.005)

0.754***
(0.092)
1.521***
(0.089)
0.138

Notes: This table presents estimates for delinquency and foreclosure based on the home purchase. The
first column for each outcome presents the final column of estimates from Table 3. The second column
presents estimates based on the interaction of the dummy variables for race and ethnicity with whether the
borrower has a vantage credit score below 701, a loan to value ratio above 0.95, or a debt to income ratio
above 0.45. The third column presents estimates using interactions of race and ethnicity with one minus
the race by year county average employment rate for prime age adults. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
robust to heteroskedasticity, and clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, **
means significant at 5% level, and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 4B. Race and Ethnicity Interactions – Refinance Sample
Delinquency
Race
Black
Hispanic

Baseline
0.005**
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.001)

Black*Subprime
Hispanic* Subprime
Black*Rate Spread
Hispanic*Rate Spread
Black*High DTI
Hispanic*High DTI

Risk Factor
-0.004
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.004
(0.004)
0.004
(0.004)
0.010***
(0.003)
-0.009***
(0.003)
0.016***
(0.004)
0.007**
(0.003)

Black*Unemp Rate
Hispanic*Unemp Rate
R-squared

0.096

0.096

Foreclosure
Employment
-0.019***
(0.004)
-0.035***
(0.003)

0.651***
(0.066)
0.874***
(0.065)
0.097

Baseline
0.007**
(0.003)
0.019***
(0.002)

0.102

Risk Factor
0.008**
(0.003)
0.014***
(0.002)
-0.013**
(0.005)
0.020***
(0.005)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.007*
(0.004)
0.009*
(0.005)
0.010**
(0.005)

0.102

Employment
-0.014***
(0.005)
-0.032***
(0.004)

0.631***
(0.071)
0.956***
(0.073)
0.103

Notes: This table presents estimates for delinquency and foreclosure based on the refinance purchase. The
first column for each outcome presents the final column of estimates from Table 3. The second column
presents estimates based on the interaction of the dummy variables for race and ethnicity with whether the
borrower has a vantage credit score below 701, a loan to value ratio above 0.95, or a debt to income ratio
above 0.45. The third column presents estimates using interactions of race and ethnicity with one minus
the race by year county average employment rate for prime age adults. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
robust to heteroskedasticity, and clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, **
means significant at 5% level, and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 5. Estimated Differences in Mortgage Outcomes by Origination Year

Home Purchase Sample
Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
0.061***
0.061***
(0.005)
(0.005)

Foreclosure
Black
Hispanic
0.086***
0.104***
(0.010)
(0.009)

2008

-0.031***
(0.007)

-0.026***
(0.006)

-0.055***
(0.011)

-0.066***
(0.010)

2007

0.017**
(0.007)

0.038***
(0.006)

0.000
(0.011)

0.035***
(0.012)

2006

0.054***
(0.008)

0.051***
(0.007)

0.091***
(0.014)

0.108***
(0.012)

2005

0.027***
(0.008)

0.034***
(0.007)

0.033**
(0.013)

0.057***
(0.011)

Race and Ethnicity
Interactions
Level Estimate

Sample Size
R-squared

0.027
207,723

0.035
207,723

Refinance Sample
Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
0.038***
0.044***
(0.005)
(0.005)

Foreclosure
Black
Hispanic
0.051***
0.059***
(0.007)
(0.006)

2008

-0.022***
(0.006)

-0.023***
(0.006)

-0.051***
(0.007)

-0.046***
(0.007)

2007

-0.002
(0.006)

0.015**
(0.006)

-0.027***
(0.008)

-0.002
(0.008)

2006

0.020***
(0.007)

0.018***
(0.006)

-0.009
(0.009)

0.035***
(0.009)

2005

0.010
(0.007)

0.007
(0.006)

-0.003
(0.008)

0.024***
(0.009)

Race and Ethnicity
Interactions
Level Estimate

Sample Size
0.011
0.012
R-squared
192,953
192,953
Notes: This table presents estimates for a model where mortgage origination year is interacted with race
and ethnicity to explain delinquency and foreclosure for the home purchase and refinance samples. The
first column for each outcome presents the estimates for origination year interacted with whether the
borrower is black, and the second column presents the estimates for origination year interacted with
whether Hispanic. The row labelled level estimate presents the estimate on the dummy variable for black
or Hispanic. The omitted category is all mortgages underwritten in 2004. Standard errors (in parentheses)
are robust to heteroskedasticity, and clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1%
level, ** means significant at 5% level, and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 6. Estimated Differences in Mortgage Outcomes by Home Purchase Year – Refinance Sample
Ethnicity
Interactions
Level

Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
0.034***
0.037***
(0.003)
(0.004)

Foreclosure
Black
Hispanic
0.035***
0.052***
(0.004)
(0.005)

2008

0.038
(0.009)

-0.034
(0.003)

-0.051***
(0.009)

-0.052***
(0.019)

2007

0.037
(0.003)

0.041*
(0.025)

0.046
(0.036)

0.088**
(0.041)

2006

0.017
(0.015)

0.049***
(0.014)

0.01
(0.022)

0.015
(0.017)

2005

0.027**
(0.011)

0.038***
(0.009)

0.029**
(0.014)

0.050***
(0.011)

2004

0.037***
(0.009)

0.028***
(0.007)

0.020*
(0.011)

0.057***
(0.010)

2003

0.021**
(0.009)

0.023***
(0.007)

0.018
(0.011)

0.024**
(0.010)

2002

0.015*
(0.009)

0.025***
(0.008)

0.015
(0.010)

0.019*
(0.011)

2001

0.035***
(0.012)

0.004
(0.007)

0.006
(0.010)

0.016
(0.011)

2000

0.004
(0.008)

-0.003
(0.008)

-0.004
(0.009)

-0.001
(0.011)

1999

0.008
(0.008)

-0.009
(0.008)

0.014
(0.011)

-0.009
(0.010)

1998

0.009
(0.011)

0.003
(0.010)

-0.008
(0.010)

-0.005
(0.011)

Sample Size
192,953
192,953
R-squared
0.012
0.012
Notes: This table presents estimates based on the refinance sample for a model where home purchase year
is interacted with race and ethnicity to explain delinquency and foreclosure. The first column for each
outcome presents the estimates for home purchase year interacted with whether the borrower is black, and
the second column presents the estimates for origination year interacted with whether Hispanic. The
omitted category is all homes purchased prior to 1998. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to
heteroskedasticity, and clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, ** means
significant at 5% level, and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 7. Estimated Differences in Mortgage Outcomes by Origination Year and Risk Factors
Race and Ethnicity
Interactions
2008

Home Purchase Sample - Debt to Income Interactions
Foreclosure
Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
Black
Hispanic
-0.029
0.033**
-0.097***
-0.080***
(0.020)
(0.015)
(0.035)
(0.023)

2007

-0.016
(0.020)

0.028*
(0.015)

-0.079**
(0.035)

-0.006
(0.025)

2006

0.050**
(0.023)

0.061***
(0.017)

0.179***
(0.043)

0.158***
(0.033)

2005

0.032
(0.026)

0.045***
(0.018)

0.085*
(0.046)

0.076***
(0.028)

Sample Size
R-squared

Race and Ethnicity
Interactions
2008

207,241
0.139

207,241
0.184

Home Purchase Sample - Unemployment Rate Interactions
Foreclosure
Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
Black
Hispanic
0.011
0.213
-0.286
0.498***
(0.113)
(0.142)
(0.182)
(0.187)

2007

-0.101
(0.114)

0.960***
(0.153)

-0.198
(0.184)

1.195***
(0.207)

2006

-0.128
(0.126)

0.498***
(0.155)

-0.003
(0.213)

1.212***
(0.233)

2005

-0.218*
(0.124)

0.291*
(0.156)

-0.151
(0.204)

0.426**
(0.204)

207,241
207,241
Sample Size
0.139
0.182
R-squared
Notes: This table presents estimates based on the home purchase sample for a model where the interactions
between home purchase year and the race and ethnicity dummy variables are interacted with mortgage risk
factors, high debt to income ratio dummy (panel 1) or exposure to unemployment rates by race by current
year by county (panel 2). The first column for each outcome presents the estimates for home purchase year
interacted with whether the borrower is black and with the risk factor, and the second column presents the
estimates for origination year interacted with whether Hispanic and the risk factor. The omitted category is
homes purchased or mortgages originated in 2004. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to
heteroskedasticity, and clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, ** means
significant at 5% level, and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 8A. Differences by Home Purchase Year and DTI – Refinance Sample

Race and
Ethnicity
2008

Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
-0.052
0.015
(0.088)
(0.072)

Foreclosure
Black
Hispanic
-0.084*
-0.21
(0.045)
(0.131)

2007

0.015
(0.065)

0.041
(0.059)

-0.035
(0.086)

-0.143**
(0.067)

2006

0.036
(0.035)

0.047
(0.029)

0.02
(0.044)

0.037
(0.030)

2005

0.077***
(0.026)

0.055***
(0.018)

0.045
(0.033)

0.063***
(0.024)

2004

0.049**
(0.020)

0.022
(0.014)

0.004
(0.023)

0.061**
(0.026)

2003

0.042*
(0.024)

0.007
(0.016)

0.004
(0.022)

0.033
(0.024)

2002

0.017
(0.020)

0.016
(0.019)

0.04
(0.026)

0.026
(0.028)

2001

0.057*
(0.030)

0.019
(0.017)

0.018
(0.024)

0.047*
(0.029)

2000

-0.002
(0.019)

-0.006
(0.019)

-0.033
(0.021)

0.020
(0.023)

1999

-0.049***
(0.017)

-0.026*
(0.015)

0.009
(0.024)

-0.016
(0.022)

1998

0.014
(0.023)

0.046**
(0.023)

-0.028
(0.020)

0.028
(0.027)

Sample Size
192,444
192,444
R-squared
0.131
0.144
Notes: This table presents estimates based on the refinance sample for a model where the interactions
between home purchase year and the race and ethnicity dummy variables are interacted with mortgage risk
factors, high debt to income ratio dummy (panel A) or exposure to unemployment rates by race by current
year by county (panel B). The first column for each outcome presents the estimates for home purchase year
interacted with whether the borrower is black and with the risk factor, and the second column presents the
estimates for origination year interacted with whether Hispanic and the risk factor. The omitted category is
homes purchased prior to 1998. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity, and
clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, ** means significant at 5% level,
and * is significant at 10% level.

Table 8B. Differences by Home Purchase Year and DTI – Refinance Sample

Race and
Ethnicity
2008

Delinquency
Black
Hispanic
0.287
0.012
(0.425)
(0.161)

Foreclosure
Black
Hispanic
0.360
0.161
(0.464)
(0.298)

2007

0.758*
(0.395)

0.138
(0.833)

0.915
(0.686)

-0.447
(1.081)

2006

0.165
(0.241)

0.751**
(0.332)

0.803*
(0.418)

0.387
(0.250)

2005

0.276
(0.189)

0.858***
(0.215)

0.728***
(0.268)

1.061***
(0.257)

2004

0.459***
(0.157)

0.380**
(0.169)

0.320*
(0.176)

0.570***
(0.193)

2003

-0.040
(0.186)

0.472**
(0.206)

0.251
(0.169)

0.131
(0.216)

2002

0.108
(0.136)

0.158
(0.208)

-0.103
(0.166)

0.609**
(0.269)

2001

0.335
(0.305)

-0.083
(0.179)

-0.102
(0.174)

0.140
(0.242)

2000

0.116
(0.150)

0.118
(0.241)

0.081
(0.179)

0.334
(0.249)

1999

0.063
(0.175)

0.040
(0.188)

0.158
(0.188)

-0.124
(0.228)

1998

-0.184
(0.184)

-0.004
(0.252)

-0.010
(0.157)

0.531*
(0.293)

192,444
192,444
Sample Size
R-squared
0.131
0.144
Notes: This table presents estimates based on the refinance sample for a model where the interactions
between home purchase year and the race and ethnicity dummy variables are interacted with mortgage risk
factors, high debt to income ratio dummy (panel A) or exposure to unemployment rates by race by current
year by county (panel B). The first column for each outcome presents the estimates for home purchase year
interacted with whether the borrower is black and with the risk factor, and the second column presents the
estimates for origination year interacted with whether Hispanic and the risk factor. The omitted category is
homes purchased prior to 1998. Standard errors (in parentheses) are robust to heteroskedasticity, and
clustered at tract-credit year level. *** indicates significant at 1% level, ** means significant at 5% level,
and * is significant at 10% level.

Figure 1. Unconditional rates of mortgage foreclosures and delinquencies by race and
year

.15
Unconditional rates
.05
.1
0
-.05

-.05

0

Unconditional rates
.05
.1

.15

.2

Delinquencies

.2

Foreclosures

2004

2005

2006
2007
Year

Whites

2008

2009

2004

Blacks

2005

2006
2007
Year

Hispanics

2008

2009

Figure 2. Black and Hispanic probability of foreclosure relative to whites by calendar
year, purchase and refinance samples

Purchase Sample
Hispanics

-.05

-.05

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Blacks

2005

2006

2007
Year

2008

2009

2005

Unconditional model
Add suprime controls

2006

2007
Year

2008

2009

Add risk factor controls
Add contemporaneous controls

Refinance Sample

-.05

-.05

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Hispanics

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Blacks

2005

2006

2007
Year

2008

Unconditional model
Add suprime controls

2009

2005

2006

2007
Year

2008

Add risk factor controls
Add contemporaneous controls

2009

Figure 3. Black and Hispanic probability of foreclosure relative to whites by loan
origination year, purchase and refinance samples

Purchase Sample
Hispanics

-.05

-.05

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Blacks

2004

2005

2006
2007
Origination year

2008

2004

Unconditional model
Add suprime controls

2005

2006
2007
Origination year

2008

Add risk factor controls
Add contemporaneous controls

Refinance Sample

-.05

-.05

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Hispanics

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Blacks

2004

2005

2006
2007
Origination year

Unconditional model
Add suprime controls

2008

2004

2005

2006
2007
Origination year

Add risk factor controls
Add contemporaneous controls

2008

Figure 4. Black and Hispanic probability of foreclosure relative to whites by home
purchase year of refinance loan

Refinance Sample

-.1

-.1

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Hispanics

Probability of foreclosure relative to Whites
-.05
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Blacks

1996

1999

2002
2005
Purchase year

Unconditional model
Add suprime controls

2008

1996

1999

2002
2005
Purchase year

Add risk factor controls
Add contemporaneous controls

2008

