                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE LIMITED VIABILITY OF
                   DUAL EXCHANGE-RATE REGIMES




                        Jacob A. Frenkel


                          Assaf Razin




                     Working Paper No. 1902




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1986




This paper was written during the Summer of 1985 while J. A.
Frenkel was a visiting professor at the Department of Economics and
Fellow of the Sackler Institute of Advanced Studies at Tel—Aviv
University, Israel. A previous version entitled "Aspects of Dual
Echange-Rate Regimes" appeared as Seminar Paper No. 335, Institute
for International Economic Studies, Stockholm, Sweden, September
1985. We wish to thank Joshua Aizennian, Elhanan Helpman and
Torsten Persson for useful comments. The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1902
                                                  April 1986



               The Limited Viability of Dual Exchange-Rate Regimes




                                       ABSTRACT

      This paper examines the viability of dual exchange-rate regimes. Typi-

cally, under such a regime the exchange rates applicable to current-account

(commercial) transactions and to capital-account (financial) transactions differ

from each other.     This difference may be determined in the free market if the

authorities peg the commercial exchange rate and set a binding quota on external

borrowing, or it may result from direct pegging of both exchange rates. The

analysis starts with a specification of the characteristics of the distortion

introduced by the exchange-rate premium (that is, the percentage discrepancy

between the financial and the commercial exchange rates), and then provides

explicit formula for the equilibrium premium, for its evolution over time and

for the welfare cost induced by the distortion. The paper outlines the set of

policy options consistent with sustaining a permanently viable dual exchange-

rate system and highlights the severe constraints that intertemporal solvency

requirements of the private sector and of the government impose on the long-run

viability of the regime. The paper concludes with an analysis of the monetary

changes associated with dual exchange-rate policies and draws the implications

of such a regime for the intertemporal distribution of taxes and for the inter-

generational distribution of welfare



Jacob A. Frenkel                                  Assaf Razin
Department of Economics                           Department of Economics
University of Chicago                             Tel-Aviv University
1126 E. 59th Street                               Ramat-Aviv, Tel-Aviv 66978
Chicago, IL 60637                                 ISRAEL
(312)962-8253                                     (972)-3-420-733
I. Introduction

      This paper deals with the economics of dual exchange—rate regimes.

Multiple exchange—rate arrangements have been adopted by numerous countries on

various occasions. Departures from a unified exchange—rate regime have taken

different forms including multiple exchange rates for different types of

commercial transactions, as well as separate exchange rates for commercial and

financial transactions; the latter is referred to as a dual (or a two—tier)

exchange—rate regime.

      The adoption of a dual exchange rate regime, taken by itself, introduces

a distortion into the economic system. Its adoption has been justified,

however, on several grounds. First, it has been argued that in circumstances

of inflation and capital flight (induced by expected depreciations of the

currency) the separation of the commercial exchange rate from the financial

rate facilitates a reduction in capital flight through a change in the finan-

cial exchange rate while avoiding adverse inflationary consequences. Second,

it has been argued that in circumstances of inflation and trade'-balarice

deficits, the adoption of dual exchange rates permits commercial exchange—rate

policies aimed at the trade balance without providing capital gains On

foreign—currency linked assets. In contrast, undera unified exchange—rate

regime a devaluation of the currency provides capital gains to owners of

foreign—currency linked assets. These capital gains stimulate spending and

hamper efforts to contain inflation and to improve the balance of payments. A

third argument used to justify dual exchange rates focuses on their impact on

relative rates of return ana capital flows. Taxes on capital flows, quantita-

tive restrictions on international financial transactions, and dual exchange

rates all influence the relative rates of return on domestic and foreign

investments. Therefore, it is argued, dual exchange rates may be viewed as an

instrument of balance of payments policies.2 Additional arguments concerning
                                        2


the welfare implications of dual exchange—rate regimes have also been

developed in the contexts of the analyses of second-best policies and public

finance.3

        The literature dealing with the working of dual exchange—rate regimes

examined the determinants of the free financial exchange rate. Issues

analyzed in this context concerned the effects of fiscal, monetary, and

commercial exchange—rate policies on the free financial exchange rate, on the

real exchange rate and on the current account of the balance of paymer.ts. In

analysing these central issues, previous contributions have employed a great

diversity of models while the links among which have not been always spelled

out. This paper develops a unified framework in order to reexamine some of

these issues in an attempt to clarify and identify the mechanisms governing

the operation of dual exchange—rate regimes. We specify the precise nature of

resultant distortions and provide an exact measure of the welfare cost. In

characterizing the dual exchange—rate regime we assume that the commercial

exchange rate applicable to transactions in the balance of trade is pegged and

we examine two alternative formulations concerning the financial exchange

rate. In the first formulation the government sets a binding quota on the

volume of external debt and the financial exchange rate is determined in the

free market. With a binding quota the equilibrium financial exchange rate

exceeds the pegged commercial rate; the percentage discrepancy between the two

is defined as the dual exchange—rate premium. Our analysis provides an

explicit formula for the equilibrium premium as well as for its evolution over

time. In the second formulation the government pegs the dual exchange—rate

premium (through pegging the paths of both the commercial and the financial

exchange rates) but allows for a free mobility of capital. In this case our

analysis provides an explicit formula for the equilibrium path of external

debt.
                                           3


      Since our model is characterized by sophisticated forward looking and

fully informed individuals, a natural question is whether the dual exchange—

rate system is viable. Specifically, since both the government and the

private sector must be solvent we examine the constraints that long—run

viability imposes on the management of the dual exchange rate system. We show

that there is a limited set of policy options consistent with a permanently

viable dual exchange—rate system. For example, we show that unless the dual

exchange—rate premium or the quota on foriegn debt are set at a level which

eliminates asset accumulation, a policy that fixes permanently the premium or

the quota cannot be sustained indefinitely without violating the solvency

constraints.5 On the other hand a transitory adoption of a dual exchange rate

regime is of course possible. We examine the relation between the length of

the period during which the dual exchange rate system is in effect and the

magnitudes of the premium and of the external debt. In considering the adop-

tion of a dual exchange—rate regime the limitations imposed by the intertem-

poral solvency constraints on the long—run viability of the system are added

to the difficulties associated with the separation between the commercial and

the financial exchange markets. The segmentation difficulties are present in
                                       6
both the short run and the long run.

      Our model does not provide a rationale for the adoption of a dual

exchange rate regime. Rather, in order to clarify the working of the system

and to identify the distortions arising from its adoption we start from a

distortion—free economy and examine the implications of introducing a dual

exchange—rate regime.7

      In section II we develop a benchmark model posessing the Ricardian

equivalence property. Accordingly, the timing of the monetary injections

associated with the management of the dual exchange—rate system does not

influence the real equilibrium. In the benchmark model the management of the
                                       14




dual exchange—rate regime affects the equilibrium through the induced dif-

ferentials between domestic and world real rates of interest. In section III

we extend the benchmark model to a framework in which the Ricardian equiv-

alence does not hold. This is achieved by allowing for overlapping gener-

ations with a finite horizon. In that case the management of the dual

exchange-rate regime impacts on the equilibrium not only through influencing

real interest—rate differentials but also through influencing the timing of

monetary injections and international reserve movements. Hence, under such

circumstances the dual exchange—rate regime inflicts the usual distortions and

in addition, the management of the regime directly influences the exchange—

rate premium, the intergenerational distribution of wealth, and welfare.

Specifically, we examine the circumstances under which a rise in the commer-

cial exchange rate (a devaluation) leads to overshooting or undershooting of

the market—determined financial exchange rate. This analysis provides infor-

mation about the effects that commercial exchange—rate policies exert on the

premium. Hence, by focusing on the temporary nature of the dual exchange—rate

regime and by highlighting the links between the regime and the intertemporal

distribution of effective taxes and distortions, we introduce pertinent

intergenerational considerations into the analysis of dual exchange—rate

systems. Finally, section IV contains concluding remarks.



II.   The Benchmark Model

       In this part of the paper we sketch the benchmark model for the analysis

of dual exchange—rate regimes. In order to highlight the key issues we focus

on two alternative (but to a large extent equivalent) formulations of such

regimes. In both the exchange rate applicable to commercial transactions

passing through the trade account of the balance—of—payments is pegged. The

two formulations differ in their specification of the regulations concerning
                                       5



financial transactions.     The first assumes that the government imposes a

quota on the volume of the international flow of financial assets. In that

case the financial exchange rate is determined in the free market at a level

that may differ from the pegged commercial rate. Our analysis examines the

precise determinants of the differential between the two rates. This dif-

ferential is referred to as the premium. The second formulation assumes that

the government sets different paths for the commercial and the financial

exchange rates. In that case the premium is determined by policy and the

volume of capital—account transactions is determined by the free market. In

this context we determine the constraints on the range of feasible paths of

the two exchange rates. These constraints arise from the requirement that the

government and the private sector must be solvent.

      Our benchmark model, which is designed to yield Ricardian equivalence

 results, assumes a small open economy with one composite traded good and

 undistorted taxes. These assumptions are modified in subsequent sections.

 The key building blocks of the model are (1) a specification of the private

 sector's budget constraints and behavioral functions; (ii) a specification of

 the government budget constraint and (lii) the determination of equilibrium.



 11.1. The private sector

      Consider a representative individual operating in an environment governed

 by a 4cash—in—advance" convention according to which purchases of domestically

 produced goods are paid for with domestic currency while purchases of foreign

 produced goods are paid for with foreign currency. The cash—in-advance model

 allows great precision in tracing out the monetary and exchange rate policies

 all the way through, and it introduces no distortions fl Conjunction with the

 monetary policy per Se. This enables us to isolate the effects of the dual
                                      6



exchange rate regime. For applications of such a convention see Helpman (1981),

Helpman and Razin (1982), Lucas (1982), Persson (1984) and Stockmari (1980).

The infinitely lived representative indivudual faces a sequence of the following

periodical budget constraints:


            e0pC0 =    —
                            + sB —        s0R1B1

                            —         +
 (1)        e1pC1 = e0pY0        T1         — s1R0B0

                                      +     - s2R1B1
            e2pC2 e1pY1 -




 where e denotes the exchange rate applicable for comercial_ transactions

 and s denotes the exchange rate applicable for financial transactions.

 These exchange rates express the price of foreign exchange in terms of

 domestic currency. In equation (1) p* denotes the foreign price of goods,

 Y measures domestic output, T denotes lump—sum taxes, B denotes the

 private—sector's one—period debt denominated in terms of foreign exchange, R

 denotes one plus the Interest rate applicable to loans In terms 0f foreign

 currency, C, denotes the rate of consumption of the composite good and,

 finally, M denotes initial money holdings (the money supply in period t —

       The first equation in (1) specifies the budget constraint in period

 zero. The left—hand—side measures the domestic—currency value of consumption

 (where we have used the law of one price by which domestic price, p, equals

 ep*). The right—hand—side measures the total amount of available net

 resources (measured in terms of domestic currency): Initial money holdings

 minus taxes plus new borrowing minus repayment of interest and principal on

 previous period one—period debt.

       The second budget constraint has a similar interpretation except that it

 includes the nominal value of period—zero output. This element reflects the
                                                         7




      cash—in—advances convention according to which during each period firms

 accumulate cash balances obtained from the proceeds of output sales and at the

 end of each period (which coincides with the beginning of the subsequent one)

 these proceeds are redistributed to individuals as wages and dividends. These

 money holdings at the beginning of period 1 equal the value of domestic output

 sales during period zero (e0pY0). The rest of the constraints in

 (1) are interpreted similarily.

         Consolidating the budget constraints and making use of the requirement

 that at the limit all debt must be paid8 yields:


                        e s p                            e S   p             + .
(2)           0+                                                   R0R1)C2


                                 +
                                     RØR1


  rI —10
     *       —
                   i     S
                       * SR
                             0   ,.
                                  I1_
                                            .,
                                                 *
                                                     S
                                                         0.               I
                                                                         ___*
                                                                                    S
                                                                                          __T
                          1 o
      e3p0       e0p0                   e0p0 s2R0R1                          e0p0 stR0...Rt_i


              —
                       (R_18_1)
                  e0p0


        This constraint which defines the initial value of wealth, W0, is

expressed in terms of units of consumptionin the initial oeriod. The econopjc

interpretation of the various terms in (2) is as follows. The term in the

parenthesis multiplying C1 is the domestic real discount factor applicable

for consumption in period one. It is composed of three components. First,

the foreign nominal interest factor (1/R0); second, one plus the foreign

rate of inflation (p/p*) and thus the product (p/p)/R                                   is the

foreign real discount factor; and finally the third component represents

the ratio of the percentage depreciation of the two exchange rates
                                     8




(e1!e)/(s1/s) (in a continuous time specification this term would be the

difference between the percentage rates of depreciation of the two exchange

rates). This last component represents the contribution of exchange—rate

changes to the real rate of return on investment in financial assets, that

is, the capital gain on an iavestthent inassets denominated in foreign cur-

rency is (s11s0) and its product with (e0/e1) translates the return to

units of foreign—currency denominated goods. Thus, the product

(e1Ie)(s/s1)(plp*)/R is the domestic real discount factor applicable to

C1. Similar interpretation applies to the coefficients multiplying the rates

of consumption in other periods. As is evident, divergencies between the

domestic and the foreign real rates. of interest stem from the terms involving

exchange—rate changes. It is important to note that these divergencies can

arise only from differences in. the percentage rates of depreciations of the

commercial and financial exchange rates. In the absence of such a difference,

the domestic and foreign real rates of interest are equalized. In that case

all allocations replicate those obtained with a completely free world capital

market.9

     The term in the parentheses multiplying the levels of output on the

right—hand—side of equation (2) also represents present value factors but,

as may be seen, these differ from those used to evaluate the sequence of con—

sumption. The difference arises from the underlying ttcash_in_advancelf assump-

tion according to which nominal proceeds from sales of output are distributed

with one period lag. Thus, for example, the ratio of the coefficients of

and C1 is (s11s2)(l/R1) which is the foregone nominal rate of return due to

the lagged payment. The next group of terms on the right—hand—side of equation

(2) represents the sum of the nominal taxes discounted by the nominal rate of

interest. Here it is relevant to note that the government, by pegging the
                                                       9



initial value of the commercial exchange rate, e                    ,   influences   the real value

of this discounted sum. Finally, the last term on the right—hand—side of

equation (2) is the real value of the private sector initial debt. We note

that the policy choice of s                     and, thereby, the initial ratio of the two

exchange rates, s0 /e0               determines the real value of this initial debt commit—

meat.     Thus, the foregoing discussion of the various terms                 in   equation (2)

shows that there are four policy considerations which affect the budget con-

straint under a dual exchange rate regime. First, the initial level of the

commercial exchange rate, e                 ,   second, the Initial level of the financial
exchange rate, s             ,   third,   the difference between the percentage rates of

change of the two exchange rates and fourth, the path of taxes.

        In a subsequent section we determine the precise equilibrium of the

system. In order to obtain simple solutions we continue this sketch by

specifying, in equation (3), a logarithmic utility function.



(3)           U =
                       109 C
where        denotes the subjective discount factor. Maximization of (3) subject

to the consolidated budget constraint (2) yields equation (4) as the

consumption function:


(4)
              Ct


where        denotes the domestic present—value factor which depends on the

domestic real rates of interest. Thus,
                                 *
                   =     1                ets0p
              at
                       R0.
                             .
                                 . Rti


        We note that                is the reciprocal of the coefficient multiplying
                                          10


 C in the consolidated budget constraint in equation (2). The dependence

 of         on the evolution of the two exchange rates implies that government

 policies concerning the management of the dual exchange—.rate system has a

 direct effect on the intertemporal allocation of consumption and asset

 accumulation.


1.2.    The Government

       In   discussing   the government sector    it   is convenient to   separate
government transactions into two accounts: a domestic currency account and a

foreign currency account. In specifying these accounts we distinguish between

the two formulations of the regulations governing international financial

transactions.

       We begin with the formulation which assumes that the government sets the

paths of the two exchange rates and allows free mobility of capital at the

prespecified exchange rates. Under these circumstances international financial

transactions that are undertaken by the private sector reflect themselves in the

domestic—currency account of the government since the latter is comitted to peg the

financial exchange rate. Thus, in period t the monetary expansion induced by

government foreign exchange intervention in pegging the

financial exchange rate is t(Bt —
                                           RtiBti),      where       denotes the pegged

financial exchange rate.         rn addition, foreign exchange intervention in

pegging the comercial exchange rate corresponds to the trade balance and

the monetary expansion that is associated with this operation in period t is

etp(Yt — Ct).       Denoting total monetary injections associated with

foreign exchange interventions by X, yields


(5)           X =   ep(Y    —
                                Ct)
                                      +
                                               - RtIBt1).
       The second formulation of the regulations concerning international

financial transactions assumes that the government imposes a quota on the
                                         11


 volume of the economy's net international borrowing. Since in our model all

 debt is of one—period maturity, this constraint amounts to a quota on the size

 of the economy's external debt. We denote this quota by         There are

 many alternative mechanisms and institutional specifications that can bring

 about the enforcement of such a quota. For
                                               example, the government may specify
 an upper limit on private borrowing from abroad. In that case the comitment

 to peg the corrinercjal exchange rate at a given level implies that the

 government must stand ready to supply foreign exchange to cover trade

 deficits. In order to obtain the foreign exchange necessary to peg the

 coninercial exchange rate without increasing its net borrowing from abroad, the

 government is assumed to purchase the necessary quantity in the local market

 for foreign exchange (at the free financial exchange rate). It is important

to note that the details of this mechanism are introduced only as a convenient

example rather than an intrinsic characteristic of this specification of the

dual exchange—rate regime. With this formulation the monetary injections

associated with foreign exchange interventions are two: purchases of foreign

currency In the local financial market and sales of foreign exchange to cover

the trade deficit. Accordingly equation (5) becomes


(5')         X =   ep(Y   -Cr) +   st(t — Rtiti).
       These two alternative formulations of the monetary consequences of

exchange rate interventions reflect themselves in the money supply.

Accordingly, the money supply in period t can be expressed as the sum of the
initial supply 1 and the cumulative monetary injections through exchange--

rate interventions minus tax receipts:


(6)         Mt =    +        —
                                 I)
                                        12


      The government foreign account states that government net external

borrowing must equal the trade balance deficit minus the private sector's net

external borrowing. Denoting the economy's net external borrowing by B* and

noting that B* equals the sum of private and government external borrowing

implies that



(7)         P(Ct —      )—      —




      Consolidating     the sequence of the constraints in equation (7) and using

the solvency requirement yields
                   *
            .— ,t           1                              1    *
                          R Ri...Rt— ,(Ct —
                           0
                                              Yt   =   —

                   p0                                      p0


Equation (8) states that the discounted sum of the trade balance (evaluated

by using the world real rates of interest) must equal the initial net foreign

asset position.1°

11.3. Equilibrium and Distortions of Dual Exchange Rate Regimes

      Equilibrium requires that the demand for money equals the supply. Since

in this model with positive nominal rate of interest money          is not held as a

store of value, the entire money supply is absorbed by firms in exchange for

output sales. Thus, the demand" for money is ep*Yt and in equilibrium



(9)         Mt =   epY.

       In order to characterize the equilibrium of the system we first express

 the equilibrium value of wealth, W0. The focus on the analysis of

 enables a simple exposition of the nature of the distortions that characterize

 the dual exchange—rate regime. Further, such an analysis yields insights into

 the determination of alternative policies that can be used in order to obtain
                                          13


 equivalent results. Using the right—hand—side of equation (2) along with the

 government accounts (5) (or (5')) (6) and (7), and the money market clearing

 Condition (9), it is shown in Appendix I that

                                                        *

 (10)            =
                     tv0                       +   (2OP2            +       — —j4. 3*


                      +
                           :°      e: +—--L-)B
                                (i)B                        :oRl)
                           e0p0 a     1 ol              2




                + ____ e,
                       g.       e *
                                —'                  1
                                                    A       e    e+,A * +
                   a 1 2        3                   o" t—1 t      t+1


        Equation (10) shows the equilibrium value of        W0 corresponding to the
 two alternative formulations of the dual exchange—rate regime which underlie

equations (5) and (5'). When the policy is formulated in such a way so as to

peg the paths of the two exchange rates, the endogeneous variable that is

determined in equilibrium j3 B* — the economy's net external borrowing (in

that case the reader may wish to put an upper bar over the two exchange

rates). On the other hand, when the policy pegs only the commercial exchange

rate and places a quota over the magnitude of the economy's net external

borrowing, the endogeneaus variab)e that is determined in equilibrium is            S —
the   free market financial exchange rate (in that case the reader may wish to

put an upper bar over the variables e and B*).

      This presentation of the egui1ibriuti value of wealth highlights three

considerations. First, in cotuparison with the pricing of consumption in

equation (2) (as reflected by the coefficients of               here the pricing of

outputs is also done by using the domestic real interest rates. Thus, in

contrast with the formulation in equation (2), in equilibrium the lagged

payment which reflects the cash—in—advance convention has no effect on the
                                                14



pricing of outputs.            Second, the benchmark model highlights the consequences

of having a forward looking rational consumer who fully internalizes future

tax liabilities associated with initial government external debt. Thus, in

conformity with the Ricardian proposition, the equilibrium value of wealth

nets Out the term         (R1311P). Third,                   and most important, the unique element

introduced by the existence of capital controls and the dual exchange—rate

system is represented by the expressions in the last squared brackets on the

righ—hand—side of equation (10). This expression denotes the discounted sum

of the implicit tax transfers associated with the dual exchange—rate system

as perceived (and taken as given) by the rational, forward looking, individuals.

Specifically, consider the coefficient of B which can also be written as

(eIs1([(s1Is) —           (e1/efl.      As argued earlier, this term represents the dif-

ference between domestic and foreign real rates of eturn on financial invest-

ment. Thus, if for example, the rate of depreciation of the financial exchange

rate exceeds the rate of depreciation of the commercial rate so that (s1Is)

is larger than (e1!e0) then with a positive net external debt, B                                  ,   there
is an implicit subsidy to domestic asset holders. In that case the percentage

subsidy rate is            *   [()     —.   ()} and           its product with the "subsidy base",
                       ep
                        00         o
 *
B    ,   yields   the implicit transfer in period zero. The rest of the terms on the

right—hand—side of equation (10) have a similar interpretation except that they

are discounted to the present by using the world rates of interest. In the case

in which the commercial nd the financial exchange rates change at the same

percentage rate, so tfiat e÷i/e =                                     ,   the implicit tax—subsidy rates are
zero. In that case there is no divergence between douestic and foreign real

rates of interest and the equilibrium value of wealth becomes

                               *                         *
                                                     p                                        *
(10')
                            p1.
                                            +                                     +
                     '0                                       R           ..R t
                                   0                              o
                            p0                       p0                               p0
                                      15


   Thus, in that case the equilibrium value wealth is the discounted sum of

   current and future incomes net of initial external debt. With equal rates of

   depreciation the equilibrium replicates the outcome obtained with free open

   capital   account of the balance—of—payments. In that case (and in contrast
  with equation (10)), the time path of external debt, 8, does not
   influence   the equilibrium value of wealth and consumption. In general,

  however, the time patterns of external debt, 8*, impacts on the real

  equilibrium.

       The foregoing interpretation of equation (10) illustrates two key

  issues. First, it highlights the fact that the dual exchange—rate regime

  operates in a manner that introduces implicit taxes on capital flows. It

  follows, therefore, that such outcomes can also be replicated through explicit

  taxation of, or quotas on, financial capital flows under a floating

  exchange—rate regime. Second, our formulation presented the precise

  manifestation and magnitude of the distortions that are associated with the

  dual exchange—rate regime.

     It is noteworthy that the analysis of the equilibrium value of   W0 did
not employ the specific behavioral assumptions underlyig the utility function

(and, thereby, the Consumption function). In subsequent sections we will

analyze in detail the factors that govern the dynamic evolution of wealth,

external debt, and the exchange rates. For this purpose we will need to use

the specific behavioral assumptions. In order to set the stage for such an

analysis it is convenient to derive the equilibrium relation between external

debt, initial wealth and the two exchange rates.

     In general, the economys external debt in period t can be written as

the difference between the sums of the present values of past as well as

current consumptions and outputs adjusted for the initial debt comitments (in

present value). The compoundings of these quantities are performed as usual

by employing the world rates of interest.
                                          16



       Substituting the consumption function (4) into the economy's budget

constraint (7), and solving the difference equation for B (for any

given value of W0), yields



(11)           =
                   (l_s)R0...Rti
                                               +   (&-)     + 62    ?. .....2.) +•••+(5t _!_2.)]




               _[RO.Ri...RtIPYO +     Ri...Rt      1pY1 +          + ptYtJ

                   +
                       R0R1...Rtl(Rl8*l).
       Using the solvency requirement that at the limit (as time goes to

infinity) the present value of debt approaches zero, equation (11) becomes



                                      -
              *           R...R           R18*1
(12)         pW
              o
                =
                             r1   6t(tO)

 Equations (1O)—(12) constitute the system which can be solved in order to
yield the entire equilibrium paths of B, the ratio of the two exchange

rates and the equilibrium value of W0. These solutions provide a complete

 characterization of the real equilibrium of the system. The solution of the

real system can be used together with equation (2) in order to determine the

 implied value of the discounted sum of nominal taxes and transfers. As is

evident in the present benchmark model all that matters are discounted sums of

 the lump—sum taxes and transfers rather than their precise -timing. This pro-

 perty reflects the structure of the model which yields Ricardian—equivalence

 propositions. In a subsequent section we relax some of the assumptions

 underlying the Ricardian structure. In that case the equilibrium depends

 on the precise time path of taxes.
                                 17

      In the next section we analyze the characteristics and the determinants

 of the endogenous variables under the two formulations of the dual

 exchange—rate regimes. Thus we examine the evolution of (i) the dual

 exchange—rate premium under the assumption that there is a quota on net

 external borrowing and (ii) the magnitude of net external borrowing under the

 assumption that •both the comercial and the financial exchange rates are

 pegged.



 11.4. The Quota on External Borrowing and the Flexible Dual Exchange Rate

      Premi urn


     When there is a quota       on the path of net external borrowing the

authorities are assumed to peg the comercial exchange rate, e, while letting

the financial exchange rate,   s, be determined in the free market. In

equilibrium the market—determined financial exchange rate may differ from the

pegged comercial rate. We define the exchange rate premium by the percentage

discrepancy between s and e; that is, the premium Is (s/e)—1. In this

section we analyze the determinants of this premium. In addition to

attempting to clarify the working of dual exchange rate regimes, our interest

in analyzing the determinants of the premium sterns from the fact that the

assumption that the authorities are capable of separating the markets and

preventing arbitrage between the corrmercjal and the financial exchange rates

may be rendered invalid if the premium gets too large. Thus, our analysis may

be useful for identifying the factors that are relevant for determining

whether the dual exchange—rate regime is viable.

     In order to gain insights into the factors governing the magnitude of the.

exchange—rate premium and the viability of the dual exchange—rate regime we

simplify the exposition and divide the horizon into two: the present (t=O)

and the future (t   1,...,.). We assume that the quota and, thereby, the dual
                                             18


exchange—rate regime, are in effect for r           periods after which the quota is
relaxed and the financial exchange rate is unified with the pegged connercial

rate. Throughout the future the world rate of interest, and the levels of

output and taxes are assumed to be constant. We further assume that the

corririercial exchange rate is pegged at the level e = 1 and we define units so

as to set the (constant) world price level at unity. In Appendix II we derive

the explicit solutions for the equilibrium value of the financial exchange

rate. Since the coimiercial exchange rate is pegged these expressions are also

applicable for the analysis of the premium. The solution for St is:



 (13) s 5(Y_(R_1) *)                        J(R)           for t
                         (Y0—R1B1 +   B )    o



        Substituting (13) into (12) and (2) (for a large -r) yields a solution

 for s0.


                                      Y-R1 B*1 *
 (14)      s
               °   (                                (R-1) R R* -T) +             (M-T   )
                                        Y_(R_11B*      R
                       (1—ó)(R_1B1)                                      RtB*i


        As is evident, the equilibrium value of the financial exchange rate in

 period zero which is the domestic price of the foreign-currency linked debt at

 the beginning of this period depends on the money supply, output, taxes, and the

 rate of interest as well as on the magnitude of the historically given foreign

 debt and the size of the quota. In addition, the value of the financial rate

 also depends on the length of the period t         during   which the quota is in effect.

 From equation (14) it is seen that during the period for which the dual

 exchange—rate regime is in effect the initial equilibrium value of the financial

exchange rate, s, depends positively on the existing money supply 1-T (a stock

which was carried over from the previous period net of period zero taxes).
                                      19




Likewise, the value of s     depends negatively on the size of the quota on ex-

ternal debt, B* (when taxes exceed the initial debt commitment) and on future

taxes, T. In general, except for the money stock which exerts a direct effect

on the financial exchange rate, the other factors influence the equilibrium

value of s      through their influence on the real rate of interest. Those

factors which lower the real rate of interest induce an increase in the ex-

change rate premium and vice versa.

     Equation (13) specifies the equilibrium value of the financial exchange

rate for all future periods during which   the   dual exchange—rate regime

operates. In addition to providing information on the impact of the various

variables on the level of the exchange rate, equation (13) can also be used in

order to determine the evolution of the premium over time as well as to assess

the likely viability of the dual rate regime.

In this context it is relevant to note that the evolution of the financial

rate (as measured by the ratio s/s0) does not depend on the length of

the period t.    The evolution of the financial exchange rate is explained as

follows. The stationary levels of outputs, interest rates and prices imply

that as long as the level of the quota is fixed, consumption must be fixed.

Obviously, from the consumption function (4) such stationarity is achieved if

the real rate of interest equals the rate of time preference. Thus,

stJst_i must equal 1/aR, and Xt                  is   proportional to (l/fSR)t



     The assumption that the quota is binding implies that the economy is a

dissaver. This implies that the rate of interest is smaller than the

subjective rate of time preference and, therefore, that the product Ra is

smaller than unity. From equation (13) it is seen that when Ra < 1           the

financial exchange rate and, thereby, the exchange—rate premium rises over

time. Obviously, under such circumstances for a large enough value of t the
                                  20


assumption that the authorities can separate the markets and prevent

profitable artibrage between the commercial and the financial exchange rates

becomes highly questionable. It follows, therefore, that the length of the

period t, cannot exceed a critical value since otherwise at some future date
the size of the quota will have to be modified. Thus the present benchmark

model illustrates the difficulties associated with the design of a dual

exchange—rate regime which is based on a permanent quota.

     In addition to the long run difficulties induced by potential arbitrage,

the dual exchange rate regime which is Implemented by fixing a permanent quota

is severely limited by more basic considerations of the overall consistency of

the model. Specifically, as shown in Appendix II, when x = 1/ER     equations

(10) and (12) imply that the value of 8* must equal


           B*_D
                '-i'-i 1
                Q*      1
             —              •



Any permanent quota which differs from 8* is inconsistent with equilibrium
and thus cannot be sustained. Thus, when         8*, the authorities can only

introduce a temporary fixed quota.



11.5. Unconstrained External Borrowing and the Pegged Dual Exchange Rate

Premium



     In the preceding section we assumed that the government pegs the

corrrnercial exchange rate and sets a binding quota on the volume of external

borrowing. The financial exchange rate and thereby the dual exchange—rate

premium was allowed to be determined in the free market. In this section we

consider the alternative specification of the exchange—rate policy according

to which the government is assumed to peg both the comercial and the

financial exchange rates (and, thereby, it pegs the dual exchange—rate

premium). With this specification the volume of external borrowing is allowed
                                                            21



         to be determined freely according to the private sectors preferences. As in

        the previous specification the present formulation of the dual exchange—rate

        regime also exhibits the limitations on the conduct of policies and on the

        viability of the dual exchange—rate regime.

            In specifying this version of the regime we adopt the same assumptions as

       in Section 11.4 concerning world prices and rate of interest, domestic output

       and taxes, and the comercial exchange rate.                             In addition we also assume that
       the authorities set the initial financial exchange rate at s and allow

       for a constant percentage change thereof.                         Accordingly, for the period
       O,..., during which the dual exchange—rate regime is in effect, the

       evolution of the financial exchange rate is governed by s/s0 =                                    x.
   Using equations (11)—(12) the implied equilibrium value of initial wealth and

   the resultant volumes of (the
                                                  market—determined) external borrowing, B,
   are:


                            +                 V -
                                    0               R1B*1
   (15)
                  0
                        51+1 +                    (1(dx)T+1)



               (16j) B: =               8*1 + (1—)w0 —
                                R1                     V0


                        *
              (1611) B = R0...R
                                         t—   1         *
                                                             +                     t—1       1 (ax)t+1
                                                  R181               (1.-)R0..           o     (1—dx)



(16)                        —
                                R0...Rt_1y0
                                                    —                            for     t =


                                                                                                           1
              (16i11)   8+t=R0. . .Rt+t_1R                                                                     +
                                                        l8*l+(1_a)Ro...R+t_1w (x

                                -
                                                                         Tt].
                                    R0...Rt_l                    -
                                                                       (1-R)
                                                                                 )        for     t =   1,2,...
                                         22



      Equation (15)    specifies    the initial equilibrium value of private

wealth. As usual the value of W0 depends positively on current and future

outputs and negatively on current and future rates of interest (which impact

on the discounting of future incomes). The expression in equation (15) also

illustrates the dependence of             on x — the      constant percentage change

in the premium — and on the length of the period during which the dual

exchange—rate regime is in effect. As is evident, a higher premium lowers

wealth. The interpretation of this result is that the premium raises the

domestic real rates of interest and thereby it lowers the present value of

current and future income streams. The effect of changes in               on the

equilibrium value of initial wealth depends on whether the financial exchange

rate rises or falls over time, that is, if x exceeds or falls short of

unity. If the financial exchange rate rises over time so that x > 1, then

lengthening the period during which the dual exchange—rate regime operates

(i.e. raising r) results in a lower value of                  and vice versa. The

interpretation of these results is also given in terms of the effects of t

on the discounting' of future income streams. Accordingly, if x exceeds

unity, the domestic interest rates exceed world rates; therefore, under these

circumstances extending t          lengthens the period during which high discount
factors apply.

      Equations (16) characterize the determinants of the equilibrium values of

external borrowing. As seen in (16—i) the current value of B: depends

on current equilibrium wealth, on current output and on past debt comitment.

A rise in V0 lowers external borrowing due to the usual mecharrism of

consumption—smoothing, whereas a rise in 14 raises consumption and,

thereby, raises external borrowing. In view of our discussion of equation

(15) it is clear that a higher value of current and future rates of interest
                                        23


  and exchange—rate premium lowers external borrowing whereas the effect of a

 rise in the length of the period   r        depends on whether the financial exchange

rate rises or falls over time.

       Equations (16—u) and (16—i ii) show the evolution of equilibrium external

borrowings for the period during which the dual exchange—rate rate operates

 (up to period r) as well as for the subsequent period (beyond period r). As

seen, the value of external borrowing at period ,t,        B;, consists of the

difference between the present values of cumulative past as well as current

consumptions and the corresponding present values of outputs. This difference

is adjusted for the current value of the initial debt connitment. The

interest rates used in the computations of the present values are the world

rates of interest. As is evident, the effect of the magnitude of the pegged

premiums on        operates through its impact on the cumulative present

values of past and current consumptions (the second term on the

right—hand—sides of equations (16—li) and (16—ui)). These effects are

ambiguous since on the one hand a rise in x lowers               and thereby lowers

consumption in all periods up to period t. The reduced level of consumption

results in a lower value of external borrowing. On the other hand the rise

in x raises the domestic rate of interest and, therefore, given W0, it

induces a rise in savings from period zero up to period t. This rise in past

savings yields higher values of current wealth and consumption and induces a

rise in Bt. The net effect seems to depend on the relative magnitudes

of these factors. It may be shown, however, that around an initial value of

x =   1, the effect of a rise in x on the value of the external debt in the
period during which the dual exchange rate regime operates is positive.

Finally, the effect of extending the period of the dual exchange—rate regime

on the value of the external debt operates through its impact on W0. As
                                     24



was shown earlier, this depends on whether the dual exchange—rate premium is

positive or negative. Specifically, a rise in t        raises      and thereby

raises       if x <   1   and vice versa.

      In the preceding discussion we examined the effects of various changes on

the value of wealth and on the evolution of external debt (and implicitly on

the levels of consumption and the current account of the balance of

payments). These comparative static questions should be interpreted as

reflecting the effects of temporary measures. In the long run if the dual

exchange—rate regime were to last indefinitely, there would be severe

constraints that limit the choice of the pegged dual exchange—rate premium.

It is argued in Appendix III that a dual exchange rate regime with permanently

pegged premiums cannot be sustained indefinitely unless the authorities peg

the premium in a way that equates domestic and foreign real rates of interest

or, alternatively, unless the authorities peg the premium in such a way so as

to yield domestic rates of interest that induce zero savings. Thus, the two

sustainable permanent paths of the premium are either a path along which x =

1   or a path along which x = 1/6R.       In the first case the evolution of the

financial exchange rate yields identical real allocations as those obtained

under free foreign—exchange markets. In the second case the choice of the

premium eliminates the capital account of the balance of payments.

     The analysis of the constraints on the long—run viability of the pegged

dual exchange—rate regime also illustrates the similarities between the

version discussed in section 11.4 in which the authorities set a fixed quota,

and the version discussed in the present section in which the authorities set

the premium by fixing the percentage change in the financial exchange rate.

Specifically, the case in which x = 1        is analogous to the case in which the

quota is nonbinding and the case in which x = 1/SR        is equivalent to the case
                                           25


  in which the quota is set at a level which generates zero savings.11 Both

 versions face difficulties in sustaining long—run viability of the dual

 exchange—rate regime. In both cases the long run problems are induced by the

 ultimate futility of separating the commercial and the financial exchange

 markets from the forces of profit—seeking arbitrage. In addition, there are

 also   the   long—run difficulties which stem from violations of solvency con-

 straints. Thus, the present benchmark model highlights the basic difficulties

 associated with the adoption of a permanent dual exchange—rate regime.




 III. Commercial Exchange—Rate Policies in a Model with Overlapping
       Generations with a Finite Horizon

        The benchmark model of section II was characterized by the Ricardian—

equivalence property according to which for a given dual exchange—rate policy

the behavior of the infinitely lived population is invariant with respect to

the timing of taxes and monetary transfers. As a result of this Richardian

property the level of the commercial exchange rate,             played   no critical
                                                         e0 ,
role. In the present section we extend the analytical framework to a non—

Ricardian world.




111.1. The Overlapping Generations Model

        We use a version of an overlapping—generations model in which each

generation has a finite horizon. More specifically, in order to obtain simple

aggregate behavior we adopt Blanchard's (1985) formulation by which output per

capita is fixed and each individual's probability of survival between two

consecutive periods is 1      (0 < y < 1) which is assumed to be independent of

age. The size of each cohort at birth is normalized to unity and, therefore,
                                                         26



its size at age a is                             The size of the population is the sum of all the

sizes of all cohorts. Thus the (fixed) population size is                          Ela =    1/1—1

         The risk—free rate of interest is given by the world at the level r

where r =       R    —   1   .   The rate of interest that governs the behavior of

 individuals takes into account the risk associated with mortality.

Competition in capital markets implies that the individual risk premium is set

 at the actuarially—fair level and, therefore, the risk—adjusted interest rate
                    12
 Is (R/1)—1                                                                 -

                                                                                structure of the
        In   order to incorporate these considerations into the
                                                                        individual and then
benchmark model we start with the specification of the
                                                                 each individual into those of
aggregate the quantities that are applicable to

the aggregate private sector. Analogously to equation (1) the typical budget

constraint faced by an individual of age a at time t                        is




(17) etPCa,t =           eiP_iYt_i           —
                                                 It - R/iStba_i,t_i
where Ca,t and bat denote, respectively, the level of consumption and

the size of debt of an individual of age a at time t, y, denotes

per—capita output. Consolidation of the periodic budget constraints yields

 equation (18) as the size of wealth, Wao of an individual of age a at

period t = 0.

                                                                        *

 (18)        Wao =               -                      +                        it-i -    ba_i,_i]•


 The budget constraints require that the discounted sum of consumption

 equals the value of wealth so that



               e
                 S


                OrO
                     o
                     *   1t—01
                           —
                                     t
                                         '
                                     'a t =      '
                                                          27

As is evident from the definition of
                                                           wealth, the discounting is performed with
the aid of the risk—adjusted discount
                                                               factor y/R.    This should be constructed
with the formulation in equation (2) of the benchmark model th which the

discount factor used by the private sector was the world risk—free discount

factor hR.

        The equilibrium value of wealth W                              is computed in an analogous
                                                                a,o
 manner to that in section II by taking into account the government foreign

 exchange interventions (equation (5)), the money market clearing condition

 (9), and noting that the monetary injections induced by foreign exchange

 interventions which accrue to the cohort of age a are



 (5N)
                                    *    *        +              —
                         —e(B — RBt1)                 st(Bt          RBt1).

Following a similar procedure outlined in Appendix I the equilibrium wealth of

an individual of age a at period t = 0                                is

                                             *
                   S0                                                 t e.    e+i *            e           *
(19)    W      =
                   —*{Zo(R
         a,o
                   e0p0                   s     -"t +
                                                               () (.ç 1st+i)Ba+t,t_18_1
                                                      —
                                                          ('—I=o(k) B + R181 —                     y       a—1,1



Recalling that the size of the population is ]./(1—), the aggregate

equilibrium wealth per—capita, W0, is obtained by using the definition

w
  0     (1_);oTawa,o.                   Thus,


                                                 *
(20)
                        S0                   ep + Z()t(!e—                    e+1 *   —
                                                                                          e0           *
            W0               *-{Zto                                                            R_181
                        e0 p0
                                             5t

                                                  t
                                —
                                    ('—)Zo(I) Bt}.
                                        28


Equation (20) specifies the equilibrium value of per—capita wealth at period

t =   0.   It is the analogue to equation (10) of the benchmark model. As may be

seen, the two expressions coincide in the special case of '      = 1.    In general

the role of the finite horizon is manifested through three channels. First,

as indicated earlier, the discounting of future flows is performed by using

the risk adjusted discount factor y/R. Second, the value of r together

with the dual exchange rate policy determine the impact of the difference

between the domestic private real rate of interest and the corresponding world

safe rate on the equilibrium value of initial wealth. As in the benchmark

model [e/s —       e+i/s+iJ   measures the distortion. In the present

case, however, the discounting is done by using the risk—adjusted discount

factor. Third, the value of          determines the effect of changes in

government debt (associated with interventions in the financill exchange rate)

on private wealth. This channel is represented by the last term on the

right—hand—side of equation (20). In the extreme case of infinite horizon

(with . = 1) the last term vanishes and the Ricardian proposition reemerges.

With a finite horizon, (with    -r <   1) changes in government debt that are
induced by interventions in the financial exchange rate induce changes in

private—sector's net wealth. These changes in wealth arise from the fact that

the private sector discounts the future flows of taxes by using the

risk—adjusted discount factor T/R whereas the government uses the risk—free

world discount factor, hR. In the special case for which there is no

intervention in the financial exchange rate, e s. (since .!             B = Be).
In    that case equation (20) coincides with (10'). Finally we note that all

the terms on the right—hand—side of (20) except for the last term depend on

the relation between the relative evolutions of the commercial and the financial

                          and s /s      but not on the initial difference between the
exchange rates, e /e to          to
levels of the two exchange rates. On the other hand the last term on the right—

hand—side of (20) depends on the initial value of s/e .          For a positive debt
                                                      29


     a rise in s /e           raises indebtedness and lowers wealth. This dependence on the
                      0   0
     level   of the exchange rate reflects the departure from the Ricardian equivalence

     and indeed when y = 1          ,   the last term vanishes, the equilibrium value of initial
 wealth does not depend on the levels of the
                                                               initial exchange rates and the
 Ricardian proposition reemerges.

         Finally, Since in our dual exchange rate regime, without fiscal

 policies, (e/s)B                          equation (20) can be simplified to



 (21)                     [1US(Y)t            tt t +
                                                  *

                                                           1              — 5)B     —
                                                                                        ..2R1B*1J


 111.2. Devaluation and the Timing of Monetary Injections

         In this section we examine the effects of
                                                                commercial exchange—rate policies
on the exchange—rate premium. Obviously these
                                                                effects depend crucially on the
timing of the monetary injections that are associated with the management of

the two exchange rates. In order to sharpen the analysis we assume that the

monetary policy is not perfectly coordinated to offset
                                                                          changes in the pegged
commercial exchange rate. With perfect coordination devaluations affect only

nominal magnitudes without any impact on the real equilibrium of the system.13

        Consider a stylized, example, with stationary outputs, in which the

commercial exchange rate is raised at time tO                  from its previous unitary
level to e and the new rate is then maintained throughout the entire

future. The change in the current level of wealth is given by

(22) Wo         2::::!    —       — L...
                  e           e    (R—y)      e

The first term on the right hand side of equation (22) represents the
capital gains that are associated with the revaluation of the money
stock— the propotlonal decline in prices, (l—e)/e, times the real value
of   money, y. The second and the third terms on                the   right hand side of
equation      (22) represent the implied change in monetary absorption (taxes)
                                                        30




in the present, T , and in the entire future T , where                                       (y/(R—y) is the

discounted sum       of       one—dollar stream commencing in period t1, evaluated with

the effective discount factor (y/R). The tax change is required in order to

preserve solvency of the government budget in the face of the decline in foreign

exchange reserves by the amount [(l—e)/e]y —                                LT/e   .   This decline equals the

fall in demand for domestic money minus money withdrawls through taxes. The

government budget constraint yields:


(23)
           e—l   +        o
                                +    T 1         = 0
                      e              e (R—l)

where 1/CR—i) is the discounted sum of a one—dollar stream commencing in

period t=1, evaluated with the market discount factor l/R. Equation (23) in-

dicates that in the absence of initial government debt and government spending,

the sum of the present values of explicit taxes (T and T) and inflationary

taxes [(e—l)/ey must be zero. From equation (23) we can solve for the change

in future taxes                 = CR—i)        (1_e)         —          .    Substituting    this expression

into equation (22) yields:


(24) W (1-T)(4) [(i)                            -
It   is worth noting that when i'l,                    equation     (24) implies that w = 0 ; that is,

devaluations have no real effects.

       For simplicity assume now that the transitory quota on external

borrowing is in effect only in the first two periods, t=0, 1. Using

equations (21) and (24) yields:




(25)        =    +   x(R-y) Y + (l) (R-) -
       +   , [Li]
              x
                              — R     B*
                                    —1—1   ,    where x          s /s
                                                                  1 0
                                     31

 Under the assumption that      the utility        function is logarithmic and that

 the subjective discount factor, 6, is constant it can be shown that the

 aggregate consumption function (which is derived from individuals'

 maximization of expected utility) is c               (l—6)W. Using this function
 and the familiar relationship of national accounts we deri'e B =                   B


 (26) *      (l—yô)W ÷ R_1B1 — y

                                                     -*
For    a given level of quota on external borrowing, B               ,    equations (25)—
 (26) yield a solution for the percentage future change in the financial

exchange rate (from period 0 to period 1). The rise in the coerciai

exchange rate in period 0 impacts negatively on the level of wealth and

on the evolution of the financial exchange rate over time. This is seen

by differentiating equations (25)—(26) which yields14


         0
(27)
                  (1—y)(.)
             X            ( y) e
(28) (!)
      x      de        —               <
                       (B*_ ..i_)
                             (R—i)


It is noteworthy, again, that in the special case in which y=1 the devalua-

tion has no effect on the evolution of the exchange rate premium over time.

Since the effective real discount rate equals RxI-y                 the   devaluation lowers

the effective real interest rate. Substituting equations (24)—(25) in the

aggregate analogue of equation (18) yields:


 (29) w0
             M-T
                   +
                       (RJ   (y-T) +       (i-i)   (t_)r(.::!)y -   .]
 Equation (29) expresses current wealth in terms of the real value of the
 stock of money in the beginning of period o plus the present value of the

 output stream (note that the nominal proceeds from sales of output are

 distributed with one period lag, requiring discounting to the present by
                                      32




the factor y/xR), minus      the   present value of taxes, plus the capital

gains arising from the devaluation, and minus the initial debt obligation.

     Given the quota on external borrowing, B* ,            the new commercial

exchange rate, e, and period zero tax changes, T, (which yield the

solution for x and         from equations (25)—(26)), equation (28) can be

solved for s and the implied exchange rate premium. To evaluate the

effect of the devaluation (with no change in current monetary injections)

on the exchange rate premium, we differentiate equation (29), and using

(27)—(28), yields:

          ds                (H—T °)/e
                     1 —                   + (1—r)   rr....L' —... +      Ry(y—T)
(30 I__(_._2.
   's1de
     o
         '      •t
                           sR   B*
                            a —1 —1
                                             sR   B*
                                             o —1 —1
                                                        R—e                         —
                                                                       (R_T)(y(Ry)B*)


    As can be seen from equation (30) with a positive initial external

debt the rise in the commercial exchange rate does not, in general, lead

to a proportional increase in the free financial exchange rate. The fall

in the real value of the initial stock of money taken by itself leads to

a decline in the financial exchange rate whereas the effect of the devalua-

tion on the effective real interest rate, taken by itself, raises the

financial exchange rate. When the initial stock of money (relative to

output) is small the financial exchange rate overshoots and the exchange

rate premium rises and vice versa.

     In this section we have analysed the circumstances under which changes

in the levels of the commercial exchange rate and of the nominal money stock

influence the real equilibrium. We focused on the effects of these policies

on the real value of initial private sector debt commitment, the real value

of wealth, the effective real interest rate and the intergenerational dis-

tribution of welfare. The real effects of such policies (that is, the

departure from the Ricardian equivalence) stem from the "myopic" element in
                                        33



 private sector behavior reflecting the finiteness of life.15    These issues of

 the neutrality of money supply and of exchange rate policies carry over to a

 more elaborate framework in which the economy produces tradable and non—

 tradable goods. In that case the nominal exchange rate regime is not neutral

 in its effect on the real exchange rate and
                                               changes in the money stock and in

 the nominal exchange rate impact on the real exchange rate.16



 IV. Concluding Remarks

       This paper introduced critical intertemporal considerations into the

 analysis of dual exchange—rate systems. These Intertemporal considerations

 cast serious doubts on the long—run viability of such
                                                         exchange—rate regimes.
Specifically, we have examined in detail the restrictions that solvency

requirements on both the private and the public sectors impose on the

admissible set of policies.

      Even though dual exchange rate regimes may not be viable in the long

run, they can be substained in the short run. In this context we have

specified the nature of the distortions introduced by the adoption of dif-

ferent exchange rates for commercial and for financial transactions and we

have examined the implications of the regime for the intertemporal distribu-

tion of effective taxes and for the intergenerational distribution of welfare.

      Our model has been characterized by forward looking individuals who take

full account of current and prospective government policies. We have used the

model in order to specify the precise mechanisms and monetary changes as-

sociated with the dual exchange—rate policies. In so doing we have provided

an analytical framework that facilitates the identification and clarification

of the mechanisms governing the operation of dual exchange rate systems.
                                     314




     While we have focused on the limited viability of dual exchange rate
regimes, our analysis is also applicable for the ongoing discussion of the

sequencing of economic liberalization policies. One of the key questions

addressed in that discussion concerned the consequences of a removal of

restrictions on current—account and on capital—account transactions. In

particular, a debated issue has been the proper order in which such restric-


tions ought to be removed.17 Our analysis of the operation of the system

under a bInding quota on external borrowing has implications for that debate.
                                                  35



                                                  APPENDIX



 I. The equilibrium Value of



         In order to compute the equilibrium value of initial wealth, W0, we

 first rewrite equation (2) of the text as


                       *                                               *
                    etp                g_10                         e1p1
                                                  + z;0 dt ______
(1.1)                              =
                     5     dtCt
                                       e0p0
                                            *
                                                             St
                                                                                t_1
                                                Tts0          R
                                   It_idt                      -1   B_1 W0.
                                                       e0p0


where dt = _____           1
                  * Lii...RtI
               e0p0
                     o



        Next, we note that from equation (6) in the text



(1.2)
              Mti_TtIMt_Xt

        Using the money market equilibrium condition (9) we replace
        *
e1p1Y1           by Mt_i and, using (1.2) in (1.1) yields


                    M -                     - X
(1.3)           =         X0 +

                                       sl
                                       M1
                                                    + ... + dt       Mt -   X   +     -    0

                                                                                          e0p0
                                                                                               * R1B1

                           *
        Substituting etPtY for Mt yields

                               *

(1.4)
                          etpt                         X S0
                                                         —
                                   Yt —     t=0dt                   R181
                                                              e0p
                                           36




     Equation (1.4) shows that the equilibrium value of W0 depends on

   which, in turn, reflects the precise specification of the dual

exchange—rate regime. In order to obtain further insights we substitute

equation (5) of the text for X. Accordingly the term


              can be written as:
_Z0dt !


             1t=ott=ot
                   d               d
                                           etp(Yt_Ct) s(B —



        Substituting equation (7) for p(Y —                 C)   yields




             —Z dt        =                     —                         (8 — RQB) + ...] —
                               e:pt
(1.5)                                               R   18*1) +




                        —                                             +
                :°00t(B
                     oo
                          R181) +.—(8i
                                   0
                                       — R0B0)



                          —            +                —         +   ...) — 1R4
                                                                                   81+e0p*R_lB_l•
                e:p [(2

Substituting (1.5) into (1.4) yields equation (10) of the text.



II. The Equilibrium Dual Exchange—Rate Premium

        In this part of the appendix we derive the expressions relevant for the

analysis of the equilibrium dual exchange rate premium for the case in which the

authorities peg the commercial exchange rate and set a quota for r on the volume

 of external debt .       We   assume that from period +1 onwards the quota

 is relaxed and the financial exchange rate is unified with the pegged

 commercial exchange rate. In order to gain insight we specialize the analysis

 to the case in which the policyis stationary in the sense that
                                                          37




   =          and    e =e        =   1. We further focus on the equilibrium in which the
world price and rate of interest are stationary, that is                            p =   p      1

In order to be able to analyze the effect of a once and for all change in

the paths of Output and world interest rates, we distinguish between the

current interest rate and outut, represented by
                                                                           R0 and Y0, and their
corresponding future stationary values R and V.

       Substituting these assumptions into equation (11), denoting the term

         by    Xt,      yields

               (a)               =               —        +            ,   for   t = 0
                                     (1—s)W0         V0

(II—')


               (b)               =                                +
                                     (1_a)R0Rt_lw0(1+x1               62x2+...+5txt)
                         —                 +                                           for t =
                             CR0RtY0           (Rt4+...+R+1)y]+R0Rt_1R1?1,

     From (II—1)(a) the initial equilibrium value of
                                                     W0 is


                                      —1
                                           +Y -R —1B*
                                                    -1
(11—2)              =


       From (II—1)—(b) together with (11—2) we can solve for the value, of

               during the r periods for which the quota is in effect. Thus,


                         V —   (R—1)             1
(11—3)         5t
                                                               for t
               S0TIR0W0                        Rt_14t



Equation (11—3) specifies the evolution of the financial exchange rate.

Finally, in order to determine the initial equilibrium value of the financial
                                        38




exchange rate we substitute equations (11—2) and (11—3) into equation (2) of

the text noting that for the periods                             s =         e       =   1,   and

assuming stationary lump—sum taxes, T, for periods t =                           1,....,—         yields

                                             R
                                             —
                                                     -       *
(11—4)
              ° RB
             s = [______
                    —1 —1
                                         R
                                (1_)(A(.__1_)(1_Rt ) +
                                                                     •r+1
                                                                             )



                                        t+1              R
                                                 +               )   +M - T
                                    (1—)A            (R—1)R'2

where
                   Y. (R—1)B
                    -




III.    The Constraints on the Choice of the Pegged Exchange—Rate Premium


       In this part of the appendix we compute the values of the pegged

exchange—rate premium that are consistent with the maintenance of an

indefinite dual exchange rate regime. The solvency constraint requires that

at the limit, the discounted value of external debt must be zero, mamely,



lim(R0...Rtir B,
                   *        *
                        R131+(1—a)W0lim
                                                     It
                                                     i—ax
                                                             —
                                                                     o   —               V
                                                                                              =
t-,.                                    t-                                       0



        In the case for which x =   1   the value of                     is given by equation

(10') of the text. Substituting (10) into the above solvency constraint and

assuming that outputs prices and the rates of interest are stationary, reveals

that the constraint is satisfied. In that case the domestic real rates of

Interest equal the world levels.
                                          39




     Another feasible path for the exchange rate premium can be obtained by

inducing an equality between income and spending. Under such circumstances

the current account of the balance—of-.payments is balanced and the value of

the external debt remains stationary. With a fixed                       it is evident

that the solvency constraint is satisfied.            Finally, in order to induce such

an equality between spending and income (with stationary outputs, prices and

rates of interest) equation (4) in the text implies that x must equal 1/dR.


     In order to compare the fixed quota *which results in a value of x
that is equal to (1/dR) we substitute (1/6R) for x into equation (10)

in the text and obtain

                                          *                                    *
              = Y(l++2              —          +            1
                                                                +   i2
                                                                    (..) +••J
                                        R1B1       (1—aR)(1+
              -y
              -            *
                       — R_1B   +
                                        ()
                                    (1_sR)B*



On the other hand equation (12) Implies that for x •
                                                     1/aR
                            D   D*
                 Y
              =     — ,R—1 1_1u_1

                              (1—s)

These two equations for    W0 imply that


                   1
           8* =


     Note that In the present case with aR < 1,             8* >    0.
     Finally It can be shown that any constant value of the dual exchange—rate
premium other than x      1 or x — 1/aR,           results in an inconsistency among

equations (10), (1611) and the solvency requirement.
                                   FOO TN OTES




      1For a recent analysis see Dornsusch (1985) and for a survey see Lanyi

(1975).

      2For an analysis of aspects of the relations between taxes on capital

flows, quantitative controls and dual exchange rates see Adams and Greenwood

(1985), Greenwood and Kimbrough (19814), Liviatan (1981), and Stockman and

Hernandes (1985). For a related analysis of the insulation properties of two—

tier exchange—rate systems see Argy and Porter (1972), Fleming (1971), Flood and

Marion (1982), Marion (1981) and Swoboda (19714).

      3For an analysis of dual exchange rates or capital controls in the context

of public finance and distortionary taxes see Aizenman (1986) and Persson and

Svensson (1985) and for an analysis of dual exchange rates as a second—best

policy see Adams and Greenwood (1985), Basevi (1985) and Flood and Marion

(1982).

      14Among the numerous studies dealing with these issues are Aizenman

(1985), Cumby (19814), de Macedo (1982), Dornbusch (1976, 1985), Flood (1978),

Guidotti (1985), Lizondo (19814), Mussa (1986), Obstfeld (19814) and van

Wijnbergen (1985).

      5me fact that In general a dual exchange—rate regime is not viable in the

long run implies that a steady—state analysis of such a regime may not be

meaningful. Therefore, great care should be given to steady—state results that

are based on descriptive models which are not constrained by intertemporal

solvency requirements.
        6For an analysis of the effects of departures from a complete segmentation

 between the commercial and financial exchange markets see Bhandari and Decaluwe

 (19814).

       7A similar methodology is employed in the analysis of the effects of a

 devaluation from an initial position of balance of payments equilibrium, and in

 the analysis of the effects of a tariff or a quota In a small competitive (price

 taking) open economy. In both cases the model itself does not provide a

 rationale for the policy but the analysis yields insights into the pure effects

of such policies.

       8
           The solvency condition is urn
                                                e S
                                                    00      1
                                                                            =
                                          t+    —t Rt R•    R Bt
                                                       o1'•'t
       9The present specification presumes that the exchange rate applicable to

debt—service payments is the financial exchange rate, 5. Alternatively, we

could have assumed (following some conventions) that the exchange rate appli-

cable to debt—service payments is the commercial exchange rate. In that case, a

typical equation in (1) would be

       epC =                         —
                  e1pY1     —
                                Tt       stBt
                                                —
                                                    e   (Rti-i)Bi — stBt_i
In that case the intertemporal price of                  (the relative price of consumption

in two consecutive periods) is [(set1)/e(R1-.1) +
                                                                      st]1'[st_ietlstet_i].         In

that case the domestic rate of interest equals the foreign rate if
                                                                                        et=s=s_1.
The key results of our analysis do not depend on this specification.

       °The solvency requirement specifies that at the limit the discounted
                                                                     —1 *
value of external debt is zero; hence urn                                   = 0   .   For further
                                                t=      (R0...Rti)
                                                                -



reference we note that R1B1/p0 in equation (8) can also be viewed as

summarizing the path of current and future government spending. Specifically, a

rise in government spending entails, in present value terms, a higher value of

initial debt. Therefore, this formulation is also useful for the analysis of

the effects of fiscal policies.
        11The real allocations induced by a policy which pegs the value of x at

a level 1/SR will be identical to those obtained by fixing a permanent quota
—*                —*        *   1
B    at a level B =                 as shown in Appendix III.
                       R_13_1
        12For a detailed description of such a model see Blanchard (1985) and

Frenkel and Razin (19814, 1986). For a Monetary model which uses a similar

framework see Helpman and   Razin    (1985).

        13The subsequent discussion draws on I-ielpman and Razin (1985). We assume

that the devaluation of the currency does not result in real revaluation of

private debt, or alternatively, that if there are capital gains on existing debt

they are taxed away immediately.

        114Note that private sector's solvency condition implies that the external
           *
debt,    RB , must be smaller than the present value of labor income Ry/(R—Y).

        5It is relevant to note, however, that in principle these real effects

can be avoided by adopting a specific course of monetary policy designed to

offset capital gains and losses on existing assets.

        l6For a thorough analysis of the lack of neutrality of the nominal

exchange rate regime in Its relation to the real exchange rate see Mussa (1985).

        17For an analysis of these issues see Frenkel (1982, 1983), Edwards

(1985), Khan and Zhaller (1983) and McKinnon (1982).
                                        L3


                                    REFERENCES




 Adams, Charles and Jeremy Greenwood, "Dual Exchange Rate Systems and Capital

       Controls: An Investigation", Journal of International Economics 18,

       (February 1985): 113—63.

 Aizenman, Joshua, "Adjustment to Monetary Policy and Devaluation Under Tio—

       Tier Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes", Journal of Development Economics 18

       (1985): 15369.

________________    On the Complementarity of Commercial Policy,
                                                                 Capital
      Controls and Inflation Tax", Canadian Journal of Economics 19, (February

      1986).

Argy, Victor and Michael G. Porter, "The Forward Exchange Market and the

      Effects of Domestic and Foreign Disturbances Under Alternative Exchange—

      Rate Regimes", IMF Staff Papers 19, (November 1972): 503—28.

Basevi, Giorgio, "Instruments for Preserving Economic Efficiency and Inter-

      national Capital Mobility" in Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange

      Legislation, Euromoblijare, Occasional Paper, Milano, (June 1985).

Bhandari, Jagdeep S. and Bernard Decaluwe, "Stochastic Implications of

      Incomplete Separation Between Commercial and Financial Exchange Markets"

      unpublished manuscript, (June 19811).

Blanchard, Olivier J., "Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons", Journal of

     Political Economy 93, (April 1985): 223—117.

Cumby, Robert E., "Monetary Policy Under Dual Exchange Rates", Journal of

     International Money and Finance 3, (August 19811): 195—208.
                                            1414




Dorrthusch, Rudiger, "The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes and

      Macroeconomic Policy", Scandinavian Journal of Economics 78, No. 2 (May

      1976): 255—75.

___________________      "Special   Exchange Rates for Capital Account Transactions"

      NBER Working Paper Series No. 1659, (July 1985).

Edwards, Sebastian, "The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in

      Developing Countries," Essays in International Finance, International

      Finance Section, Princeton University, No. 161 , December 1985.

Fleming, J. Marcus, "Dual Exchange Markets and Other Remedies for Disruptive

      Capital Flows", IMF Staff Papers 21, (March 1971): 1—27.

Flood, Robert P., "Exchange Rate Expectations in Dual Exchange Markets",

      Journal of International Economics 8, (February 1978): 65—78.

________ and Nancy P. Marion, The Transmission of Disturbances Under
      Alternative Exchange—Rate Regimes with Optimal Indexation", Quarterly

      Journal of Economics 97, (February 1982): 14366.

Frenkel, Jacob A., "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from Chile

      and Argentina: A Comment" in K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.),

      Economic Policy in a Changing World Vol. 17 of the Carnegie—Rochester

      Conference Series on Public Policy, Amsterdam, North—Holland, 1982.

___________    "Economic Liberalization and Stabilization Programs" in N.

      Ardito Barletta, M. Blejer and L. Landau (eds.), Economic Liberalization

      and Stabilization Policies in Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay:

      tions of the Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments, Washington,

      D.C.: The World Bank, 1983.

___________ and Assaf Razin, "Budget Deficits and Rates of Interest in the

      World Economy", NBER Working Paper Series, No. 13514, (May 19814).

____________    Fiscal    Policies in the World Economy", Journal of Political

      Economy 914, No. 2, (June 1986).
                                        145




 Greenwood, Jeremy and Kent Kimbrough, "An Investigation in the Theory of

       Foreign Exchange Controls", Centre for the Study of International

       Economic Relations, University of Western Ontario, Working Paper No.

       81431, August 19814.

 Guidottj, Pablo E., A study on Dual Exchange Rates, Unpublished Ph.D.

       Dissertation, University of Chicago, (July 1985).

 Helpman, Elhanan, "An Exploration in the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes",

      Journal of Political Economy, 89, (October 1981): 865—90.

________ and Assaf Razin, "Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Rate System",

      Journal of Political Economy 90, (August 1982): 728—514.

_________    "Exchange Rate Management: Intertemporal Tradeoffs", NEER Working

      Paper Series, No. 1590, (March 1985).

Khan, Mohsin S. and Roberto Zahiler, "The Macoreconomjc Effects of Changes in

      Barriers to Trade and Capital Flows: A Simulation Analysis," IMF Staff

      Papers 30, No. 2 (June 1983): 223—82.

Lanyl, Anthony, "Separate Exchange Markets for Capital and Current

      Transactions", IMF Staff Papers 22, (November 1975):     7114—149.


Liviatart, Nissan, "Neutral Monetary Policy and the Capital Import Tax",

      unpublished manuscript, The Hebrew University, 1979.

Lizondo, Jose, "Exchange Rate Differentials and Balance of Payments Under Dual

      Exchange Markets", unpublished manuscript, IMF, 19814.

Lucas, Jr. Robert E., "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two—Country

      World", Journal of Monetary Economics 10, (November 1982): 335—60.

de Macedo, Jorge B., "Exchange Rate Behavior with Currency Inconvertibility",

      Journal of International Economics 12, (February 1982): 65—81.

Marion, Nancy P., "Insulation Properties of a Two—Tier Exchange Market in a

      Portfolio Balance Model", Economica 148, (1981): 61—70.
McKinnon, Ronald I., "The Order of Economic Liberalization: Lessons from

      Chile and Argentina" in K. Brunner and A.H. Meltzer (eds.), Economic

      Policy in a Changing World, Vol. 17 of the Carnegie-Rochester Conference

      Series on Public Policy, Amsterdam: North—Hollana, 1982.

Mussa, Michael, "Nominal Exchange Rate Regimes and the Behavior of Real

      Exchange Rates: Evidence and Implications," Presented at the Carnegie—

      Rochester Conference on Public Policy, Carnegie—Mellon University,

      November 1985.

_________   "The Real Exchange Rate as a Tool of Commercial Policy" in

      Edwards, Sebastian and Liaquat Ahamed (eds.) Economic Adjustment and

      Exchange Rates in Developing Countries, Chicago, IL: University of

      Chicago Press, 1986, forthcoming.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Capital Controls, the Dual Exchange Rate and Devaluation,

      NBER Working Paper Series No. 1324, April 198g.

Persson, Torsten, "Real Transfers in Fixed Exchange Rate Systems and the

      International Adjustment Mechanism", Journal of Monetary Economics 13,

      (May 198l): 3149i69.

_________ and Lars E.O. Svensson, "International Borrowing and Time—

      Consistent Fiscal Policy", Scandinavian Journal of Economics 87', 1985.

Stockman, Alan C., "A Theory of Exchange Rate Determination", Journal of

      Political Economy 86, (August 1980): 673r-98.

__________ and Alejandro Hernandez D., "Exchange Controls, Capital Controls,
      and International Financial Markets", NEER Working Paper Series, No.

      1755, October 1985.

Swoboda, Alexander, K., "The Dual Exchange Rate Systems and Monetary

      Independence", in Robert Z. Aliber (ed.), National Monetary Policies and

      the International System, University of Chicago Press, 19711.

van Wijubergen, Sweder, "Capital Controls and the Real Exchange Rate," unpub-
      lished manuscript, October 1985.
