                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               SUSTAINABLE SHADOW BANKING

                                          Guillermo Ordonez

                                         Working Paper 19022
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19022


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Guillermo Ordonez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Sustainable Shadow Banking
Guillermo Ordonez
NBER Working Paper No. 19022
May 2013
JEL No. D82,E44,G01,G18,G21

                                            ABSTRACT

Commercial banks are subject to regulation that restricts their investments. When banks are concerned
for their reputation, however, they could self-regulate and invest more efficiently. Hence, a shadow
banking that arises to avoid regulation has the potential to improve welfare. Still, reputation concerns
depend on future economic prospects and may suddenly disappear, generating a collapse of shadow
banking and a return to traditional banking, with a decline in welfare. I discuss how a combination
of traditional regulation and cross reputation subsidization may enhance shadow banking and make
it more sustainable.


Guillermo Ordonez
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Economics
428 McNeil Building
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
ordonez@econ.upenn.edu
1    Introduction

Banks’ activities are usually regulated to prevent excessive risk-taking and to provide
a safety net to investors and depositors. One of those regulations involves capital re-
quirements, which are expressed as a capital adequacy ratio of safe assets that banks
have to hold as a fraction of their loans. This type of regulation restricts banks’ invest-
ments, potentially forcing them to give up superior and relatively safe opportunities
that governments cannot identify ex-ante as such.

In the years leading to the 2007-09 financial crisis in the United States, banks increas-
ingly devised instruments to get around capital requirements, moving away from tra-
ditional banking into so called shadow banking – intermediation usually associated with
traditional banking, but that runs in the “shadow” of regulators. As documented by
Poznar et al. (2012), “At the eve of the financial crisis, the volume of credit intermedi-
ated by the shadow banking system was close to $20 trillion, or nearly twice as large
as the volume of credit intermediated by the traditional banking system at roughly
$11 trillion. Today, the comparable figures are $16 and $13 trillion, respectively.”

Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2012), for instance, study asset backed commercial pa-
per (ABCP) conduits, one of the most representative financial instruments used in
shadow banking. These are special purpose vehicles (SPV) sponsored by commer-
cial banks to purchase long term assets issuing short term commercial paper. Since
SPV are off-balance sheet, they are not subject to capital requirements, becoming the
most important mechanism used by banks to go around regulations. They also show
that ABCP “grew from $ 650 billion in January 2004 to $ 1.3 trillion in July 2007. At
that time, ABCP was the largest money market instrument in the United States. For
comparison, the second largest instrument was Treasury Bills with about $940 billion
outstanding.”

This large increase came to a sudden halt on August 9, 2007, when BNP Paribas sus-
pended withdrawals from three funds invested in mortgage backed securities. “The
interest rate spread of overnight ABCP over the Federal Funds rate increased from
10 basis points to 150 basis points within one day of the BNP Paribas announcement.
Subsequently, ...ABCP outstanding dropped from $1.3 trillion in July 2007 to $833 bil-
lion in December 2007.” Yet, the surprising growth and posterior collapse of shadow
banking is not unprecedent. In the absence of regulations during the late 19th cen-

                                            2
tury and early 20th century, banking experienced parallel events to the recent one.
In particular, investors at some point became concerned about the credit quality and
liquidation values of the collateral used to back financial assets, and coordinated on
large bank runs.

To compensate investors for participating in shadow banking without the safety net
that regulations provide, banks offered explicit guarantees to repay maturing ABCP
at par. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2012) show that the banks that used ABCP
more intensively before the recent crisis were also the banks that were more heavily
constrained by regulation, hence arguing that these conduits were effectively used
to avoid regulatory pressures and to reduce capital requirements.1 These guarantees,
however, were constructed to cover liquidity risks, not credit risks and excessive risk-
taking, which are the main targets of capital requirements.

Why do investors agree on participating in shadow banking if they understand that
banks are trying to avoid regulation that provides a safety net against excessive risk-
taking? A potential answer is that indeed regulation and capital requirements are
useless. However, if this were true, why would investors run from shadow to tradi-
tional banking when they become concerned about the quality of collateral?

I argue that reputation concerns lie at the heart of both the growth and the fragility
of shadow banking. Shadow banking spurs as long as outside investors believe that
capital requirements are not critical to guarantee the quality of banks’ assets, since
reputation concerns self-discipline banks’ behavior. When bad news about the future
arise, reputation concerns collapse because reputation becomes less valuable, and
investors stop believing in the self-discipline of banks, moving their funds to a less
efficient, but safer, traditional banking.

In the model, banks have capital and also borrow from outside investors. Banks can
invest these funds in safe assets or risky assets. Safe assets pay a moderate return in
case of success but a high probability of success. There are two types of risky assets,
observable by banks but not by governments: Inferior risky assets pay a high return
in case of success but have a low probability of success. Superior risky assets also
pay a high return in case of success, but have the same high probability of success as
   1
    Interestingly, Acharya and Schnabl (2010) noted that Spain and Portugal are the only european
countries that impose the same regulatory capital requirement for both assets on balance sheet and
assets on ABCP conduits. Consistently with the regulatory arbitrage motive, banks in these countries
do not sponsor ABCP conduits.


                                                 3
safe assets. I assume a planner would like banks to invest in risky assets if the risky
asset is superior or in safe assets if the risky asset is inferior. However, banks have
incentives to always invest in risky assets, regardless of their type. This excessive
risk-taking arises because outside investors end up facing most of the downside risk.
Then, since the planner cannot identify between risky assets, it prefers investments
only in safe assets than investments only in risky assets.

There are two ways to prevent excessive risk-taking. One is government regulation
in the form of requirements to invest the bank capital in safe assets. The other is
self-discipline sustained by reputation concerns. If the government cannot identify
the type of risky asset, then capital requirements are useful in preventing banks from
investing in inferior risky assets, but costly in preventing banks from investing in su-
perior risky assets. Reputation concerns provide a more efficient disciplining device,
preventing banks from investing in inferior risky assets without preventing them
from investing in superior risky assets.

In this setting, if all banks are reputation-concerned, it is preferred to rely on self-
regulation than in government regulation. However, the value of reputation depends
on expected future economic conditions, and so the degree of reputation concerns
depends on news about the future. When the future looks bright, with good business
opportunities, building and maintaining reputation is valuable, inducing banks to
invest optimally. However, when future prospects are poor, reputation is not that
valuable, increasing the incentives of banks to take excessive risks. This trade-off
between short term gains of always investing in risky projects and long terms costs
in terms of reputation may change over time, rendering self-discipline fragile.

Even though banks always try to avoid restrictive regulation by issuing conduits with
explicit guarantees, outside investors are not always willing to participate in shadow
banking on terms that are convenient to banks. When the future looks bright, outside
investors understand that self-regulation is at play and believe in the value of those
guarantees, making shadow banking feasible. However, if there is sudden bad news
about the future, investors understand that reputation concerns break down and be-
come concerned about the quality of bank assets and the value of guarantees that are
sustained by those assets, moving their funds to traditional banking.

Shadow banking only arises in the presence of reputation concerns, and its collapse
is a mirror image of the collapse in reputation concerns, with the system returning

                                           4
to traditional banking, which provides a better safety net for investors. Then, the
question is how to enhance shadow banking? How to make it less volatile?
I explore the effects of an alternative regulation that combines capital requirements
and cross subsidization of banks, with taxes to banks with low reputation and subsi-
dies to banks with high reputation, that balance the budget. This alternative regula-
tion reduces even further the reputation concerns of firms with already low concerns,
which is irrelevant for welfare since those banks cannot participate in shadow bank-
ing in the first place. In contrast it increases even further the reputation concerns of
firms with already high concerns, making them more willing to participate in shadow
banking and their self-discipline less sensitive to changes in future economic condi-
tions. Hence, this alternative regulation has the potential to sustain a less fragile
shadow banking.

Relation with the literature. Stein (2010) summarizes the economic forces behind
securitization as the efficient enhancement of risk-sharing and the circumvention of
capital and other regulatory requirements. Acharya, Schnabl, and Suarez (2012) show
that regulatory arbitrage was critical in the recent phenomenal growth of shadow
banking. In this paper I rationalize the rise and collapse of shadow banking by the rise
and collapse of self-regulation driven by fragile reputation concerns as an alternative
of government regulation.
This rationalization of shadow banking complements other explanations that focus
on the risk-sharing properties of securitization. Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2011)
show that an increase in investors’ wealth drives up securitization. This also intro-
duces fragility because banks become interconnected and more exposed to systemic
risk. In their model, securitization is also welfare improving and only subject to crises
in the case when agents neglect those systemic risks. In contrast, in this paper securi-
tization spurs when there are good economic conditions and can collapse in a rational
expectations environment.
The paper also complements the view of Adrian and Shin (2009) and Shin (2009),
who argue that securitization facilitates access to funds from investors, increasing
credit supply. As balance sheets expand, however, new borrowers must be found and
banks lower their lending standards. The reduction in asset quality leaves the system
in a fragile position to face downturns. In this paper, the lower quality of assets arise
from a collapse in self-regulation and not from more relaxed lending standards.

                                           5
This paper also adds to the discussion of regulation in the new financial landscape.
Gorton and Metrick (2010) structure their proposal to regulate shadow banking around
the idea that securitization arises because it is bankruptcy remote. Ricks (2010) also
proposes to extend the safety net of public insurance to shadow banking to reduce its
fragility. However, as Adrian and Ashcraft (2012) extensively document, regulation
has persistently failed in stabilizing shadow banking. This view of regulation may be
misleading since banks can always find ways around regulation when self-regulation
becomes feasible, and it is indeed efficient for them to do so. I discuss instead reg-
ulation that focus on “carrots” rather than “sticks” to discipline banks, with policy
interventions that enhance the reputation discipline by cross-subsidizing banks, re-
ducing the fragility of securitization and still maintaining its efficiency.2

My work also contributes more generally to the literature on herding behavior, which
generates sudden collapses of reputation concerns. While the work pioneered by
Scharfstein and Stein (1990) considers agents that mimic others and disregard pri-
vate information, banks in my model cannot observe the actions of other banks and
instead use private information about possible future economic conditions to coordi-
nate behavior. The justification of herding when agents cannot observe the actions
of others but instead a correlated signal about an aggregate variable is key in under-
standing how the collapse of the new, more complex, financial system was critically
characterized by lack of information about other investors’ positions.

Finally, even though this paper rationalizes the rise and collapse of shadow banking
characterized by conduits with explicit guarantees and investors concerned about the
quality of those guarantees, an important fraction of securities were not guaranteed
at all. For those financial instruments, the investors’ main concern is the incentives of
sponsoring banks to cover securities in distress with balance-sheet assets, even with-
out being legally bound to do it (that is, implicit guarantees). According to Acharya,
Schnabl, and Suarez (2012), among all ABCP outstanding in 2007, 10% were barely
guaranteed – extendible and SIV weak guarantees – in commercial banks, 50% in
structured finance companies, and almost 75% in mortgage originators.

In Ordonez (2013), I show that conduits that do not have explicit guarantees can also
be sustained by investors’ beliefs that banks concerned for their reputation have in-
   2
    Atkeson, Hellwig, and Ordonez (2012) also discuss the benefits of cross-subsidization in a general
equilibrium environment with free entry of reputationally concerned firms.


                                                  6
centives to take securities in distress back to their balance-sheet. With these conduits,
banks not only avoid regulation but also, given that there are no explicit guarantees,
save on potential bankruptcy costs. Gorton and Souleles (2006) also argue that se-
curitization arises as an implicit collusion between banks and investors to save on
bankruptcy costs. However, in their paper there is no discussion on how the system
sustains such collusion or how it can collapse.
In the next section I introduce a model that compares traditional and shadow bank-
ing, highlighting that shadow banking instruments, such as securitization, provide a
more efficient, but fragile, alternative to traditional banking. I also discuss how firms
choose between these two banking systems based on their reputation. In Section 3, I
discuss a novel regulation to enhance and stabilize shadow banking. In Section 4, I
illustrate the results and the dynamics with a numerical example. In Section 5, I make
some concluding remarks.



2       Model

2.1     Description

Consider a two-period economy with a continuum of banks and lenders, and a gov-
ernment. There are two types of banks: Good banks (G) care about their future (low
discount rate or high ), while bad banks (B) do not care about their future ( = 0).3
Banks observe their own type. We define reputation of a bank as the probability
that the bank is of type G.
In period 1, each bank has a unit of capital, which can be invested in one of two
available illiquid assets: “Safe assets” pay ys with probability ps in period 2, and 0
otherwise, and “risky assets” pay yr > ys in case of success. With probability ↵ the
risky asset is superior and succeeds with probability ps . With probability 1 ↵ the
risky asset is inferior and succeed with probability pr < ps . Banks observe the type of
risky assets, but lenders and governments do not.
The bank also has the ability to invest in an additional “new asset”, which also requires
a unit of capital and pays x with probability px in period 2, and 0 otherwise. Firms
    3
    This is a stylized way to introduce heterogeneity in quality. Bad banks, for example, may expect
to perform poorly and leave the banking industry with a higher probability than good banks.


                                                 7
have to borrow the unit of capital at an endogenous rate R from infinitely many, short-
lived, risk-neutral, and perfectly competitive lenders, whose outside option generates
a risk free return normalized to 0. To make the model interesting, I make the following
assumptions on asset payoffs.

Assumption 1 Asset Payoffs

   1. ps yr > ps ys > pr yr > 1 and px x > 1 (Superior risky assets pay in expectation more
      than safe assets. Inferior risky assets pay in expectation less than safe assets. All assets
      are efficient).

   2. yr > ys > R (Successful assets are enough to repay loans, where R is endogenous but
      expressed in terms of primitives).

   3. ps ys > ↵ps yr + (1      ↵)pr yr (It is ex-ante optimal to invest in safe assets).

   4. ps (yr    R) > pr (yr      R) > ps (ys     R) (Moral Hazard. Firms always prefer to invest
       in risky assets).

Banks have two possible ways to finance the new asset: raising funds using tradi-
tional banking or shadow banking. For illustrative purposes, I focus attention on the
most representative financing method for each banking type: debt and securitization,
respectively. If banks raise debt (or collect demand deposits in the case of commercial
banks, for example), they are subject to regulation and capital requirements that in-
troduce restrictions on how firms invest their initial capital. In particular, we assume
that firms are required to invest their unit of capital in safe assets.

In contrast, banks can raise funds securitizing the new asset, effectively selling it to
a sponsored special purpose vehicle (SPV).4 Since new assets are off-balance sheet, the
investment of banks is not subject to any regulation or capital requirement, and thus
can invest in either safe or risky assets without restrictions. To attract investors, banks
can issue explicit guarantees to cover securities in distress with successful assets on
   4
    An SPV is a legal entity which has been set up for a specific, limited, purpose by another entity, the
sponsoring firm. The SPV is off-balance sheet of the sponsor if it meets the requirements set forth by
Financial Accounting Standard 140. Critically, the SPV should be a separate and distinct legal entity
from the sponsor, and an automaton in the sense that there are no substantive decisions for it to ever
make, just simply rules that must be followed. SPVs are essentially robot firms that have no employees,
make no substantive economic decisions, have no physical location, and cannot go bankrupt.


                                                    8
the balance sheet. However, not being subject to regulation, banks cannot guaran-
tee to investors the safety of those assets and, as a consequence, the value of those
guarantees.5

In essence, the decision between using traditional or shadow banking boils down to
a decision between using a system where regulation determines the quality of bank
assets or a system where banks choose the quality of bank assets. Banks invest op-
timally when buying risky assets only when they are superior. Without regulation,
banks have incentives to invest only in risky assets, which we call excessive risk-taking.
With regulation banks are constrained to invest only in safe assets. By assumption 1,
optimal investments dominate in terms of expected output regulation, which at the
time dominates excessive risk-taking.

Finally, banks obtain a positive continuation value V ( , ✓) at the end of period 2,
which is an exogenous function monotonically increasing both in reputation and in
a unidimensional aggregate fundamental ✓. The fundamental ✓ represents aggregate
demand, economic conditions, housing prices, or in general any other variable that
positively affects the expected prospects of banks after period 2. I assume this funda-
mental is drawn from a known normal distribution with mean µ and variance 1✓ (i.e.,
precision ✓ ).6

I also assume that, regardless of the financing choice, the continuation value from
defaulting is zero. This can be interpreted in the repeated game as the bank being
liquidated and unable to re-enter the industry by raising new funds from investors
or depositors. This extreme assumption, which imposes a heavy punishment from
defaulting, is just a normalization that simplifies the exposition.

To be concrete, the timing in each period is as follows,

    • Period 1: All agents know the distribution ✓ ⇠ N (µ, 1✓ ) of fundamentals. Banks
      observe the type of the risky asset. A bank of type i 2 {B, G} and reputation
   5
      A companion paper analyzes why reputation concerns are critical for securitization that is not
guaranteed, such as structured investment vehicles (SIV). In that case, the rationale for securitization
is not only avoiding regulation but also costly bankruptcy procedures.
    6
      For expositional reasons, I assume V ( , ✓) is exogenous. It is easy to endogeneize the continuation
value as a positive function of in a full fledged repeated game (since I will show that endogenous
interest rates decrease with ) and to show that continuation values are positive under limited liability.
These extensions are cumbersome and unnecessary to illustrate the main points of the paper. For an
application of how to endogeneize value functions in similar settings, see Ordonez (2012).


                                                    9
      chooses whether to finance the new asset by issuing (regulated) debt or (unreg-
      ulated) securities. If banks issue debt, they have to invest in safe assets. If banks
      issue securities, they choose whether to invest in a risky or safe asset.

   • Period 2: Asset payoffs are realized and observed by all agents. If the bank does
     not repay the loan, it is liquidated and disappears, having a continuation value
     of 0. If the bank repays, it continues, its reputation is updated from to 0
     according to Bayes’ rule and it obtains a continuation value V ( 0 , ✓).

In what follows, I first characterize separately the payoffs from debt and from securi-
tization for a bank of a given type i 2 {B, G} and reputation . Then, I characterize
the optimal financing decision of banks with different types and reputations.



2.2   Debt

Since lenders are competitive and the risk-free rate is zero, interest rates R equalize
the expected repayment with the size of the loan, normalized to 1. Define as p̂D =
px + (1 px )ps the probability of loan repayment, since px is the probability that the
new asset succeeds and ps is the probability that the safe asset succeeds. The face
value of debt (in this case, also the interest rate) is the loan divided by the expected
probability of repayment. Then,
                                                  1
                                        RD =         ,                                  (1)
                                                 p̂D

Since the probability of repayment is determined by regulation from imposing invest-
ments only in safe assets, the interest rate R is independent of banks’ type and, as a
consequence, also independent of banks’ reputation, . After repayment, reputation
is not updated, determining the bank’s continuation value, V ( , ✓).



2.3   Securitization

In our setting securities are financial instruments constructed to avoid regulatory
pressures to invest only in safe assets. By construction, however, bad banks only
invest in risky assets if not regulated, then the expected probability a bad bank (B)


                                            10
repays an issued security is

                    pbB = px + (1         px )[↵ps + (1          ↵)pr ]
                        = px + (1         px )[ps       (1   ↵)(ps            pr )] < pbD .

Bad banks repay when the new asset is successful (with probability px ), and when
the new asset fails, the guarantee imposes repayment using the assets on the balance
sheet. Since these are risky assets, their probability of success is ps if the asset is
superior (with probability ↵) and pr if the asset is inferior (with probability 1 ↵).

Similarly, the expected probability a good bank (G) repays an issued security is

                pbG (b
                     ⌧ ) = px + (1        px )[↵ps + (1          ↵)[ps ⌧b + pr (1         ⌧b)]]
                        = pbB + ⌧b(1          px )(1     ↵)(ps      pr )  pbD ,

where the strategy ⌧ 2 [0, 1] is the probability good banks invest optimally (invest
in safe assets when risky assets are inferior) and ⌧b is the lenders’ beliefs about good
banks’ strategies. When ⌧b = 1, and lenders believe good banks invest optimally, then
     ⌧ = 1) = pbD .
pbG (b

The price of securities can then be expressed as an interest rate,

                              1                                       1
       RS ( |b
             ⌧) =                             =                                                      RD .   (2)
                    pbG (b
                         ⌧ ) + (1      )b
                                        pB        pbB + ⌧b(1       px )(1         ↵)(ps       pr )

The only situation in which RS = RD is when = 1 and ⌧b = 1. In this extreme case it
is believed the bank is good for sure and good banks always invest optimally.

Reputation updating also depends on beliefs, ⌧b. Using Bayes’ rule,

                                0                     pbG (b
                                                           ⌧)
                                    ( |b
                                       ⌧) =                                   .
                                              pbG (b
                                                   ⌧ ) + pbB (1           )

As shown in Figure 1, 0 ( |b ⌧ ) increases with ⌧b for a given . Intuitively, if lenders
believe that good banks invest optimally, then they expect that good banks are more
likely to repay than bad banks, who only invest in risky assets. Given these beliefs,
lenders will revise reputation up when they observe a bank repaying securities and
covering guarantees. In contrast, if lenders expect that good banks never invest opti-

                                                   11
                                                            Updating after NP, ( ˆ 1 )

                        0                                                    1


mally, they expect that good banks repay with the same probability as bad banks, not
revising reputation when observing repayment of a security.


                                  Figure 1: Reputation Updating
                    '                       Updating after pay, ( ˆ 1 )
                        1




                                                              Updating after pay ( ˆ    0)


                                            45°




                        0                                                    1


Expected profits for good banks with reputation                   following strategy ⌧ , conditional
on lenders believing good banks with reputation                  follow strategy ⌧b are

                  UGS ( , ⌧ |b
                             ⌧ ) = px x + ↵ps yr + (1        ↵)[⌧ ps ys + (1      ⌧ )pr yr ]
                                      pG (⌧ ) [ V ( 0 ( |b
                                     +b                  ⌧ ))      RS ( |b
                                                                         ⌧ )] .


Good banks invest optimally (⌧ = 1) given beliefs ⌧b, if

                               ⌧ ) = UGS ( , ⌧ = 1|b
                            ( |b                   ⌧)      UGS ( , ⌧ = 0|b
                                                                         ⌧ ) > 0,

which can be rewritten as

    ( |b
       ⌧ ) = (1      ↵)(ps ys    pr yr ) + (1     px )(1   ↵)(ps      pr )[ V ( 0 |b
                                                                                   ⌧)     RS ( |b
                                                                                                ⌧ )] > 0.


Definition 1 A reputation equilibrium is one in which good banks invest optimally, and
beliefs are consistent, ⌧ = ⌧b = 1.


Defining the short term gains of investing in an inferior risky project as                     ⌘     p r yr p s ys
                                                                                                   (1 px )(ps pr )
                                                                                                                   ,


                                                    12
the sufficient condition for a reputation equilibrium is

                              V ( 0 |b
                                     ⌧ = 1)          + RS ( |b
                                                             ⌧ = 1).                   (3)


In contrast, the condition for a non-reputation equilibrium, in which ⌧ = ⌧b = 0, is

                              V ( 0 |b
                                     ⌧ = 0)         + RS ( |b
                                                             ⌧ = 0).                   (4)


In what follows, I describe a potential multiplicity of equilibria and refine the set of
equilibria using global games techniques. Then, using the unique equilibrium ob-
tained from the refinement, I characterize the conditions under which different fi-
nancing decisions are implemented.


2.3.1   Multiplicity with complete information

Since continuation values are monotonically increasing in posteriors 0 , which are
monotonically increasing in ⌧b, then V ( |b                ⌧ = 0, ✓). Also, since pbG (b
                                          ⌧ = 1, ✓) > V ( |b                           ⌧ =
          ⌧ = 0), then RS ( |b
1) > pbG (b                                 ⌧ = 0). Combining these inequalities with
                             ⌧ = 1) < RS ( |b
equilibrium conditions (3) and (4), there are values of ✓ under which reputation and
non-reputation equilibria coexist. Fundamentals are not only useful to characterize
multiplicity in an environment with changing conditions, but are also key in selecting
a unique equilibrium using global games techniques, by assuming that agents do not
observe ✓ perfectly, but ”almost” perfectly.

Good banks invest optimally when the expected gains from reputation are large
enough. Since these gains increase with fundamentals ✓, I focus on cutoff strategies,
                                      8
                                      >
                                      > 1       if      ✓ > ✓⇤ ( )
                                      >
                                      <
                         ⌧ ( , ✓) =    [0, 1]   if      ✓ = ✓⇤ ( )
                                      >
                                      >
                                      >
                                      : 0       if      ✓ < ✓⇤ ( )

Given these strategies I redefine good banks’ repayment probabilities as

                  pbG (✓b⇤ ) = pbB + (1   N (✓b⇤ ))(1     px )(1     ↵)(ps   pr ),


                                                13
where ✓b⇤ is the cutoff lenders believe good banks will follow and N (✓b⇤ ) is the ex-ante
expectation that ✓ < ✓⇤ ( ) when the expectation of ✓ is µ. Then,

                                                          1
                 RS ( |✓b⇤ ) =                                                           (5)
                                 pbB + (1   N (✓b⇤ ))(1       px )(1   ↵)(ps   pr )

If ✓b⇤ =     1, then pbG (✓b⇤ = 1) = pbB + (1 ↵)(ps pr ) and RS ( |✓b⇤ = 1) =
         1
pbB + (1 ↵)(ps pr )
                    . If good banks are believed to always invest optimally, interest rates
are lower the higher the reputation of the sponsor. In contrast, if ✓b⇤ = 1 and pbG (✓b⇤ =
1) = pbB , then RS ( |✓b⇤ = 1) = pb1B . If good firms are believed to always invest in risky
assets, then default probabilities are the same for good and bad banks, and banks pay
the highest possible interest rates, independently of their reputation.

In this setting there are two possible sources of multiplicity. First, interest rates can
possibly generate a finite number of equilibria. It is straightforward to select a unique
equilibrium in this situation as in Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), assuming Bertrand com-
petition in which lenders first offer a rate and then banks choose the best offer. As-
sume for example there are three possible interest rates in equilibrium and all lenders
charge the highest rate. In this case there are incentives for a single lender to deviate,
offering a lower rate consistent with a different equilibrium, attracting banks and still
breaking even. Then, lenders that effectively provide loans are the optimistic ones.
This refinement rationalizes as the unique equilibrium the one with the lowest rate.

The second source of multiplicity, reputation formation, is more difficult to deal with
since it always generates a continuum of multiple equilibria. Can we still apply the se-
lection mechanism proposed by Stiglitz and Weiss (1981)? Yes, but only if the lenders
who update reputation are the same than those who provide loans. Only in this unin-
teresting case, in which a bank only obtains financing from a single lender all its life,
and the perception of other market agents do not matter, is there not a meaningful
complementarity problem from reputation formation.

However, if the lenders who set interest rates in the current period are different to
the lenders who provide funds in following periods (or at least there is some chance
lenders are not the same, which is a realistic assumption for depositors in commer-
cial banks), interest rates cannot be used to select an equilibrium. Assume again all
lenders charge a high rate and then good banks prefer to invest only in risky assets.
A single lender does not have incentive to deviate and charge a lower interest rate

                                               14
(as opposed to the Bertrand intuition) because the bank taking its loan still would not
be induced to repay, knowing that future lenders will likely not update its reputa-
tion. Hence, even when Bertrand competition can solve multiplicity generated by the
first source, it cannot solve the multiplicity created by complementarity in reputation
formation.

In what follows, I assume the first source of multiplicity is not an issue, so I can focus
on the more interesting multiplicity created by reputation formation. First, I assume
that, fixing a belief ⌧b for all fundamentals ✓, there is a unique cutoff ✓⇤ at which banks
are indifferent between investing optimally or not.

Assumption 2 Single Crossing

Assume fixed beliefs ⌧b for all ✓. There is a unique cutoff fundamental ✓⇤ , consistent with
beliefs ✓b⇤ = ✓⇤ , at which banks are indifferent between investing optimally or not, such that

                              V ( 0 , ✓⇤ |b
                                          ⌧) =    + RS ( |✓b⇤ = ✓⇤ ).


This assumption is fulfilled, for example, when the variance of fundamentals is low
enough, such that the ex-ante probability of default N (✓b⇤ ), and hence interest rates
RS , do not change abruptly with changes in beliefs about cutoffs ✓b⇤ .

Now, I define a range of fundamentals for which, regardless of lenders’ beliefs, a bank
takes excessive risk and a range of fundamentals for which, regardless of lenders’
beliefs, a banks invests optimally.


Assumption 3 Dominance Regions

There are fundamental levels ✓( ) under which V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                                        ⌧ = 1) <         + RS ( |✓b⇤ = ✓) and
                           ⌧ = 0) > + RS ( |✓b⇤ = ✓).
✓( ) above which V ( 0 , ✓|b


For all fundamentals ✓ < ✓ banks take excessive risk, even if lenders believe ⌧b = 1
and reputation suffers a lot from taking risks. Intuitively, future prospects are so
poor that reputation concerns are irrelevant. Similarly, for all fundamentals ✓ > ✓
banks invest optimally, even if lenders believe ⌧b = 0 and reputation does not improve
from investing optimally. Here, future prospects are so good that firms are afraid of


                                                 15
   defaulting and getting a zero continuation value. Finally, ✓( ) < ✓( ) for all , since
    V ( 0 , ✓b⇤ |b
                 ⌧ = 1) RS ( |✓b⇤ ) > V ( 0 , ✓b⇤ |b
                                                   ⌧ = 0) RS ( |✓b⇤ ) for all and ✓b⇤ .

   For all ✓b⇤ 2 [✓( ), ✓( )], reputation and non-reputation equilibria coexist. In this
   range, good banks invest optimally when lenders believe good banks will invest op-
   timally and take excessive risk when lenders believe good banks will take excessive
   risk. This implies that a fundamental ✓ can be defined as an equilibrium cutoff if there
   exists a ⌧b( , ✓b⇤ ) 2 [0, 1] such that

                                  V ( 0 , ✓b⇤ |b
                                               ⌧ (✓b⇤ )) =    + RS ( |✓b⇤ ).


   This multiplicity is problematic for drawing conclusions about the effects of reputa-
   tion in sustaining self-regulation in the shadow banking. In the next section, follow-
   ing Ordonez (2012), we relax the assumption of complete information about ✓ and
   select a unique equilibrium robust to small perturbations of information about ✓.


   2.3.2   Uniqueness with incomplete information

   Assume now banks i and lenders j observe an informative signal of the fundamental,
   si = ✓ + ✏i where ✏i ⇠ N (0, 1s ). Cutoff strategies are then based on signals,
                                           8
                                           >
                                           > 1        if     si > s⇤ ( )
                                           >
                                           <
                            ⌧ ( , si ) =     [0, 1]   if     si = s⇤ ( )
                                           >
                                           >
                                           >
                                           : 0        if     si < s⇤ ( )


   The differential gains from investing optimally are now given by taking expectations
   about ✓, conditional on the prior µ and the signal si
                               ⇥                                              ⇥                                           ⇤⇤
E✓|si [ ( , ✓|b
              ⌧ (si ))] = (1 ↵) (ps ys      pr yr ) + (1     px )(ps   pr )       E✓|si [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                                                                                   ⌧ (si ))]       s⇤ )
                                                                                                               R( |b           ,


   where sb⇤ is the cutoff lenders believe firms follow. In this situation, lenders com-
   pute the interest rate to charge based on an ex-ante probability that fundamentals are
   smaller than sb⇤ = s⇤ , such that default probability is N (s⇤ ).



                                                      16
Proposition 1 Unique Equilibrium.

For   ! 1, there is a unique equilibrium in which every good bank with reputation invests
      s

optimally if and only if s > s⇤ ( ), where s⇤ solves

                             E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                              ⌧ (s⇤ ))] =        + R( |s⇤ ),               (6)

                       p
where ⌧b(s⇤ ) = 1          (s⇤     µ) is the belief lenders use to update reputation when they
                                                             2
think firms observe a signal s⇤ . Furthermore, = ( ✓ + s )(s ✓✓ +2 s ) .


Proof Since s⇤ ( ) is the signal that makes a good bank with reputation indifferent
between investing optimally or not, the condition that determines s⇤ ( ) is

                             E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                              ⌧ (s⇤ ))] =        + R( |s⇤ ),

where ⌧b(si ) = 1 P r(Ej (✓) < Ei (✓)|si ), this is the probability that lenders expect a
fundamental ✓ which is smaller than the fundamental the bank expects conditional
on the signal si that the bank observes. Since at the cutoff s⇤ banks are indifferent
between investing optimally or not, ⌧b(s⇤ ) is also the probability that banks assign
to lenders believing ✓ is such that the bank invests optimally, and hence the belief
lenders use to update reputation at the cutoff s⇤ .

The updated belief of the bank about the fundamental, after observing a signal si is

                                                      ✓µ +    s si
                                    Ei (✓|si ) =                         .
                                                       ✓ +       s


The updated distribution of the fundamentals after the bank observes the signal si is

                                                               1
                                 ✓|si ⇠ N (Ei (✓|si ),                           ),
                                                             ✓ +             s


and the expected distribution of the signals that lenders observe, sj , conditional on
the signal the bank does observe, si , is

                                                        1                    1
                           sj |si ⇠ N (Ei (✓|si ),                   +               ).    (7)
                                                      ✓ +    s                   s




                                                 17
Hence,
                                             ✓                                                  ◆
                                                                        ✓
              P r (Ej (✓) < Ei (✓)|si ) = P r sj < Ei (✓) +                 (Ei (✓)     µ)|si
                                                                        s
                                             p
                                        =   ( (si µ)) ,
                           2
where     =   (
                        s ✓
                  ✓ + s )( ✓ +2 s )

As   s   ! 1,! 0, then ⌧b(si ) = 12 for all si . Hence, in the limit the unique cutoff s⇤ is
                                ⇥                      ⇤
uniquely determined by E✓|s⇤ V 0 , ✓|b     ⌧ (s⇤ ) = 12 = + R( |s⇤ ).              Q.E.D.

Lenders update reputation beliefs based on their beliefs about the actions of banks,
which depend on their signals. When lenders observe a signal sj , they infer that the
probability the bank observes a signal si below the cutoff s⇤ ( ), and decides to invest
optimally, is
                                                      "s                                          #
                                                           s( ✓ +   s)                ✓ µ  +  s
                                                                                             s j
          ⌧b(sj ) = 1        P r(si < s⇤ |sj ) = 1                       (s⇤                     ) ,
                                                            ✓ +2    s                    ✓ + s


where is just the standard normal distribution from equation (7). As s ! 1,
⌧b(sj ) ! 0 if sj < s⇤ ( ) and ⌧b(sj ) ! 1 if sj > s⇤ ( ). This implies that in the limit,
whenever lenders observe a signal above s⇤ ( ), they believe almost certainly banks
invest optimally and update reputation accordingly. Similarly, whenever investors
observe a signal below s⇤ , they believe almost certainly banks take excessive risk and
do not update reputation.
This refinement of equilibria uncovers the fragility of reputation. A bank with reputa-
tion invests optimally based on a cutoff s⇤ ( ) and their risk-taking strategies change
dramatically around that cutoff. In the next section I study this extreme sensitivity of
risk-taking, which makes reputation concerns, and then shadow banking, fragile.


2.3.3    Expected economic conditions and risk-taking

How does the deterioration of expected economic conditions, captured by a lower
µ, affect risk-taking, total expected production, and the likelihood of default in the
economy? In this section, I show that bad news about the future has the potential
to reduce output, increase default rates of securities, and induce a flight of investors
from shadow banking to traditional banking.

                                                     18
A reduction in economic prospects, µ, triggers two effects. The first effect is mechani-
cal: A lower µ reduces the ex-ante probability that banks invest optimally for a given
cutoff s⇤ ( ). The second effect is strategic: A lower µ leads to a higher cutoff s⇤ ( ),
making banks less willing to invest optimally for a given ✓. Since the first effect is
obvious, the next proposition focuses on the second effect.


Proposition 2 The cutoff s⇤ ( ) decreases monotonically with µ.


Proof The proof applies for any , hence for notational simplicity I denote s⇤ ( ) just
as s⇤ . Differentiating the condition (6) that pins down s⇤ with respect to µ,

                 @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                    ⌧ (s⇤ ))] ds⇤   @R( |s⇤ ) ds⇤ @R( |s⇤ )
                                                  =              +          .
                           @s⇤                dµ      @s⇤     dµ    @µ

Then,            ✓                                              ◆
                     @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                        ⌧ (s⇤ ))]   @R( |s⇤ )       ds⇤   @R( |s⇤ )
                                                                        =           .        (8)
                               @s⇤                    @s⇤           dµ      @µ
                                                                                        ⇤
By assumptions 2 and 3, the term in parentheses is positive. Since @N@µ(s ) < 0, then
@R( |s⇤ )                                                                ⇤
  @µ
          < 0, and the left hand side is negative, which implies that ds
                                                                      dµ
                                                                           < 0. Q.E.D.

Intuitively, a decline in µ increases R( |s⇤ ) for a given s⇤ (by an increase in the cu-
mulative distribution up to s⇤ ). This requires a larger s⇤ to raise E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b ⌧ (s⇤ ))]
and fulfill equation (6). This direct effect increases s⇤ . Furthermore, an increase in s⇤
implies a further increase in R( |s⇤ ), which reinforces the direct effect generated by
a lower µ. There is also a second effect that comes from reducing beliefs ⌧b(si ) and
                                                               p
reputation updating at each si , (since ⌧b(si ) = 1                (si µ) , weakly reducing
           0
               ⌧ (si ))], for every signal si . Hence, a further increase in s⇤ is necessary to
E✓|si [V ( , ✓|b
compensate for this reduction and still fulfill equation (6).

At this point we can distinguish between informative and uninformative news about
changes in expected economic conditions. Figure 2 shows the effects of uninformative
bad news (lower expected fundamental µ without a real change in the distribution of
fundamentals). This wave of pessimism induces less production and more default by
changing banks’ strategic risk-taking behavior. In contrast, Figure 3 shows the effects
of informative bad news (a real reduction of µ), which decreases output and increases
default both mechanically (larger ex-ante probability of risk-taking) and strategically.

                                                    19
 Figure 2: Uninformative Bad News                        Figure 3: Informative Bad News
                ( |   )        ( | )                               ( |   )         ( | )




                                       ( )                                                  ( )




2.4   Financing through Traditional or Shadow Banking?

Now I study which banks raise funds issuing debt (traditional banking) and which
banks raise funds issuing securities with guarantees (shadow banking). When rep-
utation incentives are strong, lenders’ confidence about self-regulation prevails and
securitization provides a feasible way to avoid restrictive regulation. The next propo-
sition, proved in the Appendix, summarizes the result.

Proposition 3 Optimal Financing Decisions

Assume s ! 1. If µ 2 R, there is a unique cutoff µ⇤ ( ) such that firms with reputation
issue securities when µ µ⇤ ( ) and issue debt when µ < µ⇤ ( ). If the following condition is
satisfied, then µ⇤ ( ) = 1.

                                                           (1    )(1     px )(1   ↵)(ps    pr )
  ps ↵(yr   ys ) + p̂D E✓|µ=1 [V ( 0 , ✓)    V ( , ✓)]                                            (9)
                                                           p̂B + (1      px )(1   ↵)(ps    pr )

An important corollary of the previous proposition, when the range of possible µ is
restricted is the following:

Corollary 1 Assume µ 2 [µ, µ]. If µ > µ⇤ ( ), banks with reputation always issue secu-
rities and raise funds with shadow banking. If µ < µ⇤ ( ), banks with reputation always
issue debt and raise funds with traditional banking.

Figure 4 illustrates the main properties of expected profits when banks issue debt
and when they issue securities. I also show the threshold µ⇤ ( ) that defines the re-
gions under which debt and securities are preferred. Intuitively, when good banks

                                                20
are optimistic about future conditions (this is, µ > µ⇤ ( )), they value reputation and
invest safely enough to credibly guarantee securities as if they were regulated. This
system, however, has a chance of collapse in case fundamentals reveal to be weaker
than expected, since good banks would rather take excessive risks.

At the other extreme, when good banks are pessimistic about future conditions (this
is, µ < µ⇤ ( )), they do not value reputation and do not have incentives to invest
optimally. Lenders are aware of this lack of banks’ incentives and understand that the
quality of banks’ assets that sustain guarantees is not as if banks were regulated. Then
lenders require higher rates for their funds in compensation for taking higher risks in
shadow banking, which make banks better off by raising funds through traditional
banking.

The previous analysis characterizes the decisions of good banks, but bad banks al-
ways pool with good banks and take the same financing choices. If good banks raise
funds with securities, bad banks also issue securities, which give them the possibility
of investing only in risky assets at an interest rate subsidized by the presence of good
banks. If good banks raise funds with debt, bad banks also issue debt, otherwise their
reputation gets lost immediately and either they have to finance with debt anyways,
or if financing with securities they have to borrow facing the highest possible interest
rate p̂1B , receiving the lowest possible reputation 0 = 0 forever in the future.

In the next proposition, I consider how µ⇤ ( ) varies for different reputation levels 2
[0, 1]. This comparison is important to understand how the fragility of the financial
system is endogenous to the distribution of reputation levels in the economy. The
proof is in the Appendix.


Proposition 4 Thresholds µ⇤ ( ) decrease with reputation .


Intuitively, for a given expectation of future conditions µ, banks with good repu-
tations have larger reputation concerns, and their guarantees to cover securities in
distress with high quality assets are more credible to lenders. Then lenders charge a
lower rate for securities and high reputation banks are better off raising funds with
shadow banking and avoid restrictive regulations. The next proposition, which arises
from combining Propositions 3 and 4 for a given µ, summarizes this result.



                                          21
                                   Figure 4: Debt or SPV?
                                                 !!! (!, !)




                      !!! (!, !)




                            Debt                              Securitization   !
             1

                      Probability of excessive
                      risk taking
                            !(! ∗ (!))



             0                                                                 !
                                                 !∗ (!)


Proposition 5 Given expected future economic conditions, µ, there is a ⇤ (µ) such that all
banks with reputation > ⇤ (µ) issue securities and participate in shadow banking while all
banks with reputation < ⇤ (µ) issue debt and participate in traditional banking.



3    Regulation that Enhances Reputation Forces

Capital requirements are beneficial because they provide firewalls against excessive
risk-taking, but are costly because they can choke off potential good investment op-
portunities. Securitization is an option for banks to avoid restrictive regulation, spawn-
ing a shadow banking sector that is preferred but also fragile.

I now discuss alternative regulatory tools, that I call novel regulation, which comple-
ment the use of capital requirements, to which I refer as standard regulation. Specifi-
cally, I show that a budget balanced scheme of taxes and subsidies that cross-subsidize


                                             22
firms with different reputation levels can enhance the disciplining effects of reputa-
tion concerns among banks that self-select into shadow banking, increasing expected
production, and at the same time, making the financial system less sensitive to news
about future economic conditions.

Assume the economy does not have aggregate shocks (there is a unique possible µ). I
relax this assumption when illustrating my results using simulations in the next sec-
tion. First, assume that the government can impose taxes and subsidies conditional
on ✓ for each , such that Vb ( ) = V ( , ✓)T ( , ✓) is fixed. In this case, the results so
far can be recomputed considering Vb ( ), independent of ✓. This potential taxation
is compelling but difficult to sustain. Financial decisions and crises are intimately
related to news about expected economic conditions, so it is usually not plausible to
eliminate financial cycles by eliminating economic cycles and news about the future
directly. This raises a more challenging question: Is it possible to reduce fragility if it
is not possible to attack the source of fragility directly?

Another, ideal but unfeasible solution, is to just give a high subsidy to all banks,
regardless of their reputation , conditional on their repayment of the loans, such that
Vb ( ) = V ( , ✓)T with T > 1. This naturally increases the cost of default for all banks
and then allows for more self-regulation. This solution has the same effects as an
exogenous increase of µ, but how does one finance these widely available subsidies?

In order to at least partially finance this alternative policy, a government needs to
transfer resources across reputation levels, subsidizing banks of relatively high repu-
tation (this is T ( ) > 1 for > ¯) and taxing banks of relatively high reputation (this
is T ( ) < 1 for > ¯). I assume, then, a subsidy scheme independent on ✓ and mono-
tonically increasing in reputation, with a level of reputation ¯ for which T ( ¯) = 1 and
not tax or subsidy is applied.

This novel regulation both increases the incentives for banks with low reputation to
participate in a regulated traditional banking, and increases the incentives for banks
with high reputation to participate in shadow banking. Furthermore, the incentives
for banks participating in shadow banking to invest optimally are larger and less
sensitive to news about future economic prospects, inducing a more stable financial
system and overall higher production. The next proposition, proved in the Appendix,
summarizes this result.


                                            23
Proposition 6 Define     (µ) as the reputation that make good banks indifferent between
                           ⇤

shadow and traditional banking in the absence of cross subsidization and ⇤⇤ (µ) the reputa-
tion that make good banks indifferent in the presence of cross subsidization. There is a subsidy
scheme increasing in reputation, @T@( ) > 0 such that T ( ˆ) = 1, where ⇤ (µ) < ˆ < ⇤0 (µ)
and ⇤ (µ) = ⇤⇤ (µ).

Furthermore, the expected gains from assets invested by banks with reputation            <    ⇤
                                                                                                  (µ)
remain unchanged, while expected gains from assets invested by banks with reputation >
  ⇤
    (µ) increase, since their ex-ante probability of excessive risk-taking (N (s⇤ ( , µ))) decline.


Intuitively, a cross-subsidization scheme just affects behavior of those firms that use
securitization in equilibrium (those with relatively high reputation), and not firms
that use debt in equilibrium, and are then regulated. Hence, this novel intervention
hinges on subsidizing shadow banking and making it sustainable using funds from
firms that already use a stable, standard, regulated banking system. In a sense good
banks cannot effectively enjoy their capacity to self-regulate because lenders confuse
them with bad banks. Since bad banks on average have lower reputation levels than
good banks, taxing low reputation is a way for bad banks to compensate the exter-
nality they impose over good banks.

Naturally, whether the cross-subsidization can completely finance itself depends on
the distribution of reputation among banks and on the value functions for different
reputation levels. In particular, cross-subsidization is sustainable without external
funds for the government at each expected future condition ✓ if
                               Z   1                      Z       1
                                       T ( )V ( , ✓)d =               V ( , ✓)d .
                               0                              0


where d is the distribution of reputation, conditional on a realized fundamental ✓.



4    Simulations

In this section I illustrate the results from the model using a numerical example. I
assume that continuation values are linearly increasing in and ✓. In this case, even
when payoffs are linear, reputation formation convexifies the schedule of cutoffs that


                                                   24
determine the financing choices, inducing sudden and dramatic increases in risk-
taking and collapses in shadow banking, even without obvious declines in expected
economic conditions. Furthermore, shadow banking can collapse even in the absence
of real fundamental changes; just in response to small and uninformative bad news.

I assume the following parameters: The probability of success is ps = 0.5 for safe and
superior risky assets, pr = 0.1 for inferior risky assets, and px = 0.2 for new assets.
Payoffs in case of success are ys = 3 for safe assets, yr = 10 for risky assets and yx = 7
for new assets. A risky asset is superior with probability ↵ = 0.1, discounting is
  = 0.99, the variance of fundamentals is ✓ = 2, signals about fundamentals are very
precise s ! 1, and V ( , ✓) = k ✓ with k = 0.5. These parameters fulfill Assumption
1. Finally, I assume a uniform distribution of reputation levels in the market.7



4.1    Static Results

Figure 5 shows the expected profits from financing using debt and securitization for
a good bank with reputation = 0.5. The bank chooses to finance with securities and
avoid regulation for all µ greater than µ⇤ = 3.65. Figure 6 shows the interest rates
for debt and securities. Rates for debt, RD , do not depend on expected fundamentals
or future prospects because the probability of default is independent of µ. In con-
trast, rates for securities RS critically depend on expected future prospects, suddenly
increasing from 2.2 to 3.2 as µ declines from 6 to 1. Figure 7 illustrates the ex-ante
probability that good banks take excessive risks when raising funds with shadow
banking, highlighting the source of interaction between the rate of securities RS and
expected future prospects µ in Figure 6.

Finally, while Figure 5 shows thresholds µ⇤ ( ) only for banks with reputation = 0.5,
Figure 8 shows those thresholds for all reputation levels. The schedule of thresholds
is convex in expected fundamentals, even though continuation values are linear in
fundamentals. As is clear in Figure 1, learning is stronger for intermediate reputation
levels and weaker for extreme reputation levels. This is a more general property once
continuation values are determined endogenously, as shown in Ordonez (2012).
   7
     This is a conservative assumption since bad banks default and exit more often, which means the
distribution of reputation is skewed towards higher reputation levels, hence creating even more clus-
tering in financing and risk-taking decisions than I illustrate here.



                                                 25
Figure 5: Value Functions for                                                                                         = 0.5                                   Figure 6: Interest Rates for                                  = 0.5
                                                                                                                                                       3.6


                                                                       Debt                          Securitization                                    3.4
                                                           2.4
                                                                                                                                                       3.2
                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                      UG( =0.5,µ)                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                         3                                        S
                                                           2.2
Expected Profits




                                                                                                                                      Interest Rates
                                                                                                                                                       2.8

                                                            2                                                                                          2.6

                                                                                                                                                       2.4
                                                                        D
                                                           1.8         UG( =0.5,µ)
                                                                                                                                                       2.2

                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                           1.6
                                                                                                                                                       1.8               RD

                                                           1.4                                                                                         1.6
                                                              0   1           2      3         4          5           6   7       8                       0          1            2       3           4       5         6        7            8
                                                                                         µ*( =0.5)                            µ                                                                                                           µ



               Figure 7: Excessive Risks for                                                                          = 0.5                                   Figure 8: Financing Choices for all
                                                                                                                                                         1
Fraction of firms =0.5 with SPV that take excessive risk




                                                             1

                                                           0.9                                                                                          0.9

                                                           0.8                                                                                          0.8

                                                           0.7                                                                                          0.7
                                                                                                *
                                                                                             N(s (µ))                                                                                                      Securitization
                                                           0.6                                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                                           Reputation




                                                           0.5                                                                                          0.5

                                                           0.4                                                                                          0.4

                                                           0.3                                                                                          0.3

                                                           0.2                                                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                          Debt
                                                           0.1                                                                                          0.1

                                                             0                                                                                           0
                                                              0    1          2      3          4          5          6   7       8                       0      2            4       6       8       10    12     14       16       18       20
                                                                                                                              µ                                                                                                           µ




4.2                                                               Dynamic Results

Now I simulate 100 periods of this economy to illustrate the dynamics of shadow
banking and its impact on total production and default. An important dynamic in
the economy is how agents learn about expected economic conditions. The previous
static results show that poor current economic conditions lead to more expectations of
risk taking, less securitization, and more constrained shadow banking. In this section
I show that poor current economic conditions also lead agents to infer conditions will
be poor in the future as well. This implies that times with high default are followed
by a collapse in securitization and shadow banking. I also illustrate the effects of the
novel regulation on production and default.

Assume highly persistent normal times and uncommon recessionary times. These
states are characterized by two possible distributions, with means µN = 3 and µR =

                                                                                                                                  26
 1, which follow a Markov process with persistence parameters                                           N     = 0.98 and   R   =
0.70.

Agents observe the realized ✓t at the end of each period and uses it to estimate the
current distribution (µt ) and the expected distribution next period (E(µt+1 )). The
probability that the economy faces a recession, conditional on ✓t , is

                                                                   f (✓t |µR )b
                                                                              µt
                                      b0t =
                  P r(µt = µR |✓t ) = µ                                                                       ,
                                                       f (✓t |µR )b
                                                                  µt + f (✓t |µN )(1                 bt )
                                                                                                     µ

where f (✓t |µR ) is the density of ✓t in recessions, when the mean is µR and the precision
is ✓ , and µ
           bt is the prior probability that µt = µR . Finally, the posterior µ b0t is used to
estimate the probability that µt+1 = µR from the Markov process,

                                  µ0t ) = µ
                   P r(µt+1 = µR |b       bt+1 =                    b0t
                                                                   Rµ          + (1       R )(1      b0t ).
                                                                                                     µ

This probability is used to estimate the expected distribution that generates the fun-
damental ✓ next period

                                1                                              1
                 bt+1 N (µR ,
                 µ                  ) + (1            bt+1 )N (µN ,
                                                      µ                             ) = N (µ̄t+1 ,    t+1 ),
                                ✓                                               ✓

                                                                    ⇥ 2                                 ⇤
where µ̄t+1 = µ
              bt+1 µR + (1      bt+1 )µN and
                                µ                            t+1     bt+1 + (1
                                                                   = µ                        bt+1 )2
                                                                                              µ               1
                                                                                                                  ✓
                                                                                                                      .

Figure 9 shows 100 simulated fundamentals ✓t from simulated distributions of funda-
mentals µt , and expected distribution of fundamentals µ̄t at each period t, following
the previously described learning process about economic conditions.

In the next figures I compare thresholds, the scope of shadow banking, and total
production with and without the discussed novel regulation.

I assume a subsidy schedule of the form T ( ) = a 0b , such that Vb ( 0 , ✓) = a 0b V ( 0 , ✓).
Given the linearity of value functions and the uniform distribution of reputation, this
scheme is completely self-sustainable if
                                    Z       1                      Z       1
                                                      b+1
                                                ak✓         d =                k✓ d ,
                                        0                              0


which happens when a = 1 + 2b . Specifically, in what follows I compare the situation
without the novel regulation (b = 0) with a case of novel regulation in which b = 2,

                                                            27
                                                     Figure 9: Real and estimated µ
                                     10


                                               Realization of
                                      8
                                                                                                     Expected µ

                                      6
          Fundamentals and Beliefs




                                      4


                                      2


                                      0


                                     −2                                           Realization of µ


                                     −4
                                          10    20       30     40         50     60       70        80      90     100
                                                                           Time



and then a = 2. In this case T ( ) = 2                               2
                                                                         and then T ( ) = 1 for           = 0.71.

Figure 10 shows the expected profits of a bank with reputation = 0.5 with and with-
out taxation to implement the novel regulation. The functions without this alternative
regulation are the same as in Figure 5, and depicted lightly. In contrast to the absence
of cross subsidization, in which banks with reputation = 0.5 securitize if µ > 3.65,
when there is cross subsidization banks with reputation = 0.5 securitize if µ > 5. In-
tuitively, as discussed in the previous section, the novel regulation increases expected
future values for all reputation levels above = 0.71. This implies that all good banks
with reputation < 0.71 have less incentives to invest optimally if raising funds in
the shadow banking.

Figure 11 shows the thresholds for all reputation levels with and without the novel
regulation. High reputation levels are more likely to securitize with cross-subsidization,
while lower reputation levels are more likely to raise debt and be subject to standard
regulation. Since the schedule of thresholds is less sensitive to changes in µ, the econ-
omy is less subject to shocks to future economic conditions.

Note that I choose the subsidy scheme to maintain ⇤ (µ = 3) = ⇤⇤ (µ = 3) = 0.6. To
see why, take a bank with current reputation = 0.6. If reputation is not updated


                                                                           28
then                       0
                               = 0.6 and T (   0
                                                   = 0.6) = 2(0.6)2 = 0.72, which implies the bank has to pay a
fraction 28% of its value function at the end of the period. In the case reputation is
updated because banks invest optimally and repay, then 0 = 0.76 and T ( 0 = 0.76) =
2(0.76)2 = 1.16, which implies the bank receives a subsidy of 16% of its value function
at the end of the period. These two effects exactly compensate each other such that
banks with reputation = 0.6 are still indifferent between participating in traditional
and shadow banking.

                          Figure 10: Financing Regions                                                      Figure 11: Confidence Thresholds
                   2.6                                                                                 1

                                                                                                      0.9
                   2.4
                                                                                                      0.8

                                                                                                      0.7
                   2.2
Expected Profits




                                                                                         Reputation   0.6
                                                                                                                            Novel Regulation:
                    2                                       S                                         0.5                      T( )=2 2
                                                           UG(     = 0.5,µ | T( ))
                                                                                                      0.4
                   1.8
                                                                                                      0.3

                                                                                                      0.2
                   1.6                                     D
                                                          UG( = 0.5,µ | T( ))                                              Standard Regulation
                                                                                                      0.1

                   1.4                                                                                 0
                      0        1   2    3      4      5        6         7           8                  0      2   4   6    8     10     12      14   16   18   20
                                               µ                                                                                  µ




Figure 12 shows the fraction of firms in the economy that securitize every period.
Most of the time, since µ = 3 the level of securitization is the same with or without the
novel regulation. As is clear in Figure 11, when µ = 3 both with and without novel
regulation, all firms with reputation above = 0.6 securitize. Given the uniform
reputational distribution this implies that 40% of firms choose to securitize.

When there is novel regulation, however, there is a smaller decline in securitization
when the expected µ declines. In essence, with cross subsidization, high reputation
banks have more incentives to invest optimally, which sustains shadow banking in
the presence of adverse shocks to expected future conditions.

Figure 13 shows expected production in the economy with and without the novel
regulation. With cross-subsidization there are more incentives to invest optimally for
banks with high reputation, which are those who select into shadow banking. Since
expected profits for the banks that do not securitize are subject to standard regulation
and generate the same expected profits, total production does not suffer as it does
without the novel regulation. This implies that the right combination between the

                                                                                     29
novel and the standard regulation has the potential to increase expected production
in all states of the world.

Interestingly, the only time the economy enters into a recession (µR ) during the 100
periods of the simulation is in periods 80-82. However, there are negative shocks to
production also in periods 45 and 61, not because of a recession but just because bad
news about the economy. These irrelevant shocks make individuals revise the proba-
bility of a recession upward, reducing reputation concerns and inefficiently discour-
aging shadow banking.


                                                Figure 12: Securitization                                                                   Figure 13: Total Production
                                     0.4                                                                                         1.6

                                                                                                                                1.59                    Novel Regulation
                                    0.35
                                                                                                                                1.58
                                     0.3
Fraction of Firms that Securitize




                                                                                                    Expected Total Production
                                                                                                                                1.57
                                                                     Novel
                                    0.25                           Regulation                                                   1.56

                                     0.2                                                                                        1.55

                                                                                                                                1.54
                                    0.15
                                                                                                                                1.53
                                                                                                                                                             Standard
                                     0.1                         Standard
                                                                                                                                                             Regulation
                                                                 Regulation                                                     1.52

                                    0.05
                                                                                                                                1.51

                                      0                                                                                          1.5
                                           10     20   30   40       50       60   70   80   90   100                                  10     20   30   40     50     60   70   80   90   100
                                                                     Time                                                                                      Time




To put these results in context, it is important to highlight that production when all
banks invest optimally is 1.85, production when all banks take excessive risk is 1.4 and
production when all banks raise debt and then are subject to standard regulation and
capital requirements that make them invest only in safe assets is 1.5. This shows the
benefits of standard regulation in the absence of reputation concerns, which is rais-
ing production from 1.4 to 1.5. This also shows the benefits and fragility of shadow
banking in the presence of reputation concerns, raising production from 1.5 to 1.58 in
normal times, but causing sudden reductions under bad news. Finally, this exercise
also shows the benefits of the novel regulation in increasing production from 1.58 to
1.585 in normal times and buffering the losses in case of bad news.




                                                                                                  30
5    Conclusions

This paper provides a new view of shadow banking, not as an inherently dangerous
system due to their lack of regulatory firewalls, but as a positive signal that self-
regulation is at work in the financial market and that agents can get rid of restric-
tive government regulations. Still, since self-regulation is provided by the market
through reputation concerns, it is fragile because the value of reputation depends on
news about future economic prospects. In essence, I argue that securitization not only
allows for better risk-sharing, but also allows banks to avoid excessively restrictive
regulation. These gains, however, should be evaluated against the fragility of the
system.

The natural question is how to enhance the benefits of shadow banking and at the
same time reduce its costs. I show that banks with low reputation and lack of disci-
pline self-select into the use of traditional banking and those with high reputations
self-select into shadow banking. I discuss an alternative regulation that combines tra-
ditional capital requirements with cross-subsidizations. With this alternative regula-
tion, banks that do not securitize are still restrained by regulation and banks that secu-
ritize are less sensitive to news about economic conditions, making shadow banking
more stable.

The insight that shadow banking arises endogenously when self-regulation becomes
feasible is also critical to evaluate the frequent proposals for more stringent govern-
ment regulations. Indeed, trying to regulate more extensively traditional banking and
eliminate shadow banking can generate undesirable consequences, attracting the cre-
ation of a potential “new shadow banking system” with banks less concerned for
their reputation and then more fragile in their risk-taking behavior.

This paper can be extended in several directions: First, reputation gains can be de-
termined endogenously, as in Ordonez (2012); second, the forces in this paper can be
accommodated to study other financial institutions and instruments, such as repo,
money markets, investment banks, etc; third, the model can be used to study confi-
dence relations when transactions include collateral of unknown quality, the price of
which also depends on aggregate economic conditions.

All these extensions would make the model richer and more realistic, but would not
change the main insight: Reputation introduces discipline that restricts risk without

                                           31
compromising output, as is the case with capital requirements. In this sense, repu-
tation concerns allow for the rise of shadow banking as a superior, but more fragile,
alternative to traditional banking. Whether it is desirable to have a system based on
self-regulation depends on the trade-off between these benefits and costs. Hence, the
challenge for regulation is not to eliminate shadow banking, but to make it sustain-
able and more stable.



References
 Acharya, Viral, and Philipp Schnabl. 2010. “Do Global Banks Spread Global Imbal-
   ances? The Case of ABCP during the Financial Crisis of 2007-09.” IMF Economic
   Review 58:37–73.
 Acharya, Viral, Philipp Schnabl, and Gustavo Suarez. 2012. “Securitization without
   Risk Transfer.” Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
 Adrian, Tobias, and Adam Ashcraft. 2012. “Shadow Banking Regulation.” Annual
   Review of Financial Economics 4:99–140.
 Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2009. “The Shadow Banking System: Im-
   plications for Financial Regulation.” Banque de France Financial Stability Review
   13:1–10.
 Atkeson, Andrew, Christian Hellwig, and Guillermo Ordonez. 2012. “Optimal Reg-
    ulation in the Presence of Reputation Concerns.” NBER Working Paper 17898.
 Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2011. “A Model of Shadow
   Banking.” Working Paper , Harvard University.
 Gorton, Gary, and Andrew Metrick. 2010. “Haircuts.” Review, Federal Reserve Bank
   of St. Louis 92, no. 6.
 Gorton, Gary, and Nicholas Souleles. 2006. In Special Purpose Vehicles and Securitiza-
   tion, Rene Stulz and Mark Carey. University of Chicago Press.
 Ordonez, Guillermo. 2012. “Fragility of Reputation and Clustering in Risk-Taking.”
    Theoretical Economics, forthcoming.
        . 2013. “Confidence Banking and Strategic Default.” Working Paper, Univer-
    sity of Pennsylvania.
 Poznar, Zoltan, Tobias Adrian, Adam Ashcraft, and Hayley Boesky. 2012. “Shadow
    Banking.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 458.
 Ricks, Morgan. 2010. “Shadow Banking and Financial Regulation.” Columbia Law
    and Economics Working Paper 370.



                                          32
 Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein. 1990. “Herd Behavior and Investment.”
    American Economic Review 80 (3): 465–479.
 Shin, Hyun Song. 2009. “Securitization and Financial Stability.” Economic Journal
    119:309–332.
 Stein, Jeremy. 2010. “Securitization, Shadow Banking and Financial Fragility.”
    Daedalus, Fall, 41–51.
 Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with
     Imperfect Information.” American Economic Review 71 (3): 393–410.




A     Appendix

A.1    Proof of Proposition 3

Value functions from issuing debt and securities depend on and µ. If there is almost
perfect information ( s ! 1), these value functions are arbitrarily closely approxi-
mated by                                          ⇥                 ⇤
                   UGD ( , µ) = px x + ps ys + p̂D E✓|µ V ( , ✓) RD              (10)
and

    UGS ( , µ) = px x + ↵ps yr + (1 ↵) [N (s⇤ ( , µ))pr yr + (1 N (s⇤ ( , µ)))ps ys ]
                                          ⇥                                    ⇤
                 +N (s⇤ ( , µ))p̂G (b
                                    ⌧ = 0) E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( , ✓) RS ( |s⇤ ( , µ))         (11)
                             ⇤
                                               ⇥               0             ⇤
                                                                                      ⇤
                 +(1 N (s ( , µ)))p̂G (b ⌧ = 1) E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( , ✓) RS ( |s ( , µ))

respectively, where p̂G (b
                         ⌧ = 0) = p̂B , p̂G (b
                                             ⌧ = 1) = p̂D and   0
                                                                    is the updated reputation
computed with ⌧b = 1.
When µ is sufficiently low, such that N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 1, then it is always optimal for
good banks to issue debt and be subject to regulation (this is, UGD ( , µ) > UGS ( , µ)
for all ). This result is straightforward from replacing N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 1 into equation
(11), since by assumption ps ys > ↵ps yr + (1 ↵)pr yr and p̂D > p̂B . This implies there
is always a range of µ low enough such that firms take excessive risk almost with
certainty (this is N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 1), and banks participate in traditional banking.
When µ is sufficiently high such that N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 0 then it is optimal for good banks
to issue securities and avoid regulation only if UGD ( , µ) < UGS ( , µ). From replacing
N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 0 into equation (11), this happens only under condition (9) evaluated
at µ. This implies that, if µ is such that good banks invest optimally almost with
certainty (this is N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 0), then banks raise securities only if condition (9)
evaluated at µ is fulfilled. If not, then banks raise debt.

                                            33
Assuming condition (9) is fulfilled for some range of µ, there are values of µ low
enough such that UGD ( , µ) > UGS ( , µ) and values of µ high enough such that UGD ( , µ) <
UGS ( , µ). Now, I show that there is a unique threshold µ⇤ at which UGD ( , µ⇤ ) =
UGS ( , µ⇤ ).
Taking derivatives of the banks’ expected profits with respect to µ,

                                 @UGD ( , µ)       @E✓|µ V ( .✓)
                                             = p̂D               >0                                     (12)
                                    @µ                 @µ

while
@UGS ( , µ)                     @E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( , ✓)                           @E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( 0 , ✓)
            = N (s⇤ ( , µ)) p̂B                     + (1 N (s⇤ ( , µ))) p̂D
   @µ                                  @µ                                             @µ
                      ⇤
                @N (s ( , µ))
              +                 [(1 ↵)(pr yr ps ys )]
                      @µ
                @N (s⇤ ( , µ))      ⇥                                   ⇤
              +                  p̂B E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( , ✓) RS ( |s⇤ ( , µ)                      (13)
                      @µ
                @N (s⇤ ( , µ))      ⇥                                     ⇤
                                 p̂D E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( 0 , ✓) RS ( |s⇤ ( , µ)
                      @µ
                                                               @RS ( |s⇤ ( , µ)) @N (s⇤ ( , µ))
                [N (s⇤ ( , µ)) p̂B + (1 N (s⇤ ( , µ))) p̂D ]
                                                                @N (s⇤ ( , µ))        @µ

Adding and subtracting the following expression
                          
       @E✓|µ V ( .✓)               @E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( .✓)                              @E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( .✓)
   p̂D               ⌘ p̂D N (s⇤ )                    + (1              N (s⇤ ))
           @µ                             @µ                                              @µ

to the first term of equation (13), then that first term can be rewritten as

                        @E✓|µ V ( .✓)                                 @E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( .✓)
                  p̂D                      N (s⇤ ( , µ))(p̂D    p̂B )
                            @µ                                                @µ
                                                               0
                                              @E ✓|µ,✓>s⇤ [V (   , ✓)  V (  , ✓)]
                 + (1       N (s⇤ ( , µ)))p̂D                                     >0
                                                              @µ
                             ⇤
From Proposition 2, @N (s@µ( ,µ)) < 0. Then, the second term and the sum of the third
and fourth terms of equation (13) are positive too. Finally, the last term is also positive
                  ⇤
           S ( |s ( ,µ))            @U S ( ,µ)
because @R@N  (s⇤ ( ,µ))
                         > 0. Hence, G@µ > 0
Furthermore, when N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 1,

                         @UGS ( , µ)       @E✓|µ V ( .✓)   @UGD ( , µ)
                                     ⇡ p̂B               <                                              (14)
                            @µ                 @µ             @µ


                                                 34
      and when N (s⇤ ( , µ)) ! 0,

                                 @UGS ( , µ)       @E✓|µ V ( 0 .✓)   @UGD ( , µ)
                                             ⇡ p̂D                 >                                          (15)
                                    @µ                  @µ              @µ

      In words, expected profits from raising funds, both in traditional and shadow bank-
      ing, increase with µ. Furthermore, when µ is relatively low, expected profits with
      securities increase at a lower rate than expected profits with debt. In contrast, when
      µ are relatively high, expected profits with securities increase at a faster rate than
      expected profits with debt.
                                                                                ⇤
      Given the symmetry of the normal distribution, since @N (s@µ( ,µ)) < 0 from Proposition
      2 and the fact that the second, third, and fourth terms of equation (13) are positive, it is
                                    @U S ( ,µ)                                            @U S ( ,µ)
      straightforward to see that G@µ is increasing for N (s⇤ ( , µ)) > 0.5 and that G@µ
      is decreasing for N (s⇤ ( , µ)) < 0.5 (normal densities are decreasing for N (s⇤ ( , µ)) >
      0.5 and increasing for N (s⇤ ( , µ)) < 0.5). This last statement implies that the lower
                  @U S ( ,µ)
      bound for G@µ when N (s⇤ ( , µ)) < 0.5 is the expression (15). Then, if condition
      (9) holds, the expected profits with securities cross expected profits with debt from
      below only once, and there is only a cutoff µ⇤ ( ) for which UGS ( , µ⇤ ) = UGD ( , µ⇤ ).


      A.2      Proof of Proposition 4
      Taking derivatives of banks’ expected profits with respect to ,

                                         @UGD ( , µ)       @E✓|µ V ( .✓)
                                                     = p̂D               ,                                    (16)
                                            @                  @

      which is positive by construction of value functions increasing with .


@UGS ( , µ)                     @E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( , ✓)                                          @E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( 0 , ✓) @ 0
            = N (s⇤ ( , µ)) p̂B                          + (1 N (s⇤ ( , µ))) p̂D
   @                                     @                                                           @ 0           @
                                  @E✓|µ,✓<s⇤ V ( , ✓) @s      ⇤                                     @E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( 0 , ✓) @s⇤ @ 0
              +N (s⇤ ( , µ)) p̂B                                 +  (1     N  (s ⇤
                                                                                   (   , µ)))  p̂ D
                                           @s⇤             @                                               @s⇤            @ 0@
                @N (s⇤ ( , µ)) @s⇤
              +                    [(1 ↵)(pr yr ps ys )]
                      @s⇤       @
                @N (s⇤ ( , µ)) @s⇤       ⇥                                                 ⇤
              +                     p̂ B   E ✓|µ,✓<s  ⇤ V ( , ✓)     R  S (  |s ⇤
                                                                                  (  ,  µ)                                   (17)
                      @s⇤       @
                @N (s⇤ ( , µ)) @s⇤        ⇥                  0                   ⇤
                                                                                            ⇤
                                    p̂ D    E ✓|µ,✓>s ⇤V (     , ✓)    R S (  |s   (   , µ)
                      @s⇤       @
                      ⇤                             ⇤                  @RS ( |s⇤ ( , µ)) @N (s⇤ ( , µ)) @s⇤
                [N (s ( , µ)) p̂B + (1 N (s ( , µ))) p̂D ]
                                                                         @N (s⇤ ( , µ))              @s⇤         @

                                                           35
Differentiating the condition that pins down s⇤ with respect to ,

                                        d E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                                           ⌧ (s⇤ ))]   d[ + RS ( |s⇤ )]
                                                                     =                  .
                                                  d                         d

Developing the total derivative

@ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                   ⌧ (s⇤ ))] ds⇤ @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                                    ⌧ (s⇤ ))] @ 0   @R( |s⇤ ) ds⇤ @RS ( |s⇤ )
                                +                                 =              +
          @s⇤                d             @ 0                @       @s⇤     d         @

  @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                     ⌧ (s⇤ ))] @R( |s⇤ ) ds⇤       @RS ( |s⇤ ) @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                                                                  ⌧ (s⇤ ))] @ 0
                                              =                                                 .
            @s⇤                   @s⇤     d            @                    @ 0             @
By assumptions 2 and 3, the term in brackets is positive. In contrast, the right hand
side is negative because

          @RS                        (1 px )(1 ↵)(ps pr )
              =                                                                             (1   N (s⇤ )) < 0,
           @                (p̂B + (1 N (s⇤ ))(1 px )(1 ↵)(ps                      pr ))2
      @   E   ⇤ [V   ( 0 ,✓|b
                            ⌧ (s⇤ ))]     0
and    ✓|s
           @ 0
                     @
                     @
                         > 0, again by construction of value functions and Bayesian
updating. This implies that
                                      ds⇤
                                          < 0,
                                      d

The first and second terms of equation (17) are positive by construction of the value
                                                                          ⇤
functions, the sum of the third and fourth terms is positive (since @N (s@s(⇤ ,µ)) > 0), and
                                                                                                       S ( ,µ)
                                                       @RS ( |s⇤ ( ,µ))                              @UG
the last term is also positive (since                   @N (s⇤ ( ,µ))
                                                                          > 0). This implies that      @
                                                                                                                 > 0.

Since both UGS ( , µ) and UGD ( , µ) increase with for each µ, the threshold µ⇤ ( ) de-
                    @U S ( ,µ⇤ ( ))   D ( ,µ⇤ ( ))
                                    @UG
clines with if G @                       @
                                                   . Since the threshold µ⇤ ( ) is given by the
value µ at which equations (10) and (11) are equal, by evaluating equations (16) and
(17) at µ⇤ it is clear that this condition is fulfilled.


A.3       Proof of Proposition 6

First I prove the impact of subsidies on the incentives to invest optimally in shadow
banking, summarized by s⇤ .
Imposing E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                          ⌧ (s⇤ ))T ( 0 )] in condition (6) that pins down s⇤ , and differenti-
ating with respect to T ( 0 ),

@ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                   ⌧ (s⇤ ))T ( 0 )] @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                                                       ⌧ (s⇤ ))T ( 0 )] ds⇤       @R( |s⇤ ) ds⇤
                                   +                                            =                .
           @T ( 0 )                              @s⇤                   dT ( 0 )     @s⇤ dT ( 0 )


                                                                36
Then,
  ✓                                                   ◆
    @ E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                       ⌧ (s⇤ ))T ( 0 )]   @R( |s⇤ )        ds⇤
                                                                   =                    ⌧ (s⇤ ))] . (18)
                                                                       E✓|s⇤ [V ( 0 , ✓|b
                 @s⇤                        @s⇤           dT ( 0 )

The right hand side is negative and, by assumptions 2 and 3, the term in brackets is
                                  ⇤
positive, which implies that dTds( 0 ) < 0. In words, the ex-ante probability of risk-taking
declines for all reputations for which the update 0 is subsidized with T ( 0 ) > 1. In
contrast, the ex-ante probability of risk-taking increases for all reputations for which
the update 0 is taxed with T ( 0 ) < 1.
This result is important to prove the first part of the proposition. Assume T ( ⇤ ) = 1
such that T ( ⇤0 ) > 1. This implies that, in the presence of cross-subsidization, good
banks with reputation ⇤ strictly prefer to raise funds in the shadow banking. This is
clear from comparing equations (10) and (11). Equation (10) remains constant while
equation (11) increases for two reasons. First, fixing s⇤ , the value of reputation up-
dating is larger because E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( ⇤0 , ✓)T ( ⇤0 ) > E✓|µ,✓>s⇤ V ( ⇤0 , ✓). Second, as shown
above, s⇤ declines, which reduces RS and further increases the gains from shadow
banking in equation (11).
Combining this result with proposition 4, when T ( ⇤ ) = 1, then ⇤ > ⇤⇤ . By impos-
ing T ( ) < 1, equation (10) declines while equation (11) does not increase so much
as in the previous case. This implies there is always a ⇤ (µ) < ˆ < ⇤0 (µ) such that
T ( ˆ) = 1 and ⇤ (µ) = ⇤⇤ (µ).
If the government imposes such a scheme, the banks that participate in traditional
and shadow banking do not change. The banks with reputation < ⇤ participate in
traditional banking and since they are subject to regulation, the keep investing only in
safe assets. In contrast, the good banks with reputation > ⇤ participate in shadow
banking, but because subsidies decrease s⇤ ( ), they invest optimally with a higher
probability and shadow banking is less fragile.




                                                 37
