NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GENDER IDENTITY AND RELATIVE INCOME WITHIN HOUSEHOLDS
Marianne Bertrand
Jessica Pan
Emir Kamenica
Working Paper 19023
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19023

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

We thank John Abowd for pointing us to the SIPP/SSA/IRS Public Use File Project. Amanda Chuan
and David Toniatti provided excellent research assistance. We thank the George J. Stigler Center for
the Study of the Economy and the State and the Initiative on Global Markets, both at the University
of Chicago Booth School of Business, for financial support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Marianne Bertrand, Jessica Pan, and Emir Kamenica. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Gender Identity and Relative Income within Households
Marianne Bertrand, Jessica Pan, and Emir Kamenica
NBER Working Paper No. 19023
May 2013
JEL No. J12,J16
ABSTRACT
We examine causes and consequences of relative income within households. We establish that gender
identity – in particular, an aversion to the wife earning more than the husband - impacts marriage formation,
the wife's labor force participation, the wife's income conditional on working, marriage satisfaction,
likelihood of divorce, and the division of home production. The distribution of the share of household
income earned by the wife exhibits a sharp cliff at 0.5, which suggests that a couple is less willing
to match if her income exceeds his. Within marriage markets, when a randomly chosen woman becomes
more likely to earn more than a randomly chosen man, marriage rates decline. Within couples, if the
wife's potential income (based on her demographics) is likely to exceed the husband's, the wife is less
likely to be in the labor force and earns less than her potential if she does work. Couples where the
wife earns more than the husband are less satisfied with their marriage and are more likely to divorce.
Finally, based on time use surveys, the gender gap in non-market work is larger if the wife earns more
than the husband.

Marianne Bertrand
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
marianne.bertrand@chicagobooth.edu
Jessica Pan
Department of Economics
National University of Singapore
1 Arts Link
Singapore 117570
jesspan@nus.edu.sg

Emir Kamenica
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Ave.
Chicago, IL 60637
emir.kamenica@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Women have experienced substantial labor market gains over the last half century. The gender
gap in labor force participation and the gender gap in earnings have both declined. Several factors
have been identified as contributing to these gains. First and foremost has been the reduction
in the gender gap in education (Blau and Kahn 2006). Various technological innovations, such
as the contraceptive pill, have favored women (Goldin and Katz 2002, Greenwood et al. 2005).
Labor demand has shifted towards industries where female skills are overrepresented (Weinberg
2000, Black and Juhn 2000). Finally, better regulatory controls and greater competitiveness have
reduced labor market discrimination against women (Black and Strahan 2001, Black and Brainerd
2004).
Despite these gains, and despite the fact that women have now overtaken men in terms of
educational achievement (Goldin et al. 2006), substantial gender gaps remain, both in labor force
participation and in earnings. Female labor force participation appears to have plateaued since the
early to mid-1990s (Blau and Kahn 2006). Among full-time-full-year workers, the gender gap in
earnings remains at 25 percent.
This halted progress has led researchers to consider less traditional (within economics at least)
factors that might influence the gender gap in labor market outcomes (Bertrand 2010). One explanation that has gained popularity over the last decade is that slow-moving identity norms shape
behavior. Influential work by Akerlof and Kranton (2000, 2010) imports insights about identity
from sociology and social psychology into economics. Akerlof and Kranton (2000) define identity
as one’s sense of belonging to a social category, coupled with a view about how people who belong
to that category should behave. They propose that identity influences economic outcomes because
deviating from the prescribed behavior is inherently costly. In one application of this model, the
two relevant social categories are man and woman, and these two categories are associated with
specific behavioral prescriptions, such as “men work in the labor force and women work in the
home” and “a man should earn more than his wife.” If deviating from these prescriptions is costly,
gender identity would lead to lower labor force participation and lower earnings for women.
Does gender identity indeed impact the gender gap in labor market outcomes? Does it influence
other outcomes, such as marriage formation and division of household chores? In this paper, we
examine these questions, focusing on the behavioral prescription that “a man should earn more
than his wife.”

2

We first examine the distribution of the share of the household labor income earned by the wife.
Using 2008-2010 American Community Survey data on young couples, Panel (a) of Figure 1 (in
Section 3) shows that this distribution exhibits a sharp drop to the right of 0.5 – when the wife
starts to earn more than the husband.1 This drop suggests that gender identity plays an important
role in marriage formation. The other two panels of Figure 1 show the counterfactual distributions
that would arise if matches were formed through costly search within marriage markets defined by
age, race, and education.2 The outcome in Panel (b) stems from the assumption that both men
and women prefer partners with higher income. Panel (c) depicts the distribution that would arise
if men dislike women’s income once it exceeds their own. Only the distribution generated by the
gender identity norms (Panel (c)) shares the key distinctive feature of the true distribution – the
sharp drop at 0.5.
We next turn from the analysis of who marries whom to the analysis of whether people get
married at all. Using 1970 to 2010 data from the US Census Bureau, we show that, within a marriage
market, when a randomly chosen woman becomes more likely to earn more than a randomly chosen
man, the marriage rate declines. This relationship continues to hold when we flexibly control for
both the distribution of men’s income and the distribution of women’s income. Moreover, to fully
address concerns about omitted variables, we utilize a Bartik-style instrument (Bartik 1991, Aizer
2010). We exploit the fact that historically men and women have tended to work in different
industries. Based on the initial industry composition of a state and the industry-wide wage growth
at the national level, we create sex-specific predicted distributions of local wages that result from
aggregate shifts to labor demand that are plausibly uncorrelated with characteristics of men and
women in a particular marriage market. We show that marriage rates decline when the predicted
probability that a woman earns more than a man increases.
This result suggests a potential link between two important social developments over the last
several decades: the relative increase in women’s income (as discussed above) and the decline in
marriage rates. Indeed, marriage rates declined substantially in the US, from about 81 percent in
1970 to 51 percent in 2010 for young adults aged 25 to 39.3 Our estimates imply that the aversion
to the situation where the wife earns more than the husband can explain 23 percent of this decline.
1

Figures 3 and 4, which draw on administrative data, show that this feature of the distribution is not driven by
misreporting of income.
2
Details about our definition of marriage markets and the computation of the counterfactual distributions in
Figure 1 are in Section 3.
3
The fact that marriage rates declined for older individuals as well – from 80 percent to 64 percent among those
aged 40 to 65 – suggests that this decline does not solely reflect a change in the timing of marriages.

3

We then turn our attention from aggregate outcomes to individual couples. We first ask whether
a woman whose potential income exceeds her husband’s might distort her labor supply. Using 1970
to 2010 data from the US Census Bureau, for each married woman we estimate the distribution
of her potential earnings based on her demographics. We show that when the probability that
the wife’s potential income exceeds her husband’s actual income is higher, the wife is less likely
to participate in the labor force. Moreover, if she does work, the gap between her realized and
potential income is higher. Both of these patterns suggest women distort their labor supply so as
to avoid a gender-role reversal in earnings. Of course, an important concern is that women who
marry men whose income is below their own potential income have unobservable characteristics that
keep them out of the labor force or keep their realized income low. We consider two approaches
to deal with this concern. First, we show that the key coefficient is stable as we include controls
for a number of observable characteristics of the couple. Second, we construct a proxy for relative
income at marriage; inclusion of this control does not affect our estimates.
Even though our results suggest that some couples try to avoid the wife earning more than the
husband, this situation has become quite common. Based on the American Community Survey
3-year aggregate (2008 to 2010), the wife earns more than the husband in 26 percent of the couples
where both individuals are between 18 and 65 years old. In these couples, does the violation of
gender identity norms influence the quality of marriage? Using panel data from the National Survey
of Families and Households, we find that the couples where the wife earns more than the husband
report being less happy, report greater strife in their marriage, and are ultimately more likely to
get a divorce.
Finally, we examine the relationship between relative income and the division of home production. Using the American Time Use Survey, we show that the gender gap in home production –
how much more time the wife spends on non-market work than the husband – is larger in couples
where the wife earns more than the husband. This result runs counter to standard models of the
division of labor within the household (e.g., Becker 1973), which predict a negative relationship
between the wife’s share of market income and her relative contribution to home production activities. One explanation for the observed pattern is that, in couples where the wife earns more
than the husband, the “threatening” wife takes on a greater share of housework so as to assuage the
“threatened” husband’s unease with the situation. The wife, of course, may ultimately get tired of
working this “second shift” (Hochschild and Machung 1989), which could be one of the mechanisms
behind our results on divorce.
4

2

Related literature

Since the initial work by Becker (1973, 1974), the economic analysis of marriage markets has made
great strides by developing tractable models that abstract from issues such as tradition and identity.
Consequently, while the economics literature on marriage markets is vast, little of it examines the
role of gender identity. Fortin (2005) uses data from the World Values Surveys to assess how
gender role attitudes impact women’s labor market outcomes in a sample of 25 OECD countries
over a 10-year period. She shows that the social representation of women as homemakers and
men as breadwinners is associated with a low labor force participation by women and a large
gender gap in income. Fortin (2009) examines a similar question in a single country (the US)
over a longer time period (1977 to 2006). She shows that the evolution of gender role attitudes
over time correlates with the evolution of female labor force participation. In particular, while
women’s gender role attitudes steadily became less traditional until the mid-1990s (e.g. more and
more women disagree with the notion that husbands should be the breadwinners and wives should
be the homemakers), these trends reversed in the mid-1990s, precisely at the time that coincides
with the slowdown in the closing of the gender gap in labor force participation. Fernandez et
al. (2004) document intergenerational transfer of attitudes toward gender roles. They show that
a woman is more likely to work if her mother-in-law worked, presumably because having had a
working mother influences the husband’s attitudes toward gender.4 These papers focus on how
the variation in gender attitudes (across countries, across time, and across couples) correlates
with women’s labor force participation whereas our paper examines the extent to which the overall
prevalence of traditional attitudes impacts a wide range of outcomes in the aggregate; in addition to
women’s labor force participation and the gender gap in income, we study the distribution of relative
income within households, marriage rates, division of home production, marriage satisfaction, and
divorce.5
Some of these issues have been previously explored in the sociology literature. The broad notion
that individuals behave in particular ways so as to fulfill certain gender roles has been emphasized
by West and Zimmerman (1987). This idea was applied to the division of household chores by
4

Morrill and Morrill (2012) argue that, even though there is a stronger correlation in labor force participation
between a mother-in-law and a daughter-in-law than between a mother and a daughter, the data are also consistent
with a model where the preference transfer channel operates solely from mothers to daughters.
5
Watson and McLanahan (2011) argue that another notion of relative income – a man’s income relative to that
of other men of his race and education in his metropolitan area – affects marital status. A man’s income predicts his
marital status when he earns less than the median of his reference group median, but not when he earns more. Watson
and McLanahan also interpret their results through the lens of Akerlof and Kranton’s (2000) model of identity.

5

Fenstermaker Berk (1985). Bittman et al. (2003) report that the extent of the wife’s housework
decreases in relative income when she makes less than the husband, but that this relationship
reverses when relative income exceeds one half. In contrast, Gupta and Ash (2008) argue that the
number of hours the wife spends on chores is solely determined by her level of income, without
any regard for her relative income in the household. Cooke (2006) finds that among US couples
where the wife earns more than the husband, the likelihood of divorce is lower if the wife engages
in “compensatory behavior” – i.e., if she does a greater share of the housework. A number of
other papers examine the relationship between relative income and divorce.6 Heckert et al. (1998),
Jalovaara (2003), and Liu and Vikat (2004) report that couples are more likely to divorce if the
wife earns more than the husband while Rogers (2004) argues that divorce is most likely when the
couples earn around the same amount of money.

3

Distribution of relative income

In standard models of the marriage market, men and women match based on how desirable each
is relative to others of their gender; in each marriage market, the nth best man pairs up with the
nth best woman.7 In these models, relative income – the share of the household income earned by
the wife – plays no role. In this section, we demonstrate that the pattern of who marries whom
suggests that couples are indeed sensitive to their relative income.

3.1

Census data from the US

We first analyze the distribution of relative income among young married couples, where the wife
is aged 22 to 31 and the husband 24 to 33, using data from the American Community Survey
3-year aggregate (2008 to 2010).8 We focus on the young couples in order to emphasize the impact
of gender identity on marriage formation, rather than its impact on gender-specific evolution of
income within marriage (which we study in the next section).9 We focus on the most recent year

6
Using administrative data from Denmark, Pierce et al. (2012) employ a regression discontinuity design to argue
that a husband is more likely to use erectile dysfunction medication if he earns less than his wife. Stuart et al. (2011)
find that winning an Academy Award is associated with a greater risk of divorce for Best Actresses but not for Best
Actors.
7
This matching pattern is the equilibrium outcome if utility is non-transferable or if the wife’s and the husband’s
qualities are complements. If partner’s qualities are substitutes and utility is transferable, then the best man pairs
up with the worst woman and so on.
8
These ages correspond to the youngest age group in our construction of the marriage markets in Section 4.
9
Results are qualitatively similar if we include all couples regardless of their age.

6

Figure 1: Actual and counterfactual
distributions of relative
income (US Census)
Panel (b): Standard preferences
Panel (c): Identity-based preferences

Fraction
.15
..05
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
S
1
Share
Panel
05
1
hare of(a):
household
Actual
income
Distribution
earned by the wife

Fraction
.15
..05
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
S
1
Share
05
1
hare of household income earned by the wife

Fraction
.15
..05
0
.1
.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
S
1
Share
05
1
hare of household income earned by the wife

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
Share of household income earned by the wife

.9

1

.1
0

.05

Fraction

.1
Fraction
.05
0

0

.05

Fraction

.1

.15

Panel (c): Identity-based preferences

.15

Panel (b): Standard preferences

.15

Panel (a): Actual Distribution

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
Share of household income earned by the wife

.9

1

0

.1

.2
.3
.4
.5
.6
.7
.8
Share of household income earned by the wife

.9

1

because it yields the greatest overlap between the distributions of men’s and women’s income.10
In the earlier decades (e.g., 1970 and 1980), there are fewer women whose income exceeds that of
many men, so an aversion to forming a couple where the wife earns more than the husband has
a smaller impact on the distribution of relative income.11 In Figure 2, we plot the distribution of
relative income in each decade since 1970.
We define relativeIncomei as

wif eIncomei
wif eIncomei +husbIncomei

where i indexes the couples, and

wif eIncomei and husbIncomei are the labor income of the wife and the husband, respectively.
We only include couples where both the wife and the husband earn a positive income. In the Census there are many couples where relativeIncomei is exactly equal to 21 , which seems somewhat
implausible and is likely to be an artifact of the survey method. (In the administrative data we use
in the next two subsections there are not nearly as many couples where the husband and the wife
earn the same amount.) Accordingly, we recode those observations using a triangular kernel; this
eliminates the “spike” in the distribution of relativeIncomei at 21 .12
Panel (a) of Figure 1 depicts the histogram of relativeIncomei , along with a local polynomial
which is separately estimated for the observations where the wife earns less than the husband and
the observations where she earns more. The histogram clearly demonstrates a sharp drop in the
density once relative income exceeds

1
2.

This suggests that couples may have an aversion to the

wife earning more than the husband. In Panels (b) and (c) we depict counterfactual distributions
of relative income that would arise under standard and identity-based preferences, respectively. For

10

Our results are similar if we use data from 1990 or 2000 instead.
When the distribution of men’s income first order stochastically dominates the distribution of women’s income in
every marriage market, the unique stable matching under the identity-based preferences (as defined below) is positive
assortative matching, i.e., the same as under standard preferences. Likewise, under the stochastic matching process
we use below, identity-based and standard preferences generate similar counterfactual outcomes in the earlier decades
when the distributions of men’s and women’s income are further apart.
n − n −(k−1)
|
|
12
In other words, when we plot a histogram with n bins, bin k ∈ {1, ..., n} is assigned a share 2 n 2 n −1
of the
)
2(2
1
observations whose value is exactly 2 .
11

7

both panels, we use the data on all individuals in the relevant age group, whether married or not.
We assign each individual to a marriage market, based on state, race,13 and a binary education
group based on whether they have at least some college education. Then, given ordinal preferences
for partners, we run the following algorithm. In each marriage market, a woman and a man are
picked at random. The man proposes to the woman with a probability equal to

NW −k+1
NW

where

NW is the number of women in the marriage market and k is the rank of the woman according
to the man’s preferences. Hence, the man proposes to his favorite woman with probability 1 and
to his least favorite woman with probability
probability equal to

NM −k+1
NM

1
NW

. If the man proposes, the woman accepts with a

where NM is the number of men in the marriage market and k is the

rank of the man according to the woman’s preferences. If the woman accepts the man’s proposal,
they are matched and removed from the pool of singles. The algorithm proceeds until the total
number of matches is the minimum of the number of married men and the number of married
women in that marriage market.
Under standard preferences, we assume that both men and women always prefer a partner with
a higher income. Under identity-based preferences, we assume that women always prefer a partner
with a higher income, but a man with income h has an ordinal utility for a woman with income
w equal to − |h − w|. In other words, a man values women’s income as long as it does not exceed
his own. Once a woman earns more than a man, her income becomes a liability rather than an
asset. Such preferences are similar to those identified by Fisman et al. (2006) in a speed dating
setting. They find that a woman always values a man’s intelligence and ambition, but a man values
a woman’s intelligence and ambition only if it does not exceed his own. A man is less willing to
date a woman who surpasses him on these attributes.
Panels (b) and (c) make it clear that identity-based preferences generate the key qualitative
feature of the actual distribution of relative income, namely the sharp drop in the distribution when
a woman earns more than her husband.14 Unsurprisingly, standard preferences do not exhibit such
a drop. Thus, the distribution of relative income suggests an important role of gender identity in
marriage formation.15
13
The three races we consider are (non-Hispanic) white, (non-Hispanic) black, and Hispanic. We drop individuals
of other races.
14
Even though identity-based preferences generate this key qualitative feature of the actual distribution, they do
not do a better job of matching the overall distribution. Under the Wasserstein metric, the distance between the
distributions in Panels (c) and (a) is not smaller than the distance between the distributions in Panels (b) and (a).
Moreover, some other features of the data, such as the relationship between a woman’s income and the likelihood that
she is married, are not matched well by the counterfactuals based on either the identity-based or standard preferences.
15
One might worry that the tax code or divorce laws might be responsible for the cliff in the distribution of relative
income to the right of 0.5. To the extent that the tax code treats husbands and wives symmetrically, however, it

8

Figure 2: Distribution of relative income over time (US Census)

3.2

Administrative data from the US

One potential issue with Figures 1 and 2 is that income is self-reported. Thus, it is in principle
possible that the apparent cliff at 0.5 is due to misreporting.16 To address this issue, in this
subsection we depict the distribution of relative income based on administrative data. In particular,
we use the data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) which is linked to
administrative data on income from the Social Security Administration and the Internal Revenue
is difficult to think of any tax explanation for this asymmetry in the distribution. The U.S. joint tax system for
couples creates marriage tax penalties for couples where the husband and the wife earn about the same income
and tax subsidies for couples where the husband and the wife earn very different incomes (Alm et al. 1999). This
might induce some “hollowing out” in the middle of the relative income distribution, but could not explain the sharp
asymmetry we observe. Laws regarding child support and alimony payments vary state by state in the U.S. While
states issue guidelines about which factors should be taken into account (such as length of marriage, each spouse’s
earning capacity, age and health, whether there was marital misconduct, etc.), judges ultimately have substantial
discretion in setting those payments. While this judicial discretion theoretically entails the possibility that payments
might be conditioned on “whether the wife earns more than her husband,” such a possibility seems unlikely in light of
the Supreme Court’s view (e.g., Orr vs. Orr, 440 U.S. 268) that sex-specific alimony payments are unconstitutional.
So, while some judges might use whether one spouse earns more than the other as a factors in setting alimony and
child support payments, such criteria cannot constitutionally be expressed in a gender-specific way.
16
For misreporting to generate the pattern in Figure 1, it would need to be the case that the respondents are less
willing to say that the wife earns more than the husband, which by itself would suggests the importance of gender
identity. Still, we wish to show that gender identity influences actual relative income rather than only the self-reports.

9

.02

.04

Fraction

.06

.08

Figure 3: Distribution of relative income (US administrative data)

0

.2
.4
.6
.8
Share of household income earned by the wife

1

Service.17 SIPP consists of a series of national panels, each representative of the US civilian,
noninstitutionalized population. For each married couple, we use the observation from the first
year that the couple is in the panel. We include all married couples where both the husband and
the wife earn positive income and are between 18 and 65 years of age. This leaves us with 73,654
couple-level observations. The data includes observations from 1984 to 2004. For both the husband
and the wife, the measure of their individual income is total labor and self-employment income.18
The distribution of relative income is qualitatively the same as in Figures 1 and 2. Most
importantly, the distribution exhibits a sharp drop at the point where the wife starts to earn more
than the husband.

3.3

Administrative data from Canada

Figures 1, 2, and 3 all group relative income into twenty bins. This coarse grouping is necessary
given the somewhat limited sample size. With a much larger dataset, we would be able to group
17

Specifically, SIPP Synthetic Beta program allows researchers to directly access a version of the dataset with
“synthetic” (i.e., imputed) income variables. The Census Bureau then validates the results obtained with synthetic
data by running the same computer code on the original, confidential data. Validated results can be released to the
public. Figure 3 is based on the administrative records rather than the synthetic data.
18
The income variables that we use are from the Detailed Earnings Record (DER). Our income measure is the
sum of an individual’s (i) Non-Deferred FICA (total non-deferred earnings from jobs covered by FICA tax), (ii)
Deferred FICA (total deferred earnings from jobs covered by FICA tax), (iii) Non-Deferred Non-FICA (total nondeferred earnings from jobs not covered by FICA tax) and (iv) Deferred Non-FICA (total deferred earnings from
jobs not covered by FICA tax). More details can be found in the codebook for the SIPP Synthetic Beta available at
http://www.census.gov/sipp/SSB_Codebook.pdf.

10

Figure 4: Distribution of relative income and divorce (Canada)

relative income into more bins and thus have a more “microscopic” view of the distribution and how
it changes around 0.5. To this end, we utilize the Longitudinal Administrative Data Dictionary
(LAD). LAD is a 20% representative panel of all taxfilers in Canada. It contains administrative
information on all taxable income. We utilize data from 1983 to 2006.19
We construct a dataset where the level of observation is couple by year. We include all married
couples as long as at least one individual in the couple has strictly positive income. Our sample thus
includes over 60 million couple-year observations. Each person’s income is defined as their total
income, inclusive of labor income, investment income, pensions, net business income and other
sources. We recode any strictly negative individual income as zero. The histogram in Figure 4
depicts the distribution of relative income with the fraction of couple-years in each of the 100 bins
indicated on the left vertical axis. Note that, unlike in the previous figures, couples where the wife
or the husband has no income are included. As in the US data, Figure 4 indicates a sharp decrease
in the number of couples once the wife’s income exceeds the husband’s.
19
The advantages of this dataset relative to both the American Community Survey and SIPP are clear, but LAD
has its disadvantages as well. In particular, we were unable to gain direct access to the data or write our own code
to conduct the analyses. All of the analysis was conducted by research assistants employed by Statistics Canada.
Due to logistical obstacles with LAD we focus on publicly available US datasets for most of the paper, but in this
subsection we use the Canadian data to generate a more precise distribution of relative income.

11

Figure 4 also shows how the likelihood that a couple becomes divorced varies with relative
income. The line depicts (on the right vertical axis) the fraction of couples who divorce during a
given year. In particular, we code a couple-year i, t as divorcing in year t if the couple was married
in year t and both spouses are alive but not married to each other in year t + 1. Remarkably,
divorce rate seems independent of relative income as long as the wife earns less than the husband,
but once the wife earns more than the husband, the divorce rate increases with relative income.20
The magnitude of the increase is also substantial, with the divorce rate rising from around 2 percent
per year to 3 percent per year, but this pattern should be interpreted with caution since we are
not including controls for any other variables, such as the wife’s or the husband’s individual income
or age. In Section 6 we will further explore the relationship between relative income and marital
stability, albeit using a much smaller sample and a non-administrative measure of income.

4

Marriage rates and relative income

For the last forty years, marriage rates in the United States have been steadily declining. Between
1970 and 2008, the fraction of young adults who are currently married decreased by 30 to 50
percentage points among all race, gender and education groups (Autor 2010).21 Over the same
period, women’s income has greatly increased relative to that of men’s. Results from the previous
section suggest a potential link between these two trends: if men or women dislike unions where the
husband earns less than the wife, as women command a greater share of labor income, marriages
may become less appealing and thus less common. The lower prevalence of marriage could be due
to men or women choosing not to get married or due to the dissolution of existing marital unions.
In this section, we analyze how the share of individuals who are currently married varies with
the relative distribution of men’s and women’s potential earnings. Throughout the section, we use
1970 to 2000 data from the US Census and the American Community Survey 3-year aggregate
(2008 to 2010). We assign individuals to marriage markets based on the pattern of homophily
in marriage: most marriages occur between men and women who are of the same race and are
of similar age and education.22 Moreover, marriages tend to form between individuals who live
20

There is also a curious small spike in the distribution of relative income and a dip in the likelihood of divorce at
the point where the wife and the husband earn exactly the same amount. We suspect there is some omitted factor
(e.g., the couple owns a business together) that accounts for this.
21
Part of this decrease is due to delay in marriage, but the fraction of older adults who are married has also been
declining.
22
Our approach to classifying marriage markets is similar to that used in Charles and Luoh (2010) and Loughran
(2002).

12

close to each other. Accordingly, we define marriage markets based on the state of residence, race,
age group, and education group. The three race groups we consider are (non-Hispanic) whites,
(non-Hispanic) blacks, and Hispanics.23 The three age groups are (i) 22 to 31 for women and 24
to 33 for men (ii) 32 to 41 for women and 34 to 43 for men and (iii) 42 to 51 for women and 44
to 53 for men. The two education groups are (i) high school degree or less and (ii) some college
or more. Appendix Table 1 documents sorting along these dimensions. For example, 98% of wives
who are white are married to a husband who is white,24 73% of wives with a high school degree or
less are married to a husband with similar educational qualifications,25 and 76% of wives aged 22
to 31 are married to a husband aged 24 to 33.26 Overall, 56% of all marriages are between a man
and woman from the same marriage market.
Given a particular marriage market, we wish to know how the changes in women’s income
relative to that of men affect marriage market outcomes. For each marriage market m and year
t ∈ {1970, 1980, 1990, 2000, 2010} we compute how likely it is, when a woman encounters a man,
that her income exceeds his. Specifically, given woman i and man j, consider a binary variable that
takes value 1 if i’s income exceeds j’s. We define P rW omanEarnsM oremt as the mean of this
variable taken across all possible couples. Operationally, we construct this variable by randomly
drawing 50,000 women and men with replacement and computing the share of couples where the
woman earns more than the man.
We consider several measures of income. First, we use individuals’ actual earnings, where we
code an individual as having zero income if he or she is not in the labor force. Second, we construct
a measure of predicted earnings based on demographic characteristics. In particular, within each
marriage market, we assign each woman and man in a census year to a demographic group defined
based on age (three-year intervals), education (less than high school, high-school, some college,
college, more than college), race, and state of residence. We then assign potential income to each
individual by drawing from the earnings distribution within those in the individual’s demographic
group who have positive income. Finally, for our preferred specification, we construct distributions
of relative income based on a Bartik-style instrument to isolate the variation in relative income
which is plausibly unrelated to the factors that directly affect the marriage market.
Across all census years and marriage markets, the likelihood that a randomly chosen woman
23

We drop individuals of other races.
The fraction of married women in a same-race marriage is 97% and 82% for blacks and Hispanics, respectively.
For a broader discussion of same-race marriages in the United States, see Fisman et al. (2008).
25
This fraction is 76% for wives with some college or more.
26
These fractions are 70% and 68% for the other two age groups.
24

13

earns more than a randomly chosen man is about 0.25 (using either measure of income). This
likelihood has increased steadily over time, going from 11-14% in 1970 to about 31-32% in 2010.27
More importantly for our purposes, these dynamics have varied across marriage markets.28 Thus,
there is ample variation in P rW omanEarnsM oremt even when we include marriage market and
year fixed effects. Note that this residual variation stems both from compositional shifts within
a marriage market over time and from shocks that differentially affect men and women within
a marriage market. When we turn to our instrumental variables approach, we will isolate the
component of the latter source of variation which stems for US-wide changes in labor demand
across industries.
Our baseline OLS specification is the following:

M aleM arriedmt = β1 × P rW omanEarnsM oremt

(1)

+ β2 × lnW omensIncomemt + β3 × lnM ensIncomemt
+ δt + δt × AgeGroupm + δt × EduGroupm + δt × Racem + δt × Statem
+ αm + mt
The unit of observation is a marriage market in a census year. M aleM arriedmt is the share of
males who are currently married.29 Variables lnW omensIncomemt and lnM ensIncomemt are the
logs of the average female and male income, respectively. All specifications include marriage market
fixed effects (αm ) and year fixed effects (δt ) interacted with the age group, the education group,
the race, and the state of residence. We include these interaction with year fixed effects because
the relationship between demographic variables and marriage rates may have changed over time.
Standard errors are clustered by state and each observation is weighted by the number of women
in the marriage market.
This baseline specification is in Column (1) of Table 1. The estimate of β1 is −0.181 and is
marginally significant (p = 0.078). Column (2) includes a set of additional marriage market by year
controls: the sex ratio, male and female incarceration rate, average years of schooling for men and
women, and the number of men and women in the market. With this specification, the estimated


effect becomes stronger β̂1 = −0.307 and highly significant (p < 0.01). Finally, in Column (3)
27

See Appendix Table 2 for summary statistics.
See Appendix Table 3.
29
We get similar results if we use the share of females who are married.
28

14

we control for men and women’s income more flexibly, including the income at each decile, i.e.,
the 10th to 90th percentile of the distribution of both men and women’s income in the marriage
market that year. The estimate of β1 is −0.192 (p < 0.05). Thus, all three specifications point to
the importance of gender identity in individuals’ decision on whether to get married.
In Columns (4) through (6) we consider the same three specifications, but we construct the
variable P rW omanEarnsM oremt using potential income. Once again, the estimate of β1 is consistently negative. Moreover, the estimate is very stable across the three specifications, ranging from
−0.214 to −0.199, and always highly significant (p < 0.01).
The identifying assumption behind these specifications is that P rW omanEarnsM oremt is uncorrelated with unobserved shocks to factors that might influence marriage rates. The robustness
of our estimates to the inclusion of flexible controls for the distribution of men and women’s income
(Columns (3) and (6)) ameliorates concerns about many omitted variables, but to provide further
support for our causal interpretation, we now turn to an instrumental variables approach.
Historically, men and women have tended to work in different industries (e.g., women are
overrepresented in services and men in construction and manufacturing). Based on the industry
composition of the state and the industry-wide wage changes at the national level, we can thus
isolate sex-specific variation in local wages that is driven solely by aggregate labor demand, which
is presumably uncorrelated with the characteristics of workers in a given marriage market level. This
approach builds on previous work by Bartik (1991) and Aizer (2010). In contrast to previous uses
of the “Bartik instrument,” which focus on changes in average wages, we construct an instrument
for the entire distribution of potential income in each marriage market.
We begin by calculating average yearly wages by gender and marriage market as follows:
g
w̄mt
=

X

g
g
γrejbs
× wreajt,−s

j

where g indexes gender, r race, e education-group, a age-group, j industry30 , t census year, and s
g
state. Variable wreajt,−s
is the average wage in year t ≥ b in industry j for workers of a given gender,

race, education, and age-group in the nation, excluding state s. Variable γ grejbs is the fraction of
individuals with gender g, race r, and education e in state s who are working in industry j, as of
the base-year b.
30

We consider 12 industry groups: (1) Agriculture (2) Mining (3) Construction (4) Manufacturing (5) Transportation (6) Wholesale Trade (7) Retail Trade (8) Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate (9) Business, Personal, and Repair
Services (10) Entertainment and Recreation Services (11) Professional Services (12) Public Administration.

15

We consider two base years, 1970 and 1980. Using 1970 provides an additional decade of data,
yielding a greater sample of marriage markets. The 1970 Census has many fewer observations than
g
the 1980 Census,31 however, so the estimates of γrejbs
are less noisy when we use 1980 as the base

year. We report results using both base years.
g
Variable w̄mt
is strongly correlated with the actual mean income of gender g in marriage market

m in year t: states that initially had relatively more women in industries that subsequently experienced wage growth at the national level tend to have more growth in women’s income relative to
g
that of men. But, unlike the variation in actual income, variation in w̄mt
over time is driven by

aggregate shocks and is thus plausibly orthogonal to factors that might directly influence marriage
rates in market m.
Similarly, we wish to construct a measure of the entire distribution of income by gender which is
driven solely by aggregate shocks. We modify the standard Bartik instrument to compute predicted
yearly wages at the p = {5th, 10th, 15th, ..., 90th, 95th} percentile.
Specifically, let
g,p
w̄mt
=

X

g,p
g
× wreajt,−s
γrejbs

j
g,p
where wreajt,−s
is the pth percentile of the national income distribution in year t in industry j for

workers of a given gender, race, education, and age-group, excluding state s. A priori, it is not
g,p
clear that w̄mt
will be correlated with the pth percentile of gender g’s distribution in market mt.

For example, if half the women in a demographic group m work in some industry j high where the
minimum income is y high and half the women in m work in some industry j low where the maximum
income is y low < y high , increase in the 5th percentile of wages in industry j high will not raise the 5th
percentile of wages of women in market m. This example, however, has little empirical relevance –
g,p
a posteriori, the distributions defined by {w̄mt
}p indeed correlate with the actual distributions of

income. In other words, the Bartik instrument has a strong “first stage” when it is used to predict
how the distribution of potential income varies across markets.32
This modification to the standard Bartik measure allows us to construct a measure of
P rW omanEarnsM oremt whose variation over time is orthogonal to local labor market condig,p
tions. Specifically, we draw from the distributions defined by {w̄mt
}p , and calculate the likelihood
31

The 1970 Census is based on a 1% sample whereas the 1980 Census is based on a 5% sample of the population.
Appendix Tables 4A and 4B reports the first-stage regression estimates of the mean and selected percentiles
of predicted lnM ensIncome and lnW omensIncome on the corresponding moments of the 1970 and 1980 Bartik
predicted lnM ensIncome and lnW omensIncome. The coefficient estimates range from 0.3 to 1 and are all significant
at the 1% level.
32

16

that a randomly chosen women earns more than a randomly chosen man. Column (7) reports the
g
g,p
baseline specification from Equation (1) using w̄mt
and w̄mt
with the 1970 base year to construct

measures of P rW omanEarnsM oremt , lnW omensIncomemt , and lnM ensIncomemt . As in other
specifications, the estimate of β1 is negative and significant (p < 0.01). Moreover, given this esti

mate β̂1 = −0.438 , the effect of the likelihood that a woman earns more than a man on marriage
rates is economically significant. A 10 percentage point increase in this likelihood decreases marriage rates by 4.4 percentage points. In Column (8) we include a set of additional marriage market
by year controls. The estimate declines to -0.317, but remains significant at the 1% level. Finally,
in Column (9), we include controls for the predicted yearly wages of the 10th to 90th percentile for
wives and husbands in the marriage market that year. The estimate of β̂1 declines to -0.234 and
is no longer statistically significant. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the estimate remains sizable
and is economically significant (the magnitude is similar to that of the baseline specification using
predicted earnings in Column (4)). Finally, in Columns (10)-(12) we consider the same specifications as in Columns (7)-(9) but with 1980 as the base year for the Bartik instrument. All of the
estimates are again negative and statistically significant (p < 0.05 for all specifications).
Taken together, these results highlight the importance of the relative distribution of men and
women’s income in marriage markets. The estimate from our preferred specification (Column (12))
implies that the secular increase in the aggregate likelihood that a woman earns more than a man
explains 23 percent of the decline in the rates of marriage from 1970 to 2010.33
Note that the relative distribution of men and women’s income might influence the formation of
marriage even in the absence of gender identity considerations. In Beckerian models of the marriage
market, one of the key benefits of marriage is specialization. Specialization, in turn, is more valuable
if a man and a woman have different opportunities in the labor market. As P rW omanEarnsM ore
increases, there are smaller “gains from trade” that can be achieved through marriage. This force
alone might account for our negative estimate of β1 . That said, evidence we present in other
sections of this paper is in direct conflict with the standard models of the marriage market. For
example, the relationship between relative income and the division of household chores (Section 7)
is the opposite of what one would expect in the absence of gender identity considerations. Thus,
the view that couples have an aversion to the wife earning more than the husband provides a more
parsimonious explanation of the various patterns we present in this paper.
33

The coefficient −0.347 multiplied by the 20 percentage point increase in P rW omanEarnsM ore (Appendix Table
2) is 23% of the 30 percentage point decrease in marriage rates.

17

5

Women’s labor supply and relative income

The previous sections establish that couples are less likely to form if the wife’s income would exceed
the husband’s. When such couples do form, we might expect gender identity to distort labor market
outcomes. A wife whose income would exceed her husband’s may choose to stay at home so as to
be less threatening. Or, she may distort her labor supply in other ways – e.g., work fewer hours or
take a job that is less demanding and pays less. In this section we analyze such potential distortions
in the wife’s labor force participation and labor market outcomes.
Throughout this section, we use data on married couples from the 1970 to 2000 US Census
and the American Community Survey 3-year aggregate (2008 to 2010). We restrict the sample
to those couples where the husband is working and both the wife and the husband are between
18 and 65 years of age. For each couple i, we estimate the distribution of the wife’s potential
earnings as follows. For p ∈ {5, ..., 95} ,we define wip as the pth percentile of earnings among
working women in the wife’s demographic group that year. We assign the demographic group based
on age (five-year intervals), education (less than high school, high-school, some college, college,
more than college), race, and state of residence. We then define a variable P rW if eEarnsM orei =
1 P
p 1{wip >husbIncomei } where husbIncomei is the husband’s income. Thus, whether the wife works
19
or not, P rW if eEarnsM orei captures the likelihood that she would earn more than her husband
if her income were a random draw from the population of working women in her demographic
group.34
Summary statistics for this sample are presented in Appendix Table 5. Across all census years,
the mean of P rW if eEarnsM orei is 0.18. Not surprisingly, this probability has increased monotonically over time, from 0.09 in the 1970 census to 0.26 in the 2010 census. Across all years, about
66 percent of wives are participating in the labor force. As we mentioned in the introduction, wives’
labor participation increased steeply between 1970 and 1990 (going from 44 percent to 70 percent),
but has essentially plateaued since 1990, with 74 percent of wives in the labor force as of 2010.

5.1

Labor force participation

We first examine wives’ labor force participation. One of the strongest ways to conform to traditional gender roles is for the wife to stay at home while the husband plays the role of breadwinner.
34

As we discuss in Subsection 5.2, the income of the women who do work may also be distorted by gender identity
considerations. Thus, the distribution of income we identify is not the distribution of potential income, as it is usually
construed, but rather the distribution of the income that the wife would likely earn were she to join the labor force.

18

Might it be the case that when gender identity is threatened by the possibility that the wife would
be the primary provider, some couples retreat to traditional gender roles?
Given a couple i, let wif eLF Pi be a binary variable equal to 1 if the wife is in the labor force.
In Column (1) of Table 2, we consider, as the baseline specification, a linear probability model

wif eLF Pi = β0 + β1 × P rW if eEarnsM orei
+wip + β2 × lnHusbIncomei + β3 × Xi + εi
where lnHusbIncomei is the logarithm of husband’s income, wip are controls for the wife’s potential
income at each of the vigintiles, and Xi represents non-income controls: year fixed effects, state
fixed effects, the wife and the husband’s race, the wife and the husband’s 5-year age-group, and the
wife and the husband’s education group.35 Standard errors are clustered by the wife’s demographic
group (which pins down the distribution of her potential income). The baseline estimate of β1 is
−0.254 (p < 0.01).
The husband’s income might impact the marginal utility of household income non-linearly, so
in Column (2) we include a cubic polynomial in lnHusbIncomei . The estimate of β1 falls but
remains economically and statistically significant at −0.182 (p < 0.01). Also, the impact of the
wife’s potential income on her labor supply might interact with the husband’s income for reasons
that are separate from the couple’s concern that she will earn more than he does. Accordingly, in

Column (3) we add a control for the median of the wife’s predicted income wi50 interacted with
the income of the husband. The estimate of β1 is unaffected.
The main concern is that a woman who is willing to marry a man whose income is below her
potential income might have unobservable characteristics that keep her out of the labor force. For
example, highly educated women that marry men with lower education and low earnings might be
systematic underachievers or systematically lack the confidence to participate in the labor market;
such women might be relatively more drawn towards home production and child-rearing activities.
We consider two approaches to deal with this concern.
First, we examine the sensitivity of β̂1 to the inclusion of other controls. In Column (4), we
include as a control an indicator variable that equals 1 if the wife reports having had any child. In
Column (5) we include indicator variables for the full interaction of the wife’s demographic group
35

We use five education categories - less than high school, high school, some college, college degree and more than
a college degree.

19

and the husband’s demographic group. The inclusion of these additional controls essentially leaves
the estimate of β1 unchanged. The fact that our estimate appears very stable across specifications
suggests that, to the extent that the observable characteristics in our data are representative of
unobservables, the negative value of β̂1 is not due to an omitted variable bias (Murphy and Topel
1990, Altonji et al. 2005).
Second, focusing on the data from the American Community Survey, we attempt to isolate the
variation in P rW if eEarnsM orei that is driven by changes in relative income that took place after
the couple got married. Unlike the earlier Census data, the American Community Survey contains
information on the year of current marriage. We proxy for relative income of spouses at the time
of marriage as follows. For each couple, we let tm be the census year that is the closest to the
year of marriage. (We drop couples for whom the difference between the year of marriage and the
closest available census year is more than 5 years.) We then construct the distribution of potential
income, in year tm , for both the husband {hpi } and the wife {wip }, using the same procedure as
above. Based on these two distributions, we define a variable P rW if eEarnsM oreAtM arriagei =
1 P P
p
q 1{wip >hqi } , which captures the probability that, based on the couples’ demographics, the
361
wife’s potential income exceeded that of the husband at the time of marriage.
We first replicate the specification from Column (2) for each decade (Columns (6) - (10))
and for the subsample of the 2010 sample for which we can construct relative earnings at marriage (Column (11)). Our main specification is in Column (12), where we include as controls
P rW if eEarnsM oreAtM arriagei and the vigintiles of the potential earnings for both the husband and the wife at marriage. With these controls, the estimate of β1 stems from variation in
P rW if eEarnsM orei that is driven by the changes in the wife’s and the husband’s relative income
since marriage. This specification thus mitigates first-order concerns about selection.36 Comparison of Columns (11) and (12) shows that the estimate of β1 is unaffected by the inclusion of these
controls. Overall, while we do not have an exogenous source of variation in P rW if eEarnsM orei ,
the data suggest that married women may sometimes stay out of the labor force so as to avoid a
situation where they would become the primary breadwinner.
Columns (6) through (10) allow β1 and the coefficients on the control variables to vary across
the decades. This is potentially important as factors that influence women’s labor supply might
change over time. For each time period, we find a negative and statistically significant relationship
36

Two concerns still remain. First, our proxy for relative income at marriage is imperfect as we do not know the
couples’ actual income at the time. Second, to the extent that couples can predict how their relative income will
evolve after marriage, some concerns about selection are still present.

20

between the likelihood that the wife is in the workforce and the likelihood that she would earn
more than her husband were she to work. The estimate of β1 peaks (in absolute value) in 1980 and
appears to be declining over time. One possible interpretation of this trend is that gender identity
considerations played a larger role in the earlier decades.
Based on the sample that includes all years, Columns (2)-(5) indicate that a 10 percentage point
increase in the probability that a wife would earn more than her husband reduces the likelihood
that she participates in the labor force by about 1.8 percentage points. Put differently, a one
standard deviation increase (across all years) in the probability that a wife would earn more than
her husband reduces the likelihood that she participates in the labor force by around 4.5 percentage
points.

5.2

Gap between potential and realized income

Having the wife leave the labor force is a very costly way to restore traditional gender roles. It
would be less costly for the wife to simply reduce her earnings to a level that does not threaten
the husband’s status as the primary breadwinner. In this subsection, we present evidence for such
behavior.
Given a couple i, let incomeGapij =

wif eIncomei −wif eP otentiali
wif eP otentiali

where wif eP otentiali is simply

the mean of the distribution of potential earnings for the wife, as defined in the previous subsection.
To emphasize the distortions in income for women who do not leave the workforce, we focus on
the sample of couples where the woman is working. These results are reported in Table 3, which
follows exactly the same structure as Table 2.
In particular, in Column (1) of Table 3, we consider the following baseline OLS specification:

incomeGapi = β0 + β1 × P rW if eEarnsM orei
+wip + β2 × lnHusbIncomei + β3 × Xi + εi .
The estimate of β1 is -0.094 (p < 0.01). Including a cubic polynomial of lnHusbIncomei in Column
(2) strengthens the effect: β̂1 = −0.174 (p < 0.01). Women that are more threatening to their
husband given their potential systematically underperform in the labor market. A 10 percentage
point increase in the probability that a wife would would earn more than her husband increases
the gap between her actual earnings and her potential earnings by 1.7 percentage points. Put

21

differently, a one standard deviation increase in this probability increases the gap between actual
and potential earnings by 4.4 percentage points.
Columns (3)-(12) of Table 3 consider the same robustness checks as in the previous subsection.
In Column (3) we add an interaction between the median of the wife’s potential income and the
husband’s income. In Column (4) we further include an indicator variable that equals 1 if the wife
reports having had a child. In Column (5), we include fixed effects for the wife’s demographic
group dummies interacted with the husband’s demographic group dummies. Columns (2) to (5)
show that the coefficient is quite stable once we include a polynomial control for the husband’s
income.
In Columns (6) to (10), we present estimates of β1 separately by year. The estimate of β1 varies
somewhat across decades, but, unlike in Table 2, no obvious trend over time emerges from the data.
In Columns (11) and (12), we assess the sensitivity of β̂1 in 2010 to including controls for
P rW if eEarnsM oreAtM arriagei and the vigintiles of the potential earnings for the husband and
the wife at marriage. As we mentioned in the previous subsection, the estimate of β1 in Column
(12) stems from variation in P rW if eEarnsM orei that is driven by the changes in the wife’s and
the husband’s relative income since marriage. The impact of P rW if eEarnsM orei on incomeGapi
remains negative and statistically significant.
To supplement this analysis, in Appendix Table 6, we also consider the wife’s working hours as
an alternative outcome of interest. In particular, in columns (1) and (2) of Appendix Table 6, we
replicate the econometric specifications in columns (4) and (5) of Table 3, respectively, using the
logarithm of the wife’s reported hours worked in the prior week, lnHoursW orkedi , as the dependent
variable. We restrict the sample to couples for which incomeGapi is non-missing. We find a negative
and statistically significant relationship between lnHoursW orkedi and P rW if eEarnsM orei . A
10 percentage point increase in the probability that a wife would would earn more than her husband
decreases her working hours by about 0.6 percentage points. In the remaining columns of Appendix
Table 6, we show that this labor supply response on the intensive margin may account for about a
third of the negative relationship between incomeGapi and P rW if eEarnsM orei .37
In summary, women’s labor supply decisions seem to be distorted in situations where there is a
threat that they might become the primary bread winner. In the next section we document some
of the costs that arise when the woman does earn more than the husband. The presence of these
37

Columns (3) and (4) of Appendix Table 6 replicate columns (4) and (5) of Table 3 on the subsample of couples for
which lnHoursW orkedi is non-missing. Columns (5) and (6) of Appendix Table 6 further include lnHoursW orkedi
as an additional control.

22

costs provides a potential “rationalization” for the labor market distortions that we document here.

6

Marital stability and relative income

Does relative income affect marital stability? To address this question, we exploit the rich information on marital satisfaction and marital outcomes from the National Survey of Families and
Households (NSFH). The NSFH is a nationally representative survey of US households and includes
approximately 9,500 households that were followed over three waves from 1988 to 2002. We use
data from the first two waves (1987-88 and 1992-94) of the survey.38 We restrict our analysis to
couples where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old and at least one
person in the household has positive income. Our sample consists of approximately 4,000 married
couples.
The NSFH has three questions on marital stability. The first question asks: “Taking things all
together, how would you describe your marriage?” Respondents can choose answers from a scale of 1
(very unhappy) to 7 (very happy). Close to 50% of wives and husbands reported being “very happy”
in their current marriage. We define a binary variable happyM arriagei that indicates whether the
answer is “very happy.” The second question asks: “During the past year, have you ever thought that
your marriage might be in trouble?” We define a binary variable marriageT roublei that indicates
an affirmative response. The third question asks: “During the past year, have you and your
husband/wife discussed the idea of separating?” We define a binary variable discussSeparationi
that indicates whether the answer is affirmative.
The NSFH also provides information on the wife’s and the husband’s labor income,39 on
the basis of which we define self-explanatory variables lnW if eIncomei , lnHusbIncomei , and
lnT otIncomei .40 For each couple we also compute relativeIncomei , the share of the household
income earned by the wife. In Wave 1, the mean of relativeIncomei is 0.27 and it exceeds

1
2

in 15%

of households. We define wif eEarnsM orei as a binary variable equal to 1 if relativeIncomei > 21 .
38

We do not use Wave 3 of the NSFH since, due to budgetary constraints, it is based on a different sampling rule
that substantially alters the profile of the respondents.
39
The earnings measures include the wage, salary, and self-employment income. In the NSFH, the income information was collected via self-administered questionnaires completed separately by the main respondent and his/her
spouse. When possible, the questionnaire was given to the spouse at the beginning of the main interview, to be
conducted in another room. If this was not possible, the questionnaire was left in a sealed envelope for the spouse to
complete at a later time. See http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/cde/nsfhwp/nsfh1.pdf for further details.
40
Both in this and in the next section, we set lnW if eIncome = −1 if the wife’s income is equal to zero, and in all
regressions we include an indicator variable for whether the wife’s income was zero. We apply the same procedure
for the husband’s income.

23

Summary statistics for the main variables used in the analysis are in Appendix Table 7.
In Table 4, we examine how the relative income within the household affects answers to these
survey questions. Our baseline specification is a linear probability model
Yi = β0 + β1 × wif eEarnsM orei
+β2 × lnW if eIncomei + β3 × lnHusbIncomei + β4 × lnT otIncomei + β5 × Xi + εi
where Yi is the answer to the survey question, Xi represents non-income controls: region fixed
effects,41 indicator variables for whether the wife is working, whether the husband is working, the
wife and the husband’s race and education groups, and a quadratic in the wife’s and the husband’s
age.42 As Column (1) of Table 4 shows, the wife tends to be less happy with the marriage, is more
likely to report that her marriage is in trouble, and is more likely to have discussed separation in
the past year if she earns more than her husband. In Column (2), we add more flexible income
controls, namely cubic polynomials of lnW if eIncomei and lnHusbIncomei . The estimate of β1 is
unaffected. Since gender identity is more plausibly associated with a prescription that “the husband
should earn more than the wife” than with a prescription that “it is better for the wife to earn 20%
rather than 30% of the household income,” the gender identity explanation for β̂1 < 0 implies that
the variation in relativeIncomei that does not change the value of wif eEarnsM orei should have a
lesser effect on happiness. Accordingly, in Column (3) we include relativeIncomei as an additional
control to the baseline specification. The impact of wif eEarnsM ore on happyM arriage is now
somewhat smaller and is no longer statistically significant, but the impact on the other two survey
questions, marriageT rouble and discussSeparation is unaffected. Taken together, it seems that
relative income within a household matters only if it makes the wife the primary breadwinner.
In Columns (4)-(6) we consider the same three specifications, but with the husbands’ responses
to the same questions as the outcome variable. The results are largely similar. Finally, in the last
three columns of table 4, we pool the wives’ and the husbands’ responses. In these specifications,
we include an indicator variable for whether the respondent is the wife or the husband and we
cluster standard errors at the level of the couple. In our preferred specification (Column (9)), we
find that if the wife earns more than the husband, spouses are 7 percentage points (15%) less likely
to report that their marriage is very happy, 8 percentage points (32%) more likely to report marital
41

State identifiers are not available in the public-use version of the NSFH.
We weight the observations using the couple-level weights. The NSFH provides two sets of weights: a person-level
weight and a couple-level weight. Results are similar whether we use no weights, person-level weights, or couple-level
weights.
42

24

troubles in the past year, and 6 percentage points (46%) more likely to have discussed separating
in the past year.
At first thought, one might be tempted to use the difference between the coefficients on the
wives’ and the husbands’ responses to determine whether it is the wife or the husband who dislikes
the reversal of traditional gender roles. We suspect that such a comparison is not particularly
useful. If say the husband is initially the one who is unhappy, he may start to behave in the ways
that make the wife unhappy, perhaps even more so. Such a possibility echoes Al Roth’s Iron Law
of Marriage: you cannot be happier than your spouse (Roth 2008).
Next, we turn away from survey data to the revealed stability of marriage. For each couple
in Wave 1 (1987-88), we construct a binary variable divorcedi which is equal to 1 if the couple is
separated or divorced when they are re-interviewed43 in Wave 2 (1992-94). In Column (1) of Table
5, we consider the baseline linear probability model:
divorcedi = β0 + β1 × wif eEarnsM orei
+β2 × lnW if eIncomei + β3 × lnHusbIncomei + β4 × lnT otIncomei + β5 × Xi + εi
where all of the independent variables are measured in Wave 1. In Column (2), we control more
flexibly for the wife’s and the husband’s earnings (Column (2)). In both specifications we find
that when the wife earns more than the husband, the likelihood of divorce increases by about
6 percentage points (p < 0.05). Since 12% of couples in the sample get divorced by Wave 2, this
estimate implies that having the wife earn more than the husband increases the likelihood of divorce
by 50 percent. In Column (3), we include a control for relative income. The estimate decreases
slightly to about 5 percentage points and becomes less significant (p = 0.11). Overall, our data
suggests that departing from the traditional gender roles increases the likelihood of divorce.44

43

One concern is that there may be selective attrition by divorce status. If divorced couples are less likely to remain
in the panel, we would underestimate the overall tendency to divorce, but the estimate of our key coefficient would
be unaffected. Moreover, we find that there is no relationship between attrition and measures of marital stability.
The overall attrition rate is about 10%.
44
Separation or divorce occurs when the marriage fully breaks down and can be regarded as the end-point of marital
instability. Among couples that remain married in both survey waves, we can also examine whether wif eEarnsM ore
in Wave 1 is associated with a deterioration in reported marital stability. We find some evidence that this is true
(although most of the point estimates are not statistically significant). Conditional on Wave 1 responses, in marriages
where the wife earns more than the husband, wives and husbands generally report (in Wave 2) that their marriages
are less happy and that they have discussed separation. We do not find similar effects for the marriageT rouble
outcome (see Appendix Table 8).

25

7

Home production and relative income

Traditional gender roles also contain prescriptions about the division of chores within the households. In this section, we explore whether, when the wife earns more than the husband, the couple
adjusts the contributions to home production activities so as to alleviate the sense of gender-role
reversal.
We use data from the ATUS/CPS, covering the years 2003 to 2011. As in the previous section,
we restrict our analysis to couples where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65
years old and at least one person in the household has positive income. For each individual in the
sample, we compute the total amount of time spent in non-market work and child care, measured
in the number of hours per week. Following Aguiar and Hurst (2007), we define total number of
hours spent in non-market work (choresi ) as the sum of time spent in “core” non-market work
(which includes activities such as meal preparation and cleanup, doing laundry, ironing, dusting,
vacuuming, and indoor household cleaning), time spent “obtaining goods and services” (such as
grocery shopping), and time spent in “other” home production activities such as home maintenance,
outdoor cleaning, vehicle repair, gardening, and pet care. We define total number of hours spent
in child care (childcarei ) as the sum of time spent in primary child care (such as changing diapers
and feeding the child), educational child care (such as helping a child with her homework), and
recreational child care (such as playing games with the children or taking them to the zoo). We
define totN onM arketW orki as the sum choresi and childcarei .
For each individual i in the sample, we define lnW if eIncomei , lnHusbIncomei and lnT otIncomei
based on the weekly earnings reported in the CPS interviews. Based on these earnings we define
relativeIncomei and wif eEarnsM orei as before. Summary statistics are presented in Appendix
Table 9. Wives spend on average of 24.1 hours and 9.4 hours per week on chores and child care,
respectively. For husbands, these numbers are 15.7 hours and 5.1 hours, respectively. Mean relative
income is 0.34 and the wife earns more than the husband in 16 percent of the couples.
Ideally, we would like to compare the wife-husband gap in time spent on home production across
couples where the wife earns more than the husband and those where she does not. Unfortunately,
the ATUS/CPS only includes one respondent per household. Thus, to analyze how relative income
impacts the division of home production, we will focus on the interaction between the impact of
gender and the impact of relative income on time use. Specifically, in Column (1) of Panel (a) in
Table 6, we consider the baseline OLS model:

26

totN onM arketW ork i = β0 + β1 × f emalei × wif eEarnsM orei
+β2 × f emalei + β3 × wif eEarnsM orei
+β4 × lnW if eIncomei + β5 × f emalei × lnW if eIncomei
+β6 × lnHusbIncomei + β7 × f emalei × lnHusbIncomei
+β8 × lnT otIncomei + β9 × f emalei × lnT otIncomei
+β10 × Xi + β11 × f emalei × Xi + εi
where Xi includes year, state, and day of the week fixed effects, indicator variables for whether the
wife is working, whether the husband is working, the wife and the husband’s race and education
groups, and a quadratic in the wife’s and the husband’s age. Our coefficient of interest is β1 . A
positive estimate of β1 would indicate that, ceteris paribus, in couples where the wife earns more
than the husband, she also spends more hours doing non-market work and childcare. The estimate
of β1 is 1.36 (p < 0.05). In Column (2) we include more flexible cubic polynomial controls for the
wife’s and the husband’s income. The estimate of β1 is similar at 1.64 (p < 0.05). In Column (3)
we include relativeIncomei as a control. The estimate of β1 increases to 2.19 (p < 0.01). Thus,
once again we see that relative income is particularly important if it implies a reversal in traditional
gender roles.45
In Column (4), we add controls for the presence of children of different ages in the household
to the baseline specification. Specifically, we add indicator variables for whether there is no child,
the youngest child is younger than 3, the youngest child is between 4 and 6 years of age, or the
youngest child is older than 6. The estimate remains largely unchanged. Finally, our results are
robust to restricting the sample to time-use during week-days only (Column (5)). In Panels (b)
and (c) we consider the same specifications but consider the two components of total non-market
work, choresi and childcarei , separately. The estimates suggest that most if not all of the effects
on total non-market work are driven by chores rather than childcare.
45

One potential source of an omitted variable bias would be that in couples that are “more traditional,” women
are less likely to earn more than their husbands and are more likely to take on a larger share of housework. This force
would bias the estimate of β1 downwards, in the opposite direction of our finding. Similarly, one might be concerned
that that there are unobservable factors that lower the husband’s income (below his potential and below the wife’s
income) and simultaneously lower his ability to do household chores. Such factors, however, are not prevalent; in the
overall sample, when the husband’s realized income is further below his potential income, he spends more time on
chores.

27

In summary, our analysis of the time use data suggests that gender identity considerations may
lead a woman who seems threatening to her husband because she earns more than he does to
engage in a larger share of home production activities, particularly household chores. Akerlof and
Kranton (2000) report that women do not undertake less than half of the housework even if they
work or earn more than the husband. Our finding is even more striking; the (reverse) gender gap
in non-market work is greater when the wife earns more than the husband.

8

Conclusion

The evidence presented in this paper is consistent with the view that gender identity norms, and
in particular the norm that “a man should earn more than his wife,” impact a wide range of social
and economic outcomes. In particular, we argue that the prevalence of this norm helps explain the
distribution of relative income within US households, the patterns of marriage, divorce and women’s
labor market participation, and the division of home production activities between husbands and
wives.
By definition, the gender identity norm that we focus on in this paper would be of no relevance in
a world where a woman could never earn more than her (potential or actual) husband. The relative
gains in women’s labor market opportunities over the last half century, however, have turned
gender identity into an increasing relevant constraint, with real economic and social consequences.
We suspect that the changes in women’s relative income are particularly important because they
happened quickly in comparison to the slow-moving social norms and concepts of gender.
While our empirical work focuses on the United States, rapid gains in women’s labor market
opportunities are not unique to this country. Even more rapid changes have taken place in developed
Asian countries, such as Korea and Japan. At the same time, these Asian countries have experienced
large declines in marriage rates and fertility among educated women. As suggested by Hwang
(2012), the interaction of economic growth and intergenerational transmission of gender attitudes
might play an important part in these developments.
In future work, we would like to better understand the long-run determinants of gender identity.
While the evidence in this paper suggests that the behavioral prescription that “a man should earn
more than his wife” helps explain economic and social outcomes even in the most recent decade,
this does not imply that this prescription is as strong today as it was in the past. How are gender
identity norms evolving in the face of market forces that are making those norms more costly?

28

References
[1] Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. Measuring trends in leisure: The allocation of
time over five decades. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 122(3): 969-1006.
[2] Aizer, Anna. 2010. The gender wage gap and domestic violence. American Economic
Review. 100(4): 1847-59.
[3] Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2000. Economics and identity. Quarterly
Journal of Economics. 115(3): 715-753.
[4] Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton. 2010. Identity Economics: How Our Identities Affect Our Work, Wages, and Well-being. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[5] Alm, James, Stacy Dickert-Colin, and Leslie A. Whittington. 1999. Policy watch: The
marriage penalty. Journal of Economic Perspectives. 13(3): 193-204.
[6] Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder, and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. Selection on
observed and unobserved variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools.
Journal of Political Economy. 113(1):151-184.
[7] Autor, David. 2010. U.S. labor market challenges over the longer term. Paper prepared
for the Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
[8] Bartik, Timothy. 1991. Who Benefits From State and Local Economic Development
Policies? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
[9] Becker, Gary S. 1973. A theory of marriage: Part I. Journal of Political Economy.
81(4): 813-46.
[10] Becker, Gary S. 1974. A theory of marriage: Part II. Journal of Political Economy.
82(2): S11-S26.
[11] Bertrand, Marianne. 2010. New perspectives on gender. In Handbook of Labor Economics, O. Ashenfelter and D. Card eds., pp. 1545-1592.
[12] Bittman, Michael, Paula England, Liana Sayer, Nancy Folbre, and George Matheson.
2003. When does gender trump money? Bargaining and time in household work.
American Journal of Sociology. 109: 186-214.
29

[13] Black, Sandra E. and Elizabeth Brainerd. 2004. The impact of globalization on gender
discrimination. Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 57: 540–59.
[14] Black, Sandra E. and Chinhui Juhn. 2000. The rise of female professionals: Women’s
response to rising skill demand. American Economic Review. 90(2): 450-455.
[15] Black, Sandra E. and Philip E. Strahan. 2001. The division of spoils: rent-sharing and
discrimination in a regulated industry. American Economic Review. 91: 814–31.
[16] Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2006. The U.S. gender pay gap in the 1990s:
Slowing convergence. Industrial and Labor Relations Review. 60(1): 45-66.
[17] Charles, Kerwin K. and Ming Ching Luoh. 2010. Male incarceration, the marriage
market, and female outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics. 92(3): 614-627.
[18] Cooke, Lynn Prince. 2006. “Doing” gender in context: Household bargaining and risk
of divorce in Germany and the United States. American Journal of Sociology. 112:
442-472.
[19] Fenstermaker Berk, Sarah. 1985. The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work
in American Households. New York: Plenum Press.
[20] Fernandez, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. Mothers and sons:
Preference development and female labor force dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 119 (4): 1249-1299.
[21] Fisman, Raymond, Sheena S. Iyengar, Emir Kamenica and Itamar Simonson. 2006.
Gender differences in mate selection: Evidence from a speed dating experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 121(2): 673-697.
[22] Fisman, Raymond, Sheena S. Iyengar, Emir Kamenica and Itamar Simonson. 2008.
Racial preferences in dating. Review of Economic Studies. 75(1): 117-132.
[23] Fortin, Nicole. 2005. Gender role attitudes and women’s labour market outcomes across
OECD countries. Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 21(3): 416-438.
[24] Fortin, Nicole. 2009. Gender role attitudes and women’s labor market participation:
Opting out, AIDS, and the persistent appeal of housewifery. Working paper, University
of British Columbia.
30

[25] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. The power of the pill: Oral contraceptives and women’s career and marriage decisions. Journal of Political Economy.
110(4): 730–770.
[26] Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence F. Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. The homecoming
of American college women: The reversal of the gender gap in college. Journal of
Economics Pespectives. 20:133-56.
[27] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorukoglu. 2005. Engines of liberalization. Review of Economic Studies. 72: 109–133.
[28] Gupta, Sanjiv and Michael Ash. 2008. Whose money, whose time? A nonparametric approach to modeling time spent on housework in the United States. Feminist
Economics. 14: 93-120.
[29] Loughran, David S. 2002. The effect of male wage inequality on female age at first
marriage. Review of Economics and Statistics. 84: 237-251.
[30] Heckert, D. Alex, Thomas C. Nowak, and Kay A. Snyder. 1998. The impact of husbands’ and wives’ relative earnings on marital disruption. Journal of Marriage and the
Family. 60: 690-703.
[31] Hwang, Jisoo. 2012. Housewife, “Gold Miss,” and equal: The evolution of educated
women’s role in Asia and the U.S. Working paper, Harvard University.
[32] Jalovaara, Marika. 2003. The joint effects of marriage partners’ socioeconomic positions
on the risk of divorce. Demography. 40: 67-81.
[33] Liu, Guiping and Andres Vikat. 2004. Does divorce risk depend on spouses’ relative
income? A register-based study of first marriages in Sweden in 1981-1998. MPIDR
Working paper WP 2004-010.
[34] Morrill, Melinda S. and Thayer Morrill. 2012. Intergenerational links in female labor
force participation. Labour Economics. Forthcoming.
[35] Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 1990. Efficiency wages reconsidered: Theory
and evidence. In Advances in the Theory and Measurement of Unemployment, Y. Weiss
and G. Fishelson, eds. New York: St. Martin’s Press, pp. 204-40.
31

[36] Hochschild, Arlie and Anne Machung. 1989. The Second Shift. New York: Viking.
[37] Pierce, Lamar, Michael S. Dahl, and Jimmi Nielsen. 2012. In sickness and in wealth:
Psychological and sexual costs of income comparison in marriage. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin. Forthcoming.
[38] Rogers, Stacy J. 2004. Dollars, dependency, and divorce: Four perspectives on the role
of wives’ income. Journal of Marriage and Family. 66: 59-74.
[39] Roth, Alvin E. 2008. Deferred acceptance algorithms: History, theory, practice, and
open questions. International Journal of Game Theory. 36: 537-569.
[40] Stuart, Colleen H., Sue Moon, and Tiziana Casciaro. 2011. The Oscar curse: Status
dynamics and gender differences in marital survival. Working paper, Carnegie Mellon
University.
[41] Watson, Tara and Sara McLanahan. 2011. Marriage meets the Joneses: Relative income, identity, and marital status. Journal of Human Resources. 46: 482-517.
[42] Weinberg, Bruce A. 2000. Computer use and the demand for female workers. Industrial
and Labor Relations Review. 53: 290–308.
[43] West, Candace and Don H. Zimmerman. 1987. Doing gender. Gender & Society. 1:
125-151.

32

PrWomanEarnsMore
lnWomensIncome
lnMensIncome
sexRatio
femaleIncarcerationRate
maleIncarcerationRate
femaleAvgYearsOfEducation
maleAvgYearsOfEducation
numFemales
numMales
Observations
R-squared
Control for deciles of men's and
women's income

Actual
(1)
(2)
-0.181* -0.307***
[0.101]
[0.081]
0.046*** 0.056***
[0.014]
[0.013]
0.056* 0.086***
[0.030]
[0.024]
-0.038***
[0.008]
-0.324
[0.213]
0.425***
[0.076]
0.007
[0.006]
-0.032***
[0.009]
-0.000
[0.000]
0.000
[0.000]
4,365
4,365
0.989
0.990
No

No

Table 1: Marriage Rates and Relative Income
Dependent variable: MaleMarried
Predicted
Bartik (1970)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.192**
-0.214*** -0.200*** -0.199*** -0.438*** -0.317*** -0.234
[0.078]
[0.060]
[0.049]
[0.051]
[0.118]
[0.106]
[0.156]
0.051**
0.076*** 0.055*** 0.037
0.236*** 0.110**
0.304
[0.022]
[0.016]
[0.014]
[0.041]
[0.040]
[0.050]
[0.233]
0.169***
0.000
0.051**
-0.012
0.061 0.182*** -0.363**
[0.042]
[0.029]
[0.021]
[0.064]
[0.038]
[0.045]
[0.151]
-0.041***
-0.036*** -0.036***
-0.018** -0.011
[0.008]
[0.009]
[0.008]
[0.008]
[0.008]
-0.249
-0.356
-0.330
-0.240
-0.181
[0.208]
[0.216]
[0.209]
[0.198]
[0.183]
0.455***
0.217*** 0.194***
0.193*** 0.083
[0.084]
[0.068]
[0.064]
[0.071]
[0.081]
0.007
0.004
0.004
0.004
-0.000
[0.006]
[0.007]
[0.006]
[0.007]
[0.006]
-0.029***
-0.028*** -0.024***
-0.022** -0.010
[0.008]
[0.009]
[0.007]
[0.008]
[0.007]
-0.000
-0.000
0.000
-0.000
-0.000
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000*
0.000
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
[0.000]
4,365
4,236
4,236
4,236
4,423
4,423
4,423
0.990
0.988
0.989
0.990
0.989
0.989
0.990
Yes

No

No

Yes

No

No

Yes

Bartik (1980)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-0.510*** -0.399*** -0.347**
[0.097]
[0.095]
[0.142]
0.300*** 0.153*** 0.503***
[0.044]
[0.053]
[0.171]
0.064* 0.199*** -0.299
[0.038]
[0.048]
[0.215]
-0.013*
-0.005
[0.008]
[0.009]
-0.126
-0.113
[0.190]
[0.177]
0.196**
0.103
[0.075]
[0.075]
0.005
0.001
[0.009]
[0.007]
-0.024** -0.014*
[0.010]
[0.007]
-0.000
-0.000
[0.000]
[0.000]
0.000* 0.000**
[0.000]
[0.000]
3,646
3,646
3,646
0.990
0.990
0.991
No

No

Yes

Note: Data is from 1970-2000 Censuses and 2010 ACS 3-year aggregate (2008-2010). Level of observation is marriage market by decade. All specifications include marriage market fixed
effects, decade fixed effects, and the decade interacted with the age group, the education group, the race, and the state of residence. PrWomanEarnsMore is the probability that a randomly
chosen woman earns more than a randomly chosen man. See text for further details. Regressions are weighted by the number of women in the marriage market. Standard errors clustered at the
state level are in brackets. ***significant at 1%, **at 5%, *at 10%.

33

T bl 2:
Table
2 P
Potential
t ti l Relative
R l ti IIncome and
d Wif
Wife's
f ' L
Labor
b F
Force P
Participation
ti ip ti
Wife in the labor force

Dependent
variable:
p
PrWifeEarnsMore
Obs.
Obs
R squared
R-squared
q
Addi i l controls:
Additional
l
Cubic in lnHusbIncome
l M di Wif P
i lX
lnMedianWifePotential
lnHusbIncome
anyChild(ren)
Child( )
Wife
Wife'ss demographic group
X H
Husband's
b d'
d
hi group
demographic
PrWifeEarnsMoreAtMarria
ge
g
g
of the wife's
Vigintiles
wife s and
th husband's
the
h b d' potential
p t ti l
at marriage
i
income
i
Sample
S
l restriction?
t i ti ?

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-0.254
0 254*** -0.182
0 182*** -0.179
0 179*** -0.191
0 191*** -0.182
0 182*** -0.154
0 154*** -0.213
0 213*** -0.148
0 148*** -0.099
0 099*** -0.091
0 091*** -0.090
0 090*** -0.102
0 102***
[[0.005]
[[0.005]
[[0.005]
[[0.005]
[[0.005]
[[0.014]
[[0.008]
[[0.007]
[[0.006]
[[0.005]
[[0.006]
[[0.006]
[0 005]]
[0 005]]
[0 005]]
[0 005]]
[0 005]]
[0 014]]
[0 008]]
[0 007]]
[0 006]]
[0 005]]
[0 006]]
[0 006]]
6564953 6564953 6564953 6564953 6564953
321298 1682558 1729726 1729171 1102200 991039
991039
0 10
0.10
0 10
0.10
0 11
0.11
0 12
0.12
0 15
0.15
0 06
0.06
0 08
0.08
0 09
0.09
0 08
0.08
0 09
0.09
0 09
0.09
0 09
0.09
no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

yes

yes

yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

y
yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes
y

none

none

none

none

none

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

2010sub

2010sub

1970 2000 Censuses and 2010 ACS 3-year
3 year
y
gg g ((2008-2010).
(2008 2010)) Sample
p consists of couples
p where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 y
Note: Data is from 1970-2000
aggregate
years
workingg Sample
years
old and the husband is working.
p restriction 2010sub indicates a subsample
p where the difference between y
year of marriage
g and the closest census y
year is no more than 5 yyears.
PrWifeEarnsMore
is
probability
would
were drawn
from
the
positive
P Wif E
M
i the
th p
b bility that
th t wife's
if ' income
i
ld exceed
d the
th husband's
h b d' if her
h income
i
d
f
th distribution
di t ib ti off p
iti earnings
i g in
i the
th wife's
if ' demographic
d
g phi
group.
g
p Variable
V i bl lnHusbIncome
l H bI
i the
is
th log
l g off husband's
h b d' income.
i
V i bl lnMedianWifePotential
Variable
l M di Wif P t ti l is
i the
th log
l g off the
th median
di off the
th distribution
di t ib ti off p
positive
iti earnings
i g in
i the
th wife's
if '
d
demographic
g phi g
group.
p Variable
V i bl anyChild(ren)
yChild(( ) is
i a binary
bi y variable
i bl that
th t equals
q l 1 if the
th wife
if reports
p t having
h i g any
y child,
hild, 0 otherwise.
th i
V i bl PrWifeEarnsMoreAtMarriage
Variable
P Wif E
M AtM i g is
i the
th
probability
p
obab
b bility tthat
hat income
i co e d
drawn
aw from
f o tthe
he d
dist ib
distribution
butio o
off pos
positive
itive ea
earnings
i gs in
i tthe
he w
wife's
ife's de
d og aphic g
demographic
group
oup eexceeds
ceeds
d income
i co e d
drawn
aw from
f o tthe
he d
dist ib
distribution
butio o
off pos
positive
itive ea
earnings
i gs in
i tthe
he
h b d's demographic
husband's
husband
d
hi group in
i the
h closest
l
census year to the
h year off their
h i marriage.
i
All regressions
i
i l d controls
include
l for
f log
l off husband
h b d's income,
husband's
i
vigintiles
i i il off the
h wife
wife's
if 's potential
i l
income,
wife
year age group, wife
at 1% level,
i
wife's
if s and
d husband
h b d s education
husband's
d
i (5
( categories),
i ) wife
wife's
if s and
d husband
h b ds 5
husband's
5-year
wife's
if s and
d husband
h b d s race, year and
husband's
d state fixed
fi d effects.
ff
***significant
***significant
i ifi
l l **at
**at
5%,
at 10%
10%.
5% *at

34

Table 3: Potential Relative Income and Wife's Realized Earnings
incomeGap

Dependent variable:
PrWifeEarnsMore
Obs.
R-squared
Additional controls:
Cubic in lnHusbIncome
lnMedianWifePotential X
lnHusbIncome
any child(ren)
Wife's demographic group X
Husband's demographic group

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.094*** -0.174*** -0.173*** -0.198*** -0.196***
[0.006]
[0.007]
[0.007]
[0.007]
[0.007]
4515564 4515564 4515564 4515564 4515564
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.06

(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
-0.124*** -0.208*** -0.093*** -0.100*** -0.205*** -0.210*** -0.225***
[0.021]
[0.012]
[0.011]
[0.010]
[0.011]
[0.012]
[0.012]
164721
1033605 1240755 1274464
802019
721512
721512
0
0
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02

no

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

no

yes

yes

yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

PrWifeEarnsMoreAtMarriage

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

husband's potential income at
marriage

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

no

yes

none

none

none

none

none

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Sample restriction?

sub

2010

2010sub

Note: Data is from 1970-2000 Censuses and 2010 ACS 3-year aggregate (2008-2010). Sample consists of couples where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old and the
husband is working. Variable incomeGap measures the difference between the wife's realized and potential earnings. PrWifeEarnsMore is the probability that wife's income would exceed the
husband's if her income were drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's demographic group. Variable lnHusbIncome is the log of husband's income. Variable
lnMedianWifePotential is the log of the median of the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's demographic group. Variable anyChild(ren) is a binary variable that equals 1 if the wife reports
having any child, 0 otherwise. Variable PrWifeEarnsMoreAtMarriage is the probability that income drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's demographic group exceeds income
sub
drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the husband's demographic group in the closest census year to the year of their marriage. Sample restriction 2010 indicates a subsample where
the difference between year of marriage and the closest census year is no more than 5 years. All regressions include controls for log of husband's income, vigintiles of the wife's potential income,
wife's and husband's education (5 categories), wife's and husband's 5-year age group, wife's and husband's race, year and state fixed effects. ***significant at 1% level, **at 5%, *at 10%.

35

Respondent:

wifeEarnsMore
Obs.
R-squared
wifeEarnsMore
Obs.
R-squared
wifeEarnsMore
Obs.
R-squared
Additional controls:
Cubic in lnWifeIncome and
lnHusbIncome
relativeIncome

Table 4: Relative Income and Marital Satisfaction
Wife
Husband
Both husband and wife
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
Panel (a); Dependent variable: happyMarriage
-0.071* -0.077**
-0.058
-0.065*
-0.043
-0.081*
-0.068** -0.060*
-0.070*
[0.036]
[0.038]
[0.044]
[0.037]
[0.037]
[0.044]
[0.031]
[0.032]
[0.036]
3,822
3,822
3,822
3,837
3,837
3,837
7,659
7,659
7,659
0.026
0.027
0.026
0.040
0.041
0.040
0.025
0.026
0.025
Panel (b); Dependent varible: marriageTrouble
0.088**
0.074** 0.107***
0.076**
0.081**
0.052
0.082*** 0.078*** 0.079**
[0.035]
[0.036]
[0.041]
[0.033]
[0.033]
[0.038]
[0.027]
[0.029]
[0.033]
3,757
3,757
3,757
3,763
3,763
3,763
7,520
7,520
7,520
0.049
0.050
0.049
0.046
0.047
0.047
0.047
0.048
0.047
Panel (c); Dependent variable: discussSeparation
0.084*** 0.073**
0.073**
0.053**
0.054**
0.048
0.068*** 0.064*** 0.060**
[0.028]
[0.029]
[0.033]
[0.026]
[0.026]
[0.030]
[0.024]
[0.024]
[0.028]
3,742
3,742
3,742
3,765
3,765
3,765
7,507
7,507
7,507
0.041
0.042
0.041
0.032
0.032
0.032
0.034
0.034
0.034
no

yes

no

no

yes

no

no

yes

no

no

no

yes

no

no

yes

no

no

yes

Note: The data is from Wave 1 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH). Sample is restricted to couples where both the wife and the husband
are between 18 and 65 years old and at least one person in the household has positive income. Variable relativeIncome is the share of the household income
earned by the wife. Varible wifeEarnsMore is an indicator variable for whether relativeIncome > 0.5. Variables lnWifeIncome and lnHusbIncome are the logs
of the wife's and husband's income, respectively. Variables happyMarriage, marriageTrouble, and discussSeparation are binary variables based on
respondents' answers about their marriage (details are in the text). All regressions include log of the wife's income, log of the husband's income, log of the total
household income, a quadratic in wife and husband's age, indicator variables for wife and husband's race and education (5 categories), region fixed effects, and
an indicator variable for whether only the wife is working or only the husband is working. Regressions in Columns (7)-(9) include an indicator variable for
whether the wife or the husband is the respondent and have standard errors clustered at the level of the couple. All regressions are weighted using the Wave 1
person weights from NSFH. Robust standard errors are reported in brackets. ***significant at 1%, **at 5%, *at 10%.

36

wifeEarnsMore
Obs.
R-squared
Additional controls:
Cubic in lnWifeIncome and
lnHusbIncome
relativeIncome

Table 5: Relative Income and Divorce
Dependent variable: divorced
(1)
(2)
0.062**
0.060**
[0.025]
[0.026]
3,439
3,439
0.080
0.086

(3)
0.048
[0.030]
3,439
0.080

no

yes

no

no

no

yes

Note: The data is from Waves 1 and 2 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH).
Sample is restricted to couples where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old
(in Wave 1) and at least one person in the household has positive income. Variable relativeIncome is
the share of the household income earned by the wife. Variable divorced is an indicator for whether
the couple is divorced or separated as of Wave 2. Varible wifeEarnsMore is an indicator variable for
whether relativeIncome > 0.5. Variables lnWifeIncome and lnHusbIncome are the logs of the wife's
and husband's income, respectively. All regressions include log of the wife's income, log of the
husband's income, log of the total household income, a quadratic in wife and husband's age, indicator
variables for wife and husband's race and education (5 categories), region fixed effects, and an
indicator variable for whether only the wife is working or only the husband is working. All regressions
are weighted using the Wave 1 person weights from NSFH. Robust standard errors are reported in
brackets. ***significant at 1%, **at 5%, *at 10%.

37

Table 6: Relative Income and the Gender Gap in Non-Market Work and Childcare
Panel (a); Dependent variable: totNonMarketWork
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
wifeEarnsMore
0.235
-0.150
0.307
-0.126
[0.472]
[0.495]
[0.589]
[0.481]
female X wifeEarnsMore
1.362**
1.643**
2.187***
1.827***
[0.685]
[0.710]
[0.847]
[0.690]
Obs.
45,074
45,074
45,074
45,074
R-squared
0.156
0.156
0.156
0.202
Panel (b); Dependent variable: chores
wifeEarnsMore
-0.006
-0.268
0.442
-0.284
[0.403]
[0.423]
[0.503]
[0.422]
female X wifeEarnsMore
1.186**
1.397**
1.466**
1.417**
[0.585]
[0.607]
[0.724]
[0.606]
Obs.
45,074
45,074
45,074
45,074
R-squared
0.095
0.096
0.095
0.098
Panel (c); Dependent variable: childcare
wifeEarnsMore
0.241
0.118
-0.135
0.159
[0.233]
[0.244]
[0.291]
[0.221]
female X wifeEarnsMore
0.176
0.246
0.721*
0.410
[0.338]
[0.351]
[0.418]
[0.317]
Obs.
45,074
45,074
45,074
45,074
R-squared
0.168
0.168
0.168
0.319
Additional controls
Cubic in lnWifeIncome and
no
yes
no
yes
lnHusbIncome
no
no
yes
no
relativeIncome
no
no
no
yes
children
none
none
none
none
Sample restriction

(5)
-0.177
[0.634]
2.264**
[0.914]
22,377
0.277
-0.432
[0.539]
2.029***
[0.777]
22,377
0.154
0.255
[0.308]
0.235
[0.444]
22,377
0.362
yes
no
yes
week-day only

Note: The data is from ATUS/CPS, 2003 to 2011. Sample is restricted to married individuals in the ATUS/CPS who are between 18 and
65 years old and whose spouse is also between 18 and 65 years old. We further restrict the sample to couples where at least one person in
the household has positive income. Variable chores is the amount of time spent on non-market work (not including childcare). Variable
childcare is the amount of time spent on childcare. Variable totNonMarketWork is the sum of chores and childcare. Variables
lnWifeIncome and lnHusbIncome are the logs of the wife's and husband's income, respectively. Variable relativeIncome is the share of
the household income earned by the wife. Varible wifeEarnsMore is an indicator variable for whether relativeIncome > 0.5. Variable
children is an indicator variable for whether there is no child, the youngest child is younger than 3, the youngest child is between 4 and 6
years of age, or the youngest child is older than 6. All regressions include log of the wife's income, log of the husband's income, log of
the total household income, year, state, and day of the week fixed effects, the wife and the husband's race, a quadratic in wife and
husband's age, and indicator variables for the wife's and the husband’s education groups, for whether only the husband is working, and
for whether only the wife is working. Furthermore, we also include the interaction of all these controls with an indicator variable for
whether the respondent is female. Each observation is weighted using the ATUS/CPS weight. ***significant at 1% level, **at 5%, *at
10%.

38

Appendix Table 1: Marriage Markets - Fraction of Wives Marrying Husbands in Particular Age, Education
and Race Groups from 1970 to 2010
Age Groups
Husband's Age
Wife's Age
24 to 33
34 to 43
44 to 53
Other
22 to 31
75.6%
17.0%
1.5%
5.9%
32 to 41

13.0%

69.6%

15.6%

1.8%

42 to 51

0.6%

14.1%

68.2%

17.1%

Education Groups

Wife's Education
High School or Less

Some College or More

Husband's Education
Some College or
High School or Less
More
73.4%
26.6%

23.7%

76.3%

Wife's Race
White

White
98.0%

Husband's Race
Black
0.4%

Hispanic
1.5%

Black

2.2%

96.9%

0.9%

Hispanic

17.1%

1.3%

81.6%

Race Groups

Note: Data from the 1970 to 2000 Censuses and the 2010 3-year ACS (2008 to 2010).

39

Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics - Marriage Market Sample
N
Mean

S.D.

All years
PrWomanEarnsMore - Actual
PrWomanEarnsMore - Predicted
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1970)
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1980)
Male marriage rate
Female marriage rate
1970
PrWomanEarnsMore - Actual
PrWomanEarnsMore - Predicted
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1970)
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1980)
Male marriage rate
Female marriage rate
1980
PrWomanEarnsMore - Actual
PrWomanEarnsMore - Predicted
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1970)
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1980)
Male marriage rate
Female marriage rate
1990
PrWomanEarnsMore - Actual
PrWomanEarnsMore - Predicted
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1970)
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1980)
Male marriage rate
Female marriage rate
2000
PrWomanEarnsMore - Actual
PrWomanEarnsMore - Predicted
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1970)
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1980)
Male marriage rate
Female marriage rate
2010
PrWomanEarnsMore - Actual
PrWomanEarnsMore - Predicted
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1970)
PrWomanEarnsMore - Bartik (1980)
Male marriage rate
Female marriage rate

4412
4236
4456
3651
4423
4456

0.239
0.259
0.234
0.240
0.660
0.638

0.077
0.076
0.073
0.070
0.142
0.147

772
670
805
777
805

0.106
0.140
0.114
0.826
0.792

0.048
0.058
0.045
0.070
0.092

907
876
910
910
908
910

0.170
0.199
0.166
0.166
0.733
0.697

0.061
0.071
0.061
0.060
0.120
0.131

907
889
911
911
911
911

0.235
0.257
0.232
0.232
0.662
0.644

0.052
0.063
0.056
0.055
0.134
0.132

915
903
916
916
915
916

0.276
0.287
0.265
0.267
0.629
0.613

0.053
0.052
0.044
0.044
0.121
0.135

911
898
914
914
912
914

0.306
0.320
0.304
0.306
0.573
0.559

0.056
0.051
0.040
0.040
0.149
0.157

Note: Data from the 1970 to 2000 Censuses and the 2010 3-year ACS (2008 to 2010). Each observation is a
marriage market defined by the interaction of age-group*race*education-group*state. Variable
PrWomanEarnsMore is the likelihood that a randomly chosen woman earns more than a randomly chosen man
within a marriage market. "Actual" refers to the use of actual earnings to construct PrWomanEarnsMore,
"Predicted" refers to the use of predicted earnings based on the woman or man's demographic group. "Bartik
(1970)" refers to the use of 1970 industry shares and the national growth in industry wages to compute predicted
earnings. "Bartik (1980)" refers to the use of 1980 industry shares and the national growth in industry wages to
compute predicted earnings (this measure is not computed for 1970). See text for details.

40

Appendix Table 3: Change in PrWomanEarnsMore from 1970 to 2010 by Age Group
Change in PrWomanEarnsMore from 1970 to 2010
No. of Marriage
Markets
Age Group
10th Percentile
Mean
90th Percentile
22 to 31 (F), 24 to 33 (M)
267
0.077
0.178
0.294
32 to 41 (F), 34 to 43 (M)

256

0.119

0.205

0.317

42 to 51 (F), 44 to 53 (M)

248

0.057

0.167

0.281

Note: Data from the 1970 to 2000 Censuses and the 2010 3-year ACS (2008 to 2010). Changes are calculated
based on Actual income.

41

App di Table
Appendix
T bl 4A
4A: Fi
Firstt St
Stage
g R
Regressions
g
i
off M
Moments
t off P
Predicted
di t d M
Male
l IIncome on M
Moments
t off
1970 Bartik Male Income
Dependent variable: Selected Percentiles of Predicted lnMensIncome
Mean
10th
30th
50th
70th
90th
((1))
((2))
((3))
((4))
((5))
((6))
Percentiles of 1970
Bartik lnMensIncome:
l M I
Mean

00.706***
706***
[0.070]

10th

00.399***
399***
[0 033]
[0.033]

30th

0.531
0.531***
[0 078]
[0.078]

50th

0.631***
0
631***
[0 112]
[0.112]

70th
0h
90th
Observations
Ob
ti
R-squared

Percentiles of 1970
B tik
Bartik
lnWomensIncome:
Mean
10th
30 h
30th

0.925
0
0.925***
92 ***
[[0 086]]
[0.086]
0.798***
0
798***
[0.073]
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
4,413
0 995
0.995
0 971
0.971
0 981
0.981
0 981
0.981
0 988
0.988
0 990
0.990
Dependent variable: Selected Percentiles of Predicted lnWomensIncome
M
Mean
10th
30th
50th
70th
90th
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.980
0.980***
[0 077]
[0.077]
00.393***
393***
[0 044]
[0.044]
0.395
0
0.395***
395***
[[0 033]]
[0.033]

50th

0.874***
0
874***
[0.083]

70th

0.683***
0
683***
[0 177]
[0.177]

90th

1.077
1.077***
[[0 147]]
[0.147]
Observations
4 375
4,375
4 375
4,375
4 375
4,375
4 375
4,375
4 375
4,375
4 375
4,375
R-squared
0.994
0.969
0.977
0.976
0.983
0.989
N t to
Note
t Table
T bl 4A and
d 4B
4B: D
Data
t iis ffrom 1970
1970-2000
2000 C
Censuses and
d 2010 ACS 33-year
y aggregate
gg g t ((2008
(20082010) Level of observation is marriage market by decade.
2010).
decade All specifications include the same
controls
l as Table
bl 1 as well
ll as marriage
i
market
k fi
fixed
d effects,
ff
ddecade
d fi
fixed
d effects,
ff
and
d the
h ddecade
d
interacted with the age group,
group the education group
group, the race
race, and the state of residence.
residence See text for
further details. Regressions are weighted by the number of women in the marriage market. Standard
errors clustered
l t d att th
the state
t t llevell are iin bbrackets.
k t ***
***significant
i ifi t att 1%
1%, **
**att 5%
5%, **att 10%
10%.

42

App di Table
Appendix
T bl 4B
4B: Fi
Firstt St
Stage
g R
Regressions
g
i
off M
Moments
t off P
Predicted
di t d M
Male
l IIncome on M
Moments
t off
1980 Bartik Male Income
Dependent variable: Selected Percentiles of Predicted lnMensIncome
Mean
10th
30th
50th
70th
90th
((1))
((2))
((3))
((4))
((5))
((6))
Percentiles of 1980
Bartik lnMensIncome:
l M I
Mean

00.789***
789***
[0.065]

10th

00.258***
258***
[0 048]
[0.048]

30th

0.529
0.529***
[0 088]
[0.088]

50th

0.768***
0
768***
[0 117]
[0.117]

70th
0h
90th
Observations
Ob
ti
R-squared

Percentiles of 1980
B tik
Bartik
lnWomensIncome:
Mean

1.019
1
1.019***
019***
[[0 119]]
[0.119]
0.801***
0
801***
[0.078]
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
3,643
0 995
0.995
0 975
0.975
0 983
0.983
0 982
0.982
0 989
0.989
0 991
0.991
Dependent variable: Selected Percentiles of Predicted lnWomensIncome
M
Mean
10th
30th
50th
70th
90th
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

0.970
0.970***
[0 065]
[0.065]

10th

00.411***
411***
[0 052]
[0.052]

30 h
30th

0.440
0
0.440***
440***
[[0 047]]
[0.047]

50th

0.958***
0
958***
[0.111]

70th

0.751***
0
751***
[0 170]
[0.170]

90th
Observations
R-squared

33,630
630
0.995

33,630
630
0.974

3,630
3
630
0.979

43

3,630
3
630
0.977

3,630
3
630
0.985

0.993
0.993***
[[0 141]]
[0.141]
3 630
3,630
0.991

Appendix Table 5: Summary Statistics - Married couples in the Census
All years
PrWifeEarnsMore
wifeLFP
incomeGap
lnHoursWorked
1970
PrWifeEarnsMore
wifeLFP
incomeGap
lnHoursWorked
1980
PrWifeEarnsMore
wifeLFP
incomeGap
lnHoursWorked
1990
PrWifeEarnsMore
wifeLFP
incomeGap
lnHoursWorked
2000
PrWifeEarnsMore
wifeLFP
incomeGap
lnHoursWorked
2010
PrWifeEarnsMore
wifeLFP
incomeGap
lnHoursWorked

N

Mean

S.D.

6564953
6564953
4515564
4087444

0.18
0.66
0.00
3.52

0.25
0.47
0.77
0.44

321298
321298
164721
128397

0.09
0.44
0.00
3.46

0.19
0.50
0.74
0.48

1682558
1682558
1033605
877570

0.12
0.57
0.00
3.48

0.22
0.49
0.77
0.45

1729726
1729726
1240755
1126726

0.17
0.70
0.00
3.52

0.24
0.46
0.76
0.43

1729171
1729171
1274464
1181503

0.21
0.72
0.00
3.55

0.26
0.45
0.78
0.42

1102200
1102200
802019
773248

0.26
0.74
0.00
3.54

0.28
0.44
0.78
0.44

Note: Data from the 1970 to 2000 Censuses and the 2010 3-year ACS (2008 to 2010). Sample
consists of couples where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old and
the husband is working. PrWifeEarnsMore is the probability that wife's income would exceed
the husband's if her income were drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's
demographic group. Variable wifeLFP is an indicator variable for whether the wife is in the
labor force. Variable incomeGap measures the difference between the wife's realized and
potential earnings. Variable lnHoursWorked indicates the logarithm of the total number of
hours the wife was at work during the previous week.

44

Appendix Table 6: Relative Income, Wife's Working Hours and Wife's Realized Earnings
Dependent variable:
PrWifeEarnsMore
Obs.
R-squared
Additional controls:
Cubic in lnHusbIncome
lnMedianWifePotential X
lnHusbIncome
anyChild(ren)
Wife's demographic group X
Husband's demographic group
ln(hoursworked)

lnHoursWorked

incomeGap

(1)
-0.066
[0.004]**
3904512
0.05

(2)
-0.061
[0.003]**
3904512
0.09

(3)
-0.152
[0.008]**
3904512
0.02

(4)
-0.157
[0.008]**
3904512
0.07

(5)
-0.103
[0.007]**
3904512
0.18

(6)
-0.112
[0.007]**
3904512
0.22

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

yes

no

yes

no

yes

no

yes

no

no

no

no

yes

yes

Note: Data is from 1970-2000 Censuses and 2010 ACS 3-year aggregate (2008-2010). Sample consists of couples where both the
wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old and the husband is working. Variable incomeGap measures the difference
between the wife's realized and potential earnings. Variable lnHoursWorked is the logarithm of the total number of hours the wife
was at work during the previous week. PrWifeEarnsMore is the probability that wife's income would exceed the husband's if her
income were drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's demographic group. Variable lnHusbIncome is the log of
husband's income. Variable lnMedianWifePotential is the log of the median of the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's
demographic group. Variable anyChild(ren) is a binary variable that equals 1 if the wife reports having any child, 0 otherwise.
Variable PrWifeEarnsMoreAtMarriage is the probability that income drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the wife's
demographic group exceeds income drawn from the distribution of positive earnings in the husband's demographic group in the
closest census year to the year of their marriage. Sample is restricted to observations where lnHoursWorked is non-missing. All
regressions include controls for log of husband's income, vigintiles of the wife's potential income, wife's and husband's education (5
categories), wife's and husband's 5-year age group, wife's and husband's race, year and state fixed effects. ***significant at 1%
level, **at 5%, *at 10%.

45

Appendix Table 7: Summary Statistics - National Survey of Families and Households (NSFH)
Wave 1
Wave 2
N
Mean
SD
N
Mean
SD
Wife's Responses:
happyMarriage
3909
0.48
0.50
2720
0.43
0.49
marriageTrouble
3840
0.27
0.44
2863
0.25
0.43
discussSeparation
3825
0.14
0.35
2857
0.11
0.32
Husband's Responses:
happyMarriage
marriageTrouble
discussSeparation

3920
3834
3836

0.47
0.22
0.12

0.50
0.41
0.32

Couple's Characteristics:
relativeIncome
wifeEarnsMore
divorced

4037
4037
3514

0.27
0.15
0.12

0.27
0.36
0.33

2568
2711
2719

0.40
0.20
0.09

0.49
0.40
0.29

Note: The data is from Waves 1 and 2 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH). Sample is restricted
to couples where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old and at least one person in the
household has positive income. The sample in Wave 2 is restricted to couples who are married in both Wave 1 and
Wave 2. Variables happyMarriage, marriageTrouble, and discussSeparation are binary variables based on
respondents' answers about their marriage (details are in the text). Variable relativeIncome is the share of the
household income earned by the wife. Variable wifeEarnsMore is a binary variable that indicates whether
relativeIncome > 0.5. Variable divorced indicates whether the couple is separated or divorced when they are reinterviewed in Wave 2.

46

Respondent:

wifeEarnsMore
Wave 1 Response
Obs.
R-squared
wifeEarnsMore
Wave 1 Response
Obs.
R-squared
wifeEarnsMore
Wave 1 Response

Appendix Table 8: Relative Income and the Evolution of Marital Satisfaction
Wife
Husband
Both wife and husband
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Panel (a); Dependent variable: happyMarriage
-0.084**
-0.116**
0.015
0.031
-0.033
-0.042
[0.040]
[0.045]
[0.044]
[0.049]
[0.032]
[0.035]
0.382***
0.383***
0.349***
0.349***
0.370***
0.370***
[0.021]
[0.021]
[0.021]
[0.021]
[0.015]
[0.015]
2,587
2,587
2,462
2,462
5,049
5,049
0.188
0.186
0.188
0.188
0.180
0.179
Panel (b); Dependent varible: marriageTrouble
-0.010
-0.044
0.042
0.036
0.014
-0.005
[0.036]
[0.042]
[0.037]
[0.041]
[0.029]
[0.033]
0.292***
0.293***
0.272***
0.272***
0.283***
0.283***
[0.024]
[0.024]
[0.025]
[0.025]
[0.019]
[0.019]
2,672
2,672
2,547
2,547
5,219
5,219
0.142
0.139
0.132
0.131
0.134
0.133
Panel (c); Dependent variable: discussSeparation
0.045*
0.034
0.045*
0.031
0.044**
0.033
[0.025]
[0.029]
[0.025]
[0.029]
[0.021]
[0.024]
0.281***
0.282***
0.242***
0.243***
0.265***
0.266***
[0.030]
[0.030]
[0.032]
[0.032]
[0.024]
[0.024]
2,655
2,655
2,557
2,557
5,212
5,212
0.130
0.126
0.091
0.090
0.108
0.106

Obs.
R-squared
Additional controls:
Cubic in lnWifeIncome and
lnHusbIncome
relativeIncome

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
no

yes
yes

yes
no

yes
yes

Note: The data is from Waves 1 and 2 of the National Survey of Family and Households (NSFH). Sample is restricted to couples
where both the wife and the husband are between 18 and 65 years old and at least one person in the household has positive income.
Variable relativeIncome is the share of the household income earned by the wife. Varible wifeEarnsMore is an indicator variable for
whether relativeIncome > 0.5. Variables lnWifeIncome and lnHusbIncome are the logs of the wife's and husband's income,
respectively. Variables happyMarriage, marriageTrouble, and discussSeparation are binary variables based on respondents' answers
about their marriage (details are in the text). All regressions include log of the wife's income, log of the husband's income, log of the
total household income, a quadratic in wife and husband's age, indicator variables for wife and husband's race and education (5
categories), region fixed effects, and an indicator variable for whether only the wife is working or only the husband is working.
Regressions in Columns (5) and (6) include an indicator variable for whether the wife or the husband is the respondent and have
standard errors clustered at the level of the couple. All regressions are weighted using the Wave 1 person weights from NSFH. Robust
standard errors are reported in brackets. ***significant at 1%, **at 5%, *at 10%.

47

Appendix Table 9: Summary Statistics - ATUS/CPS (2003-2011)
N
Mean
Wife's time use (hours per week)
chores
23386
24.11
childcare
23386
9.41
totNonMarketWork
23386
33.52

19.59
13.93
24.21

Husband's time use (hours per week)
chores
childcare
totNonMarketWork

21688
21688
21688

15.66
5.07
20.74

18.38
10.3
21.11

Income
wifeIncome
husbIncome
relativeIncome
wifeEarnsMore

45074
45074
45074
45074

498.57
985.66
0.34
0.16

537.41
707.25
0.31
0.36

S.D.

Note: The data is from ATUS/CPS, 2003 to 2011. Sample is restricted to married individuals in the
ATUS/CPS who are between 18 and 65 years old and whose spouse is also between 18 and 65 years old.
We further restrict the sample to couples where at least one person in the household has positive income.
Variable chores is the amount of time spent on non-market work (not including childcare). Variable
childcare is the amount of time spent on childcare. Variable totNonMarketWork is the sum of chores and
childcare. Variables wifeIncome and husbIncome are the wife's and the husband's weekly income,
respectively. Variable relativeIncome is the share of the household income earned by the wife. Varible
wifeEarnsMore is an indicator variable for whether relativeIncome > 0.5.

48

