                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       THE “GREATEST” CARRY TRADE EVER? UNDERSTANDING EUROZONE
                              BANK RISKS

                                            Viral V. Acharya
                                             Sascha Steffen

                                          Working Paper 19039
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w19039


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




We thank Martin Brown, Paul Glasserman, Ruediger Fahlenbrach, Martin Hellwig, Bryan Kelly, Jan-Pieter
Krahnen, David Lesmond, Christian Leuz, Marco Pagano, Hélène Rey, Phil Strahan and participants
in the 12th annual FDIC / JFSR conference, 2012 C.R.E.D.I.T., 2nd Mofir Ancona and seminar participants
at Darden, Deutsche Bundesbank, Goethe University, Indiana, Lancaster, Leeds, Mainz, NYU Stern,
Osnabrueck and Tulane for valuable comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Matteo Crosignani
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Viral V. Acharya and Sascha Steffen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The “Greatest” Carry Trade Ever? Understanding Eurozone Bank Risks
Viral V. Acharya and Sascha Steffen
NBER Working Paper No. 19039
May 2013
JEL No. F3,G01,G14,G15,G21,G28

                                              ABSTRACT

We show that Eurozone bank risks during 2007-2012 can be understood as a “carry trade” behavior.
Bank equity returns load positively on peripheral (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy, or GIPSI)
bond returns and negatively on German government bond returns, a position that generated “carry”
until the deteriorating GIPSI bond returns inflicted losses on banks. The positive GIPSI loadings correlate
with banks’ holdings of GIPSI bonds; and, the negative German loading with banks’ short-term debt
exposures. Consistent with moral hazard in the form of risk-taking by large, under-capitalized banks
to exploit government guarantees, arbitrage regulatory risk weights, and access central-bank funding,
we find that this carry-trade behavior is stronger for large banks, and banks with low Tier 1 ratios and
high risk-weighted assets, in both GIPSI and non-GIPSI countries’ banks, but not so for similar banks
in other Western economies or for non-bank firms.


Viral V. Acharya
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street, Suite 9-84
New York, NY 10012
and CEPR
and also NBER
vacharya@stern.nyu.edu

Sascha Steffen
European School of Management and Technology
Schlossplatz 1
10178 Berlin
Germany
steffen@esmt.org
“And of course, the deterioration of the Euro zone situation and particularly the sovereign crisis
in the peripheral economies hit very badly the group. And that’s of course not a surprise for a
group that still had very important short-term funding needs that was mainly present in strong
exposures in peripheral countries. [...] Before 2008, it was the group’s high rating granting easy
access to wholesale funding that led to the situation of October 2008 with short-term funding
need of €260 billion outstanding in October 2008, i.e. 43% of total balance sheet. [...] with very
significant acceleration and buildup of the bond portfolio was amounting at €203 billion at the
end of 2008. Mostly carry trades with marginal improvement of customer access [...] that led to a
very significant gearing ratio because the portfolio size was, at that time, 25 times the group
equity.” - Pierre Mariani, Chairman of the Management Board and CEO, Dexia SA, Earnings
Call, February 23rd, 2012


1. Introduction

           The ongoing sovereign debt crisis in Europe has cast doubt on the solvency of European

banks that incurred substantial mark-to-market losses and impairments on their peripheral

(Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy, or GIPSI) sovereign bond holdings. Since mid-2008,

government bond yield spreads between pairs of European countries, for example, between

German bunds and GIPSI bonds, have widened considerably, mirroring the economic divergence

between these countries (Figure 1).1 This divergence has challenged even the survival of the

Eurozone as a whole. Since then, banks have on average lost 70% of their market value and shed

billions of euros of assets in an effort to increase regulatory capital ratios.

                                                          [Figure 1]

           We show in this paper that banks’ risks during this period can be understood as

reflecting a “carry trade” behavior. With access to short-term unsecured funding in wholesale

markets, banks appear to have undertaken long peripheral sovereign bond positions. On the

upside, the trade would pocket the “carry”, the spread between the long-term peripheral sovereign

bonds and banks’ short-term funding costs. On the downside, which has materialized, the spreads

between two legs of the trade diverged even further resulting in significant losses for banks and


1
 For almost a decade prior to this, the ten-year sovereign bond yields for these countries hovered around the four
percent benchmark with a small yield spread difference between core and peripheral European countries.
                                                          1
leading to questions in funding markets about their solvency and liquidity. In essence, this carry

trade reflects a bet that Eurozone countries would converge economically resulting in a

convergence of the spread between its two legs.

          Dexia SA (Dexia), a Belgian financial group and one of the largest lenders to public

sector entities, provides a quintessential example of such behavior as it invested heavily in these

carry trades (see the introductory quote). Dexia built up a risky bond portfolio of almost a third of

the bank’s total balance sheet which was financed almost 50% with short-term funding. As the

quality of the bond portfolio worsened, Dexia was unable to roll over the financing of its assets

and was bailed out in October 2011. Dexia is not an isolated case. Bank of Cyprus more than

quadrupled its investments in Greek government bonds in 2010 as Greek bonds were among the

highest yielding sovereign bonds and financed its investment with short-term funds obtained

from the ECB in 2009.

       We document that this behavior has in fact been pervasive among Eurozone banks. We

investigate the causes of the European banking crisis and argue that banks’ substantial share price

decline can in part be explained by banks placing a bet on the survival of the Eurozone, choosing

to hold peripheral sovereign bonds and financing their investments in short-term wholesale

markets. While correlations between bond yields of Germany (or France) and peripheral

sovereign bond yields were above 95% in 2005, these correlations became negative in 2010 when

markets became more reluctant to finance banks’ investments in risky sovereign debt resulting in

a flight into longer-term core European (particularly German) government bonds. In other words,

the banks lost on both sides of the carry trade.

       At the core of our analysis are the publicly listed banks that took part in five consecutive

stress tests conducted by the European Banking Authority (EBA) starting in 2010 and ending in

June 2012. March 2010 is the first reporting date as of which detailed information about

                                                   2
European banks’ sovereign bond holdings is available. We document interesting patterns in the

sovereign bond holdings of banks.

        First, our data show that European banks already entered the stress test period with a

substantial exposure to GIPSI sovereign debt which overall remains remarkably constant over the

next two years.

        Second, and more importantly, GIPSI and non-GIPSI banks appear to have actively

managed their sovereign bond portfolios by increasing their sovereign bond exposures to Italy,

Spain and Portugal even as yield spreads on these countries’ debt widened between March and

December 2010.2 This behavior rules out the alternative that banks were passively caught in the

sovereign debt crisis due to exposures to peripheral sovereign debt prior to the emergence of Irish

and Greek sovereign crises in 2009.

        Third, banks with lower Tier 1 ratios, higher risk-weighted assets and larger loan-to-asset

ratios increased their holdings particularly in Spanish sovereign bonds between March and

December 2010 strongly supporting regulatory arbitrage as important motivation for bank

behavior.3

        Fourth, this active trading behavior reversed (only as late as) between January 2012 and

June 2012, when domestic (Italian and Spanish) banks substantially increased their exposure to

their domestic sovereign, while non-domestic banks even decreased their holdings. The European

Central Bank (ECB) injected about EUR 1 trillion with a maturity of three years and a 0.75%

coupon into the banking system in two three-year Long Term Refinancing Operations (LTROs)

in December 2011 and February 2012 facilitating these trades. We document that Italian banks

purchased domestic sovereign bonds for EUR 28.6 billion with a maturity of equal or below three

2
  S&P downgraded Spanish bonds to AA from AA+ in April 2010 pushing yield spreads for ten-year sovereign
bonds higher than (worse rated) Italian bonds.
3
  Interestingly, non-domestic banks increased their exposure more relative to domestic banks. For example, non-
Spanish banks increased their Spanish sovereign bond positions by 66% between March 2010 and December 2010.
                                                      3
years which is consistent with a match of the maturities of the securities they purchase with the

maturity of the ECB funds. Spanish banks also increased their exposures to Spanish government,

albeit in smaller magnitudes. Non-Italian and non-Spanish banks reduced their exposures.

        Overall, the descriptive evidence based on reported sovereign bond holdings imply an

overall increase in risk exposure towards peripheral sovereign debt for both GIPSI and non-

GIPSI banks during March 2010 and December 2010, and a shift in this risk exposure from non-

GIPSI banks into GIPSI banks’ portfolios between January 2012 and June 2012.

        Micro level data of sovereign bond positions (except for the five EBA reporting dates) are

unavailable to us on a high-frequency basis. Furthermore, banks may be exposed to sovereign

bond risk other than through direct bond positions, e.g., through credit default swap positions and

counterparty exposure in derivatives transactions with governments. Given this limitation and to

link bank risk to both the investment and funding leg of the carry trade, we collect daily stock

prices for these banks as well as daily ten-year sovereign bond yields over the January 2007 to

June 2012 period. Our main results are as follows:

        First, we find a positive correlation between banks’ stock returns and GIPSI bond returns

and a negative correlation with German bund returns and these correlations are significantly

larger during the 2007 – 2012 period as compared to the pre-2007 period. European banks are

thus effectively, on average, long GIPSI government bonds and their stock returns decline when

bond prices depreciate. The negative loadings on German government bonds (bunds) suggest that

banks are “short” long-term German bunds. In other words, these results suggest that banks were

financing long-term peripheral bonds with short-term debt in a carry trade.4




4
 If long-term German bund prices appreciate whenever short-term funding dries up (due to a flight to safety or
quality) and banks are exposed to short-term funding, then it would appear as if banks were “short” long-term
German bunds.
                                                      4
        Second, we show that the peripheral exposures relate to banks’ actual government bond

holdings rather than non-sovereign exposures (to firms, households and real estate). Moreover,

banks with more short-term funding exposure (through US money market funds (MMF)5 and

other wholesale funding sources) have more negative factor loadings on German bunds.

        Third, we provide a large number of falsification tests suggesting that the return exposures

consistent with a carry trade behavior were specific to banks and not to hedge funds or industrial

firms, and specific to Eurozone banks and not to banks of other Western economies. This is

potentially due to the funding “put” from domestic central banks and European Central Bank

against Eurozone sovereign collateral, available only to Eurozone banks.

        We then explore incentives for banks to engage in carry trades, namely: (1) implicit

bailout guarantees, (2) risk shifting by under-capitalized banks, (3) regulatory capital arbitrage,

and (4) European Central Bank (ECB) funding, which might have all – individually or in

conjunction – made these trades more attractive for banks.

        We find that larger banks are significantly more exposed consistent with large banks

exploiting an implicit bailout guarantee from their sovereign. Also, banks with greater leverage,

and in particular, a higher percentage of short-term leverage relative to total debt, have somewhat

higher exposure to GIPSI countries and lose significantly greater market value when German

bond prices appreciate.

        The regulatory capital arbitrage motive arises under the current Basel II regulations

which assign a zero risk weight for investments in sovereign debt. The governments may




5
  The dependence on US money market funds (MMF) by European banks for US-Dollar funding potentially poses a
threat to their (short-term) liquidity and could be transmitted to other financial institutions or the real economy
(Chernenko and Sunderam, 2012, and Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein, 2012).
                                                        5
themselves have had incentives to preserve the zero risk weight to be able to continue to borrow.6

Undercapitalized banks, that is, banks with low Tier 1 capital ratios, now have an incentive to

increase short-term return on equity by shifting their portfolios into highest-yielding assets with

lowest risk weights in an attempt to meet the regulatory capital requirements without having to

issue economic capital (regulatory capital arbitrage).7

        Moreover, riskier banks might shift into riskier government bonds placing a bet on their

own survival (risk shifting) as this way they shift risk into the states of the world (government

defaults) where they are likely to experience bank runs (as argued by Diamond and Rajan, 2011).

While the regulatory arbitrage incentive would be stronger both for GIPSI and non-GIPSI banks,

the second incentive would be stronger for domestic banks of GIPSI countries. We focus in our

analysis of these incentives on Italy and Spain as largest bond markets among the GIPSI

countries and find that banks with lower core Tier 1 ratios or higher risk-weighted assets have

greater exposure to GIPSI bonds. This is reflected in both higher sensitivities of banks’ equity to

GIPSI bond returns as well as higher (reported) bond holdings by riskier and weakly capitalized

banks, for banks of both GIPSI and non-GIPSI countries, lending support to the presence of

regulatory arbitrage incentives.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the related literature. Section 3

presents Dexia as the quintessential example of carry trade behavior, explains the data sources

and provides some descriptive statistics. Section 4 provides portfolio level evidence on sovereign

bond exposures. Section 5 presents our carry trade exposure estimates from multifactor models

and various robustness tests to demonstrate their validity. In Section 6, we relate our carry trade


6
  The more entangled the financial sector with the governments, the more costly the government default would be
due to “collateral damage” in the form of bank runs and disruption of inter-bank and repo markets (Broner, Martin
and Ventura, 2010; Bolton and Jeanne, 2011 and Acharya and Rajan, 2011).
7
  See Acharya, Engle and Pierret (2013) for a formal derivation of this perverse incentive when banks disregard risks
arising from earning returns on capital subject to a risk-weight based capital requirement scheme.
                                                         6
estimates to reported sovereign bond holdings as reported by the EBA and measures of short-

term funding risk. In Section 7, we explore incentives of banks to invest in carry trades. Section 8

concludes with policy implications.

2. Related Literature

        Our paper is related to the literature investigating the yield-chasing investment behavior

of financial institutions. Becker and Ivashina (2012) analyze the investment behavior of insurance

firms and document a reaching for yield behavior due to agency frictions. Kacperczyk and

Schnabl (2013) analyze the investment behavior of US MMF and find that these funds invested in

riskier securities searching for yield as money inflow was responsive to fund yields. Fischer et al.

(2012) focus on the investment behavior of German Landesbanken and document a searching for

yield due to risk shifting incentives after the announcement that government guarantees will be

revoked. We show in our paper that yield chasing by European banks implies investing in high

yielding long-term government debt financed with low yielding short-term wholesale funds

which ultimately leaves the banks exposed to risky assets and high funding risk.

        It is also related to the literature highlighting that regulatory arbitrage is an important

motive for banks’ investment and financing decisions. Acharya, Schnabl and Suarez (2011)

investigate the widespread use of conduits in the securitization process and find evidence

consistent with regulatory arbitrage: Most conduits were set up with capital reducing liquidity

guarantees, they were particularly initiated by weakly capitalized commercial banks, and risks

were not transferred to investors but losses were rather booked by the guarantee issuing

institutions.8 Boyson, Fahlenbrach and Stulz (2013) analyze the use of trust preferred securities

by US bank holding companies as part of their regulatory capital and also find evidence



8
  Acharya and Richardson (2010) also emphasize the importance of regulatory capital relief in explaining the huge
increase in securitization schemes of banks.
                                                       7
consistent with a regulatory capital arbitrage motive.9               Acharya, Engle and Pierret (2013)

compare the results from macroprudential stress tests both in the US and Europe with stress tests

based on market data. They conclude that the reliance on regulatory risk weights in the original

stress tests is in part responsible for the undercapitalization of the banking sector creating

incentives for banks to invest in low risk-weight assets.

        The paper relates more broadly to the literature on risk shifting incentives of firms (Jensen

and Meckling, 1976). Several theoretical studies emphasize banks’ incentives to shift into riskier

assets. Furlong and Keeley (1987, 1989), for example, show that banks increase asset risks if they

have higher leverage. Keeley (1990) shows that increased competition among banks induces risk

shifting because of lower charter values. Relatedly, Hellman, Murdock and Stiglitz (2000) argue

that banks have higher gambling incentives if they are poorly capitalized. The Japanese

experience from the 1990s provides supporting evidence. Undercapitalized Japanese banks

followed a policy of regulatory forbearance extending loans to troubled borrowers to avoid their

insolvency and subsequent capital write-downs (Peek and Rosengren, 2005; Hoshi and Kashyap,

2010). Particularly affiliated banks channeled funds to these firms instead of giving credit to high

quality firms betting that the banks were going to be bailed out by the government if the firms

eventually defaulted (Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap, 2008).

3. Background and Data

        In this section, we provide brief examples of two European banks that heavily invested in

carry trades and eventually defaulted – Dexia S.A. and Bank of Cyprus. We then describe the

data used during the rest of this paper.

A. Carry Trades Gone Wrong - Dexia and Bank of Cyprus


9
  The Collins amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act requires that any trust preferred securities issued after May 19th,
2010 do no longer count towards Tier 1 capital which effectively eliminates the regulatory capital arbitrage using
these instruments.
                                                        8
           Dexia SA was formed in 1996 through a merger of Crédit Local (France) and Crédit

Communal (Belgium). In October 2011, the Dexia Group was bailed out for a second time

because of carry trades that went wrong (see the quote of Dexia’s current CEO at the start of the

paper). This section provides a brief overview how the situation unraveled.

           Dexia built a proprietary bond portfolio amounting to EUR 203 billion at the end of

2008 (about 32% of its balance sheet).10 These investments were carry-trades, financed in short

term wholesale markets. The bond exposure was mainly to fixed rate bonds and Dexia hedged the

interest rate risk using credit derivatives. Effectively, Dexia was short German bunds in the Total

Return Swap market betting on an increase in bund yields.

           The sovereign debt crisis started in November 2009 when Greece forecasted an annual

budget deficit of 12.7% for 2009. During the following months, Greece, Portugal and Spain

announced first austerity measures to reduce their indebtness. Spain was downgraded by S&P

losing its AAA rating in April 2010 and Greece was downgraded below investment grade. In

May 2010, the Eurozone countries and the IMF agreed to the first EUR 110 billion bailout

package for Greece. On May 5th, the ECB announced that it had started to accept Greek

sovereign bonds as collateral independent of the rating responding to the tensions in funding

markets. The European Commission explicitly addressed its concerns with respect to the large

amount of sovereign debt in Dexia's portfolio and the use of interest rate derivatives which

"probably requires significant collateral for Dexia, which may reduce its eligible collateral base

for financing from the central banks or in the interbank repo market" (EC (2010)).11



10
   Holding a large amount of securities given Dexia's funding imbalances was even encouraged by rating agencies:
"Dexia's widely diversified funding base and the liquidity reserve provided by its large securities portfolio offset its
reliance on wholesale capital markets." (S&P Ratings Direct, 22 May 2008).
11
   Dexia held a portfolio of GIPSI sovereign bonds amounting to EUR 26.1 billion as of March 31st, 2010 consisting
mainly of Italian bonds (EUR 17.6 billion) and Greek government bonds (EUR 3.7 billion). The size of the sovereign
bond portfolio corresponds to almost three times of its book equity. Importantly, Dexia has kept the positions
unchanged since then.
                                                           9
          Even though Dexia made considerable progress in reducing its dependence on short-

term wholesale funding and in reducing its overall balance sheet, it was poorly capitalized (given

the huge impairments due to the deleveraging process) in summer 201112, i.e. when the crisis

became worse, which contributed to the subsequent run on the bank. Moreover, both Moody's

and S&P placed Dexia's ratings under review for possible downgrade. As reported by the group,

EUR 22 billion in unsecured short-term funds have been withdrawn between April and June 2011

and their US Dollar position has been impacted first. Figure 2.A. shows that US Money Market

Mutual Funds (MMF) reduced their holdings of Dexia’s commercial papers and repos within a

few months in spring 2011 from about USD 10 billion to zero after rating agencies have put

Dexia on watchlist for possible downgrade.

                                                      [Figure 2]

          Stock prices plunged following this liquidity shock. Consequently, Dexia needed to rely

increasingly on central bank funding which reduced the amount of available collateral for further

repo transactions.13 Figure 2.B. shows the pairwise correlation of Dexia’s stock return and Italian

sovereign bond returns and its stock return and German sovereign bond returns from January

2011 onwards. This graphic shows strikingly how the two legs of the carry trade diverged when

Italian yields surged and German bund yields continued to fall as investors continued their flight

into long-term German government bonds. Dexia lost about EUR 40 billion short-term funding

within 6 month in the second half of 2011. An additional EUR 6 billion unsecured short-term

funding was withdrawn during the July - September period, and another EUR 6 billion after

Moody's announcement of placing the group's long and short-term rating under review for




12
  Dexia’s Tier 1 ratio fell to 7.56% at end of 2011 due to losses incurred while Dexia divested its assets.
13
  The ratio of repurchase agreements with the ECB over total repurchase agreements almost doubled between 2010
and 2011.
                                                     10
possible downgrade on October 3rd, 2011. Moreover, the group lost commercial deposits of EUR

7 billion in the fourth quarter of 2011.14

           Dexia's derivative positions put even more pressure on short-term liquidity. Between

June and September 2011, Dexia had to post EUR 15 billion cash collateral due to the fall in

interest rates. On October 7th, Dexia incurred an additional EUR 16 billion margin call but was

unable to post the collateral and eventually was bailed out by the governments of Belgium,

France and Luxembourg. The government assured debtholders as well as swap counterparties that

they would not incur any losses in order not to trigger a default event. This is similar to

September 2008, when the US government bailed out American International Group (AIG). Also

in the case of Dexia, governments were concerned with massive losses that had to be booked by

the (unidentified) counterparties emphasizing the systemic importance of Dexia. It was bailed out

a third time in November 2012 and the European Commission extended an additional EUR 85

billion refinancing guarantee to restructure Dexia in December 2012.

           Dexia is not an isolated example. The bailout of Cyprus to rescue its two failing banks

Bank of Cyprus (BOC) and Cyprus Popular Bank provides the most recent example how

aggressive yield chasing by banks in the form of investing in risky sovereign debt brings an entire

country at the verge of collapse. A recent investigation by the Cypriot central bank into the

activities of Bank of Cyprus (BOC) showed that BOC purchased about EUR 2 billion Greek

government bonds in 2010 increasing its holdings to about EUR 2.4 billion (A&S, 2013).15

           Based on internal emails from BOC employees they infer the motives behind these

purchases. The existing non-performing loan portfolio eroded the profitability of the firm. BOC

thus purchased Greek government bonds to pursue an “absolute yield” strategy to deliver net

14
   The 1-year CDS spread of the banking subsidiary Dexia Crédit Local. The CDS spread increased within a few
weeks after June 2011 from 200bps to 1,000bps reflecting its rise in short-term funding costs as well as the market
expectation of Dexia’s default probability over the next year.
15
   The data published by the EBA shows a consistent increase in Greek bond exposure.
                                                        11
interest income and "relative value" strategy to take advantage of selling opportunities to generate

gains around reporting dates (“window dressing”). They invested in amongst the highest yielding

bonds including longer maturity inflation linked bonds, which resulted in BOC ultimately

experiencing higher losses on account of the related hedging that was entered. Hedges were put

in place to swap longer dated bonds onto floating rates and maintain target durations.16

           This carry trade was funded by the ECB. On December 16th, 2009, BOC applied and

received EUR 3 billion of ECB funding in a 1-year LTRO. The funds were not required to fund

the bank's existing balance sheet, but was obtained to invest in government and / or government

guaranteed bonds. Shortly thereafter, on Dec 21, 2009, BOC approved an increase in the overall

limit of the banks' bond portfolio to EUR 6 billion, which limits for investment in Greek and

Cypriot bonds set at 2 billion each. The yields on Greek and Cypriot were significantly higher

than interest rates on the ECB funds, and thus the ECB funding provided BOC with the

opportunity to increase net interest income.

B. Data Sources

           To identify the effects of banks’ carry trade behavior, we construct a dataset using three

major data sources. We collect market information (bank stock prices, bank and sovereign CDS

spreads, and sovereign bond yields) from Bloomberg, information about bond portfolio holdings

from the European Banking Authority (EBA) and annual and quarterly reports from the banks,

and financial information from SNL Financial as well as company reports. We augment the data

with information from S&P Credit Portal, investor presentations and the European Central Bank

and Bank of International Settlement (BIS).



16
  Total losses as a result of BOC’s Greek government bond holdings amounted to EUR 1.9 billion on 16 November
2012: EUR 910 million relate to the costs of restructuring due to the Private Sector Involvement program (PSI); EUR
562 million relate to mark to market adjustments on the new bonds; EUR 48 million relate to transfers from
Available for Sale (AFS) reserves; EUR 399 million relate to the costs of unwinding hedges related to the bonds.
                                                        12
           We start with all public European banks included in the EBA stress tests. A list of these

banks is included in Appendix II.17 We collect financial information such as size, leverage and

capitalization from SNL Financial. In addition, we compute stock returns from daily stock prices.

We use ten-year benchmark government bond yields, which are observed on a daily basis. Stock

prices and bond yields are collected from Bloomberg.

           Information about banks’ actual portfolio holdings of sovereign bonds is obtained from

the EBA. The EBA took over the responsibilities from the Committee of European Banking

Supervisors (CEBS) on January 1, 2011. They have been responsible for five stress tests and

capitalization exercises that have been conducted in the European banking market since 2010 to

“ensure the orderly functioning and integrity of financial markets and the stability of the financial

system in the EU.”18 The results of the tests together with detailed information about banks

sovereign bond portfolios were published for the following reporting dates: (1) March 2010, (2)

December 2010, (3) September 2011, (4) December 2011 and (5) June 2012.19

           We use the iMoneyNet database to collect monthly information about the holdings of

US Money Market Mutual Funds (US MMF) in European banks’ commercial paper and

repurchase agreements (repos). As a consequence of the financial crisis, the SEC approved

changes to Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act of 1940 in 2010 and took other actions to

strengthen the regulatory framework that governs MMFs. Following SEC regulation, US MMFs

have to report monthly market-to-market net asset value per share (NAV) of their portfolios on




17
   We exclude six banks from our analysis either because of data availability or because the bank is part of a banking
group where the parent owns the vast majority of stocks. These are: Bankia (BKIA), Raiffeisenbank International
AG (RBI), Österreichische Volksbanken AG (VBPS), Caja de Ahorros del Mediterraneo (CAM), Hypo Real Estate
(HRX) and Irish Life and Permanent (IPM).
18
   The first stress test was already performed in 2009, but neither the identity of the participating institutions nor
details about the results have been disclosed except for the information that all institutions were adequately
capitalized.
19
   The data is publicly available on the website of the EBA (http://www.eba.europa.eu/Home.aspx).
                                                         13
Form N-MFP which is then published by the SEC. We can access the data from November 2010

onwards.

C. Summary statistics

           We provide descriptive statistics for the returns of GIPSI as well as German ten-year

government bonds in Table 1. Panel A of Table 1 shows the mean daily bond returns since

January 2007 in basis points (bps). Greek government bonds have the highest negative return as

well as the highest variance followed by Portugal and Ireland. All three countries have already

been bailed out by the European Union. Germany has positive daily returns with a small variance.

                                                     [Table 1]

           Panel B (Panel C) reports bond return correlations between 2001 and 2007 (2007 and

2012). In the period between 2001 and 2007, bond returns were almost perfectly correlated. This

demonstrates that these countries were perceived by investors as being almost identical despite

the major economic differences between them. Greece and German government bond returns, for

example, had a correlation of 0.99. This changed significantly as the sovereign debt crisis

unfolded. Between 2007 and 2012, the bond return correlation among the GIPSI countries

declined and the correlation between GIPSI and German bond returns became negative showing

the divergence within the Eurozone and the flight to quality.20

           Panel A of Appendix III lists the averages of key variables for each bank. Log-Assets is

the natural logarithm of total book assets. Loans / Assets is measured as total customer loans

divided by total assets. ST-LVG is short-term debt divided by total debt. RWA / Assets is risk-

weighted assets divided by book assets. Tier 1 is the Tier 1 capital divided by risk-weighted

assets. On average, 33% of the total debt is short-term debt and banks have a Tier 1 ratio of

20
   We explore further time-series characteristics of GIPSI bond yields. The time-series are non-stationary but first
differenced time-series are. GIPSI bond yields are thus integrated of the order of 1 (I(1)). We test the co-integration
relationship between, for example, Italian government bond and German government bond yields and find that there
is no co-integrating relationship in the period starting in Q4 2009.
                                                          14
10.15%. Panel B of Appendix III provides time-series characteristics of banks’ stock returns and

CDS prices observed on a daily basis. The average daily realized return is -13.21 bps and the

average five-year CDS spread is about 185 basis points.

4. How Did Banks Manage their GIPSI Exposure? Portfolio Level Evidence

         In this section, we document the trading behavior of European banks and discuss

alternative explanations for our findings based on portfolio holding data obtained from the EBA.

Moreover we explore important differences as to the investments of peripheral versus core

European banks in peripheral sovereign debt, particularly how these patterns change once the

ECB started to fund the carry trades with two three-year LTROs in December 2011 and February

2012.

A. Sovereign bond holdings

         The carry trade hypothesis suggests that banks exploited a widening of yield spreads

betting on their subsequent convergence while short-term funding was still available. The

incentives were particularly strong for weakly capitalized banks to shift their portfolios into

riskier assets and to improve their regulatory capital without the costs of raising fresh equity as

these exposures had zero capital requirements. However, there are alternative explanations for

these findings. For example, it could be that European banks did not increase their exposure to

GIPSI sovereign debt but they are they simply holding on to their pre-crisis holding, that is,

before the spreads widened (“inertia hypothesis”). European banks’ exposure to GIPSI countries

might also simply reflect a home-bias of banks holding domestic sovereign debt (“home bias

hypothesis”).

         The EBA disclosed the sovereign bond holdings of European banks at five reporting

dates during the March 2010 to June 2012 period which provides first evidence that helps to

analyze banks’ behavior as to investments in risky sovereign debt and to disentangle the different

                                                15
hypotheses. Table 2 shows a highly aggregated statistic of European banks’ sovereign bond

holdings at five reporting dates since March 2010 both for the full sample (Panel A) and

separately for GIPSI and non-GIPSI banks (Panel B).

                                                   [Table 2]

         We document four important findings: First, European banks entered the sovereign debt

crisis with a substantial exposure to peripheral sovereign debt and their total exposure towards

Italian, Spanish and Portuguese government debt did not decrease substantially during the March

2010 to June 2012 period. For example, Italian government bond positions decreased only from

EUR 264.5 billion to EUR 258.9 billion. Second, we observe an increase in GIPSI and non-

GIPSI banks’ exposure to Spanish, Italian and to some extent also Portuguese sovereign debt

between March and December 2010 when yield spreads widened (compare Figure 1). Non-GIPSI

banks even increased their exposure to Spanish sovereign debt more than GIPSI banks in

absolute euro amounts. Spanish bond yields surged above Italian bond yields after Spain was

downgraded by S&P in April 2010 despite a higher rating of Spain vis-à-vis Italy. In other words,

banks were not passively caught by the emergence of the sovereign debt crisis as suggested by

the inertia hypothesis, but actively increased risky sovereign debt positions in their portfolios.

This also rules out the alternative home bias hypothesis that our results are driven by peripheral

banks’ exposure to their home country. Particularly non-GIPSI banks were increasing their

exposure to peripheral sovereign debt during this period.21

         Third, we observe a further substantial exposure increase to GIPSI sovereign debt in the

portfolios of GIPSI banks between December 2011 and June 2012. For example, Italian banks

invested about EUR 37 billion in domestic sovereign debt; Spanish banks increased their

exposure to Spanish government debt by about EUR 13 billion. Non-GIPSI banks, on the other
21
  Our introductory example “Bank of Cyprus” demonstrates this active yield searching behavior in Greek
government bonds in 2010.
                                                 16
hand, kept their exposures largely unchanged during this period.22 In December 2011 and

February 2012, the ECB injected about EUR 1 trillion of liquidity into the banking system at a

coupon of 0.75% and with a maturity of three years. Fourth, due to a substantial reduction of

GIPSI sovereign debt in non-GIPSI portfolios in 2011 and a relatively larger increase of

exposures in non-GIPSI bank portfolios (particularly during December 2011 and June 2012), we

observe a shift in risk exposure towards peripheral sovereign debt from non-GIPSI banks into

GIPSI banks’ portfolios. Nonetheless, non-GIPSI banks keep a substantial exposure to peripheral

sovereign debt and our findings suggest that banks were actively purchasing these securities after

yield spreads widened in search for returns.

B. Increasing sovereign exposures: Moral hazard vs. home bias

              In this sub-section, we investigate more generally European banks’ incentives to

purchase GIPSI sovereign debt after emergence of the sovereign crisis end of 2009 and how bank

behavior has changed between March 2010 and June 2012. To do this, we analyze the change in

banks’ sovereign bond holdings (1) by domestic vs. non-domestic bank, (2) by bank risk and (3)

by bond maturity. The results are reported in Table 3.

                                                              [Table 3]

              Panel A of Table 3 reports the absolute change in Italian and Spanish sovereign bond

holdings for domestic and non-domestic banks between March and December 2010, January to

December 2011 and January and June 2012 as well as the percentage change. Between March

and December 2010, non-domestic banks had a higher absolute as well as percentage increase in

both Italian and Spanish sovereign debt than domestic banks. For example, non-Spanish banks

increased their holdings by 66.34%. Between January and June 2012, non-domestic banks

reduced their portfolio exposures towards both countries, whereas domestic (and, in particular

22
     Note that Greek banks did not participate in the stress tests or capitalization exercises since September 2011.
                                                             17
Italian) banks purchased a significant amount of the debt of their own sovereign. Particularly

non-domestic banks reduced their exposures between January and December 2011.

              In Panel B of Table 3, we show the change in Italian and Spanish sovereign debt as a

percentage of total assets separately for various risk characteristics. High Tier 1, High

RWA/Assets and High Loans/Assets are indicator variables equal to 1 if the banks’ Tier 1 ratio

(RWA/Assets ratio, Loans/Assets ratio) is within the lower (upper) quartile of the distribution

among all sample banks. For example, banks with a Tier-1 ratio below 9.03% (the 25% quartile)

increase their Italian bond holdings, on average, by 0.49% of total assets between March and

December 2010. Overall, we find that banks with low Tier-1 ratios, high RWA / Assets and high

Loans / Asset ratios, that is banks with higher incentives to gamble and for regulatory arbitrage,

increase their exposure to Italian and Spanish sovereign debt more relative to other banks.

              High Tier 1 banks, for example, decreased their exposure to Italy in 2011 while low

Tier 1 banks even marginally increased their holdings. This is intuitive as those banks have

capital to support reinvesting in assets with higher RWA and absorb possible write-offs from

divesting Italian sovereign bonds which have substantially lost in value after Italy has been

downgraded to A in September 2011.

              While non-domestic banks increased their holdings in Italian and Spanish bonds

relatively more than domestic banks between March and December 2010, this trend reversed

between January and June 2012. Domestic banks increased their holdings while non-domestic

banks even decreased their sovereign bond exposures. These results indicate an increase in home

bias in the first half of 2012 which has been funded by the ECB. In December 2011 and February

2012, the ECB injected about EUR 1 trillion in two three-year LTROs into the banking system at

an initial interest rate of 1% at that time.23 Panel D of Table 3 reports the change in Italian and

23
     Since then, the interest rate on these funds has decreased to 0.75%.
                                                             18
Spanish sovereign bond holdings of our sample banks between January and June 2012. We

aggregate all individual bank exposures to the country level and distinguish between changes in

bond holdings with maturities equal / smaller than three years and greater than three years. If

banks use LTRO funds for new carry trades and match the maturities of the securities they

purchase with the maturity of these funds we expect to see increases in sovereign debt holdings

particularly for maturities equal or below three years.24                The data show that Italian banks

increased Italian sovereign bond holdings with a maturity of equal / below three years by EUR

28.6 billion and longer dated bonds by EUR 7.8 billion. Similarly, Spanish banks increased their

exposure to Spanish sovereign bonds by EUR 6 billion with a maturity of equal / below three

years and EUR 6.6 billion with maturities above three years.25 Some non-GIPSI banks have

increased their exposure, for example, French banks increased their Italian bond holdings by

EUR 3.1 billion. Overall, however, these exposure changes were small in comparison to

purchases by Italian or Spanish banks and holdings were, on average, rather reduced than

increased. Taken together, these results indicate that carry trades with Italian and Spanish

sovereign debt have been done by domestic banks consistent with the notion that “home bias” has

increased over time funded by the ECB.

5. Estimating Banks’ Carry Trade Exposure Using Multifactor Models

           In this section, we investigate the carry trade behavior of European banks inferring

banks’ peripheral sovereign debt as well as short term funding exposures through sensitivities of

banks’ equity with GIPSI and German sovereign bond returns. We then provide a series of

robustness and falsification tests to support our interpretation of carry trade behavior among


24
   Note that Panel B of Table 3 reports holding changes. That is, if banks use the funds to simply replace maturing
bonds or to replace own funding with ECB funding, this is not recognized in this analysis. Only increases in euro
exposures are recognized as “new” carry trades.
25
   However, about EUR 12 billion short term bonds have matured between December 2011 and June 2012, net
purchase of Spanish banks were thus about EUR 19 billion.
                                                        19
European banks and to demonstrate that this behavior is bank specific and does not extend to

hedge funds, non-European banks and non-financial firms providing further support for a bank

specific motivation (such as regulatory arbitrage) that drives bank behavior.

A. Methodology: Measuring Banks’ Carry Trade Exposure

             Unfortunately, micro level data of sovereign bond positions are unavailable to us on a

high frequency basis. Furthermore, banks may be exposed to sovereign bond risk other than

through direct bond positions, for example, through credit default swap positions and

counterparty exposure in derivatives transactions with governments. Given this limitation and to

link bank risk to both the investment and funding leg of the carry trade, we use multifactor

models in which the sensitivities of banks’ stock returns to sovereign bond returns are measures

of banks’ exposure to sovereign debt. The lack of micro level changes in portfolio holdings of

banks gives these tests more power and increases the efficiency of the estimates.26 More

precisely, we estimate the following regression

             ,         ,              ,           ,                 ,              ,         ,   ,     ,         (1)

where    ,       is bank i’s daily stock return,                ,       is the daily return on ten-year government bonds

from Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain or Ireland,                                ,   is the daily return on ten-year German

government bonds and              ,       is the daily return of the equity market index in country m in which

the bank is headquartered. Because of the co-movement of                               ,   and the sovereign bond returns of

country m and Germany, we orthogonalize                             ,    to both return series.27 Note that the ten-year

German government bond is an additional risk factor in our model.

             The estimate of                  ,       provides an unbiased estimate of the exposure of bank i to

GIPSI sovereign debt. A positive factor loading suggests that banks have invested in long-term

26
   Our approach to estimate European banks’ sovereign risk exposure is similar to the procedure employed by
Agarwal and Naik (2004) to characterize the exposures of hedge funds.
27
   Not orthogonalizing gives qualitatively similar results.
                                                                    20
(peripheral) government bonds.            ,   is an estimate of bank i’s short term funding exposure.

The negative factor loading suggests that banks are “short” long-term German bonds. This

reflects a “flight to quality” of investors who purchase long-term safe (German) government

bonds, at the same time reducing the supply of short-term capital. If long-term bond prices

appreciate whenever short-term funding dries up and banks are exposed to short-term funding,

then it appears as if banks were short long-term bonds.               ,    0 and            ,   0 is

consistent with a “carry trade” behavior of European banks: they appear to have invested in long-

term government bonds financed in the short-term wholesale market to maximize the carry

between both legs of the trade.

                                                    [Table 4]

         Panel A of Table 4 provides descriptive statistics of the estimated carry trade exposures,

for the full sample of banks and separately for GIPSI and non-GIPSI banks. The factor loadings

are estimated quarterly and averaged across all banks. The mean factor loadings for peripheral

bond exposure (Italy and Spain) are positive and suggest, on average, more exposure of banks to

Italian sovereign debt. A large negative loading of German bunds indicates the funding pressure

on banks during our sample period due to a flight to quality of investors. Interestingly, the factor

loadings for Italian and Spanish bonds are larger for the non-Italian and non-Spanish banks,

respectively. This suggests that non-domestic banks had large exposures to the periphery. The

pre-2007 carry trade estimates show that the exposure estimates were close to zero and

sometimes even small and negative before the yield spreads widened in mid-2008 supporting our

hypothesis that banks have built substantial carry trade positions as bets on the convergence of

sovereign bond yields in the euro area.

B. “Carry trade” behavior of European banks



                                                  21
         We estimate regression equation (1) using pooled OLS regressions and cluster standard

errors at two dimensions, bank and quarter, to account for (unobserved but time-variant) variation

that is both bank specific in different quarters and that is common across all banks in the same

quarter. The results are reported in Panel B of Table 4.

       The estimated values of           and               represent the cross-sectional averages of

European banks’ carry trade exposure. We also estimate (1) for each bank individually. Our

results indicate that banks’ stock returns are very sensitive to peripheral sovereign bond returns.

Model (1), for example, estimates the sensitivity of stock returns to Greek government bond

returns. The positive factor loading suggests an (unhedged) exposure of banks to Greek

government debt. All other factor loadings are (when employed individually) positive and

significant and the exposure seems largest with respect to Italian and Spanish government debt.

Model (6) estimates the sovereign debt exposures collectively. The R² of the models show that a

substantial proportion of the variation in stock returns is explained by these covariates.

is negative and large in magnitude indicating banks’ funding pressure caused by their exposure to

short-term debt. Overall, our results are consistent with a carry trade behavior of European banks.

C. Robustness of our carry trade estimates

       In Table 5, we report a series of robustness tests that supports the notion of carry trade

behavior of European banks.

                                                  [Table 5]

       We first construct an index of bond returns using the daily average return of sovereign

bonds from Euro area members other than GIPSI countries or Germany or France (Bond Index).

If banks invested in GIPSI government debt to exploit the highest yielding sovereign

investments, banks’ stock returns should be less sensitive to the return of this index. Model (1) of



                                                 22
Table 5 reports a regression including Bond Index as separate control variable and, as expected,

its coefficient is not statistically significant.

        Banks are also the largest domestic bond investors. A higher sensitivity of bank equity to

sovereign bond returns could also reflect a lower ability or willingness of the domestic

government to bail out a distressed bank. It could also reflect a higher exposure to the domestic

sovereign through bond holdings (“home bias”). To address both concerns, we include the home

country bond return (Home) of each bank in model (2). Home, as an example, reflects the amount

of Italian government debt that is held by Italian banks. The positive factor loading on the banks’

home country bond return indicates that banks are exposed to sovereign bonds of their home

country. The factor loadings of Italian and German bonds do not change materially suggesting

Italian bonds as primary asset class for carry trades.

        We include a variety of other macroeconomic state variables to control for changes in

macroeconomic fundamentals that could drive both stock and sovereign bond prices, namely: (i)

VSTOXX, the European counterpart to the VIX index in the US, is the change in the volatility

index of the European stock market; (ii) TermStructure is the slope of the term structure of

interest rates measured as the difference between the yield on a ten-year euro area government

bond and the one-month Euribor; (iii) BondDefSpread is the difference between the yield on ten-

year German BBB bonds and yields on ten-year German government debt; (iv) 1mEuribor is the

level of the short-term risk-free interest rate measured as the one-month Euribor; (v) ∆ESI is the

monthly change in the economic sentiment indicator obtained from opinion surveys conducted by

the European Central Bank; (vi) ∆IntProd is the monthly change in the level of industrial

production; (vii) ∆CPI is the change in the rate of inflation measured as the monthly change in

the European Consumer Price Index. Model (3) reports the results. Most importantly, the factor

loadings do not change including these variables.

                                                    23
           The sovereign debt market is characterized by a high degree of collinearity as shown in

Table 1. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) offers a way to construct different linear

combinations of the factor returns that are uncorrelated with each other using the covariance

matrix of the returns. As the covariance matrix is symmetric, it has linearly independent

eigenvectors corresponding to the number of positive eigenvalues. The eigenvectors are called

principal components and are ranked according to the eigenvalue. The first principal component

(PC1) is the linear combination of GIPSI bond returns with the highest eigenvalue. It is the

component that explains the largest part of the variation in GIPSI bond returns. Instead of using

the GIPSI returns as independent variables, we regress the banks’ stock return on PC1 and

Germany. We find a positive and significant relationship between PC1 and stock returns (model

(4)), which is consistent with a carry trade behavior of banks.

           In model (5) we substitute French for German government bonds and find a negative and

significant value for              , which is smaller in magnitude compared to the factor loadings of

German bunds. This is reflecting the increasing divergence of yields between French and German

government debt that started in 2011. The coefficients of Greece and Italy are even stronger. In

model (6), we include the Fama-French factors SMB and HML, however, the results remain

unchanged.28

           Carry trade exposure should also be reflected in CDS spreads as an important proxy for

bank risk and funding costs. We expect to see that CDS spreads reflect a widening of the gap

between GIPSI bond and German bund yields, either through an increase in peripheral bond

yields or if funding conditions deteriorate. We test this in models (7) and (8) and use Δ Log (Bank

CDS) as a dependent variable, which is the change in the natural logarithm of daily bank CDS

spreads. As reported in column (7), the coefficient of Greek bond returns is negative and

28
     HML and SMB are measured for European portfolios and available on Kenneth French’s website since 1990.
                                                        24
significant, whereby, if Greek bond prices fall, banks experience, on average, an increase in their

CDS spreads. Moreover, if German bund prices appreciate, banks’ funding costs also rise, ceteris

paribus, pointing to their exposure to short-term wholesale markets. The PCA in model (8) shows

a similar result. Overall, and across our various tests, we find strong evidence consistent with a

carry trade behavior of European banks.29

D. Alternative return indices

        We provide a variety of falsification tests as to the incentives of European banks versus

other financial and non-financial firms to load up on GIPSI sovereign exposures. US banks, for

example, were systematically recapitalized after the US mortgage crisis. European banks, on the

other hand, were, and still are, undercapitalized based on various standards (such as leverage

ratios). Moreover, US banks cannot use sovereign debt to the same extent as collateral for

liquidity as European banks. A similar argument applies to UK banks. Many of them have been

nationalized and their capital position strengthened after the financial crisis. They also do not

have access to the ECB using peripheral debt as collateral. We thus expect to find smaller

estimates on similar tests using US or UK banks. A third set of firms we consider are non-

financial (industrial) firms which do not have similar incentives such as gambling or regulatory

capital arbitrage as banks which should also be reflected in the carry trade estimates.

        We run a series of tests with various index returns as dependent variables. There are: (1) a

value weighted index of all EBA banks in our sample; (2) a value weighted index of UK banks;

(3) a value weighted index of the 100 largest US banks based on market values; (4) a HFRX

Macro Hedge Fund Index; (5) an equally weighted industrial index formed from the underlying

29
  We perform a series of further tests that remain unreported for brevity. We include bank fixed effects to control for
time-invariant bank characteristics. In other tests, we use bond yield changes instead of bond returns. We also
construct an equally weighted portfolio of bank stocks from our sample and estimate a time-series regression. In
separate tests, we exclude broker-dealer banks. These banks might have larger portfolios due to this specific
function. Lastly, we use weekly (instead of daily) stock returns. In all tests, our results from Table 4 remain
qualitatively unchanged.
                                                          25
MSCI industrial indices from Italy, Spain and Portugal (MSCI GIPSI)30; (6) the MSCI Industrial

Germany index; (7) an equally weighted index of the most important countries in Europe other

than Germany and the periphery (France, Netherlands, Norway, Denmark and Sweden); and (8)

the MSCI Industrial UK index.

                                                         [Table 6]

        Table 6 reports the results from OLS regressions. Control variables include the Fama-

French Factors SBM and HML. As market return, we include the Euro Stoxx 600 index for

European indices, the S&P 500 index for the US banks and MSCI World for the HFRX Macro

Hedge Fund index. Standard errors are adjusted for heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation using

Newey-West with 8 lags. Column (1) shows the time-series estimates for all EBA banks which

reflect our earlier cross-sectional results. We do not find statistically significant exposure of UK

banks to peripheral sovereigns (column (2)). Moreover, the value of                           is much smaller

indicating lower funding exposure. Column (3) reports the result for US banks echoing the results

for UK banks.31 We use daily returns of the HFRX Macro fund as dependent variable in column

(4). The results are intriguing and suggest that macro hedge funds are betting against Italy but are

long German bunds, thus effectively taking the opposite positions in trades with European banks.

Columns (5) to (8) show sensitivities of country specific industry indices to GIPSI and German

sovereign debt. Overall, the betas are close to zero and mostly insignificant.

6. Factor Loadings, Sovereign Bond Holdings & Liquidity Risk

           In this section, we show that our carry trade estimates are measuring banks’ investment

and funding risk exposure. Moreover, we show that they reflect sovereign risk exposure rather

than exposure of international banks to the real sector of the periphery.

30
  We exclude Ireland and Greece from this index due to missing data in the respective industrial index.
31
  We also run these results for a portfolio of Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan, Morgan Stanley, Citigroup and Bank of
America. It has frequently been claimed that these banks had huge counterparty exposure to the GIPSI countries. We
do not find significant exposures to either of the GIPSI sovereigns.
                                                       26
A. Results from Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR)

            Do these exposures relate to actual government bond holdings of banks or simply reflect

some other underlying economic exposures and linkages? And what determines banks’ liquidity,

i.e. short-term funding, risk? To address these important questions, we exploit bank level data on

sovereign bond holdings and short-term funding exposure. Since June 2010, the EBA has

disclosed bank level sovereign bond holdings reported during five sequential stress tests.32 If

             reflects     higher      exposure      to    GIPSI      sovereigns,       we       expect   to   find   higher

           if banks’ have higher reported holdings.

            We were arguing above that the negative factor loading of German bond returns reflects a

flight-to-quality from short-term investors into long-term German government bonds. We thus

expect to see cross-sectional differences in the factor loadings across banks arising from their

short-term funding exposure. An important source of funding risk for European banks is their

exposure to US money market mutual funds (MMF). Ivashina, Scharfstein and Stein (2012), for

example, show that the reduction in US-Dollar lending by US MMF caused a significant decline

in the dollar lending relative to euro lending by European banks which was not the case for US

banks.

                                                               [Figure 3]

            Figure 3.A shows US MMF’s exposure to European banks since October 2010. As

explained above, new regulation enforced by the SEC made it mandatory for MMF to disclose

the NAV of their investments on a monthly basis. In 2011 alone, US MMF funds withdrew about

USD 167 billion in repurchase agreements and commercial paper from European banks. Figure

3.B shows the percentage withdrawal from individual banks in 2011. US MMF completely

eliminated their exposure to seven banks in the Eurozone, among them Dexia S.A. Other banks,

32
     Note that not all banks participated in all stress tests or the capitalization exercise.
                                                                27
predominantly        Scandinavian              banks,   experienced      massive     inflows       such               as   Svenska

Handelsbanken AB, SEB Banken AB or Swedbank indicating the divergence in funding

opportunities for European banks.

         We assess the importance of portfolio holdings of sovereign debt as well as money market

fund exposure in explaining our factor loadings in a one-step framework

                                                        ,,                                     ∆                  ,
     ,                  ,                                            ,               ,                                          ,
                                                    ,                                                     ,


                 ,          ,                                                                                                  (2)

using Zellner’s (1968) seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) technique.33                                              is taking the

                                    ,,                                                         ∆              ,
form                                        and                is taking the form                                     . ∆MMF are
                                ,                                                                     ,


monthly money market withdrawals denominated in million euros. The pooled time-series cross-

sectional approach is well suited in our setting because there might be substantially more

variation in the bond portfolios across banks as there is variation over time for a single bank

given the limited portfolio data that is available to us. This system of equations consists of N (i.e.

the number of banks) time series equations and is estimated using GLS. T is the number of time-

series observations and             ,      ,      and        are point estimates constrained to be constant across

all banks. We thus can interpret these coefficients as average factor loadings of our sample banks.

We expect the value of                   to be positive and the value of            to be negative. The results are

reported in Table 7.

                                                                [Table 7]

         The exposures to Italy and Spain show that equity returns are sensitive to GIPSI and

German government bond holdings consistent with a carry trade behavior of banks and the results

reported in Panel B of Table 4.                   is positive and significant showing that banks’ stock returns

33
  This approach has also been used, for example, in French et al. (1983) to estimate the effects of nominal
contracting on stock returns.
                                                                28
are responding more positively to GIPSI bond returns if banks have larger holdings of these

securities in their portfolios. Correspondingly, banks with larger withdrawals from MMF

experience more funding pressure as indicated by the negative and significant coefficient of         .

   is also negative and significant suggesting that even if banks do not have US MMF exposure,

they are still subject to short-term funding risk. In unreported test, we also analyze the effect of

other measures of liquidity risk (LIQ) on banks’ sensitivity to German bunds which have been

used widely in the literature. There are: short-term debt over total debt (ST-LVG) and repurchase

agreements with other banks or the ECB over total assets (Repo / Assets). As expected banks with

more short term debt (relative to total debt) or more repo funding have more negative            .

B. Results from a two-step-procedure

       The advantage of the one-step procedure over a two-step procedure is to avoid a

measurement (sampling) error in estimating               and            . The two-step procedure

estimates the factor loadings in a first regression and uses these estimates in a second step to

analyze their determinants. If the sampling error is not constant across banks, this might induce

heteroscedasticity in the second stage regression. More importantly, a possible contemporaneous

correlation between the error terms in estimating (1) could induce a correlation among the factor

loadings which, in turn, could inflate our t-statistics in the second step. However, the SUR

methodology requires a balanced panel restricting the number of time-series observations that can

be used in the regressions. Given the limitations of both approaches, this section presents the

results from the two-step procedure to further investigate the link between our carry trade

estimates and the actual bond holdings from bank disclosures. In a first step, we relate the factor

loadings estimated for each bank in the time period 60 days before and 60 days after each

reporting date on the sovereign bond holdings scaled by total assets. To visualize this


                                                29
relationship, we plot the factor loadings on the sovereign bond holdings for each reporting date

and country separately in Figure 4. We use logs for illustration purposes.

                                                    [Figure 4]

          The scatterplot shows a positive relationship between factor loadings and portfolio

holdings. We estimate regression (3) to analyze how                     .,   varies with actual portfolio

holdings in the cross-section of banks. Similar to the one-step-procedure, we scale holdings by

total assets (alternatively by book value of equity) to construct a measure that has the same unit

of measurement as            .,   and expect        to be positive. A positive value indicates that the

sensitivity of banks’ equity return is higher if banks have higher actual exposure.              measures

other influences on          ,,   which are assumed to be constant across banks.

                                                              ,,
                                   ,                                     ,     (3)
                                                          ,


          The results are reported in Appendix IV. Panel A of Appendix IV shows the result for

exposures to Italian and Spanish government bonds. The standard errors are White’s

heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors. We find that              is positive and significant at the

one percent level which supports our methodology to infer banks’ exposure to sovereign debt

through the sensitivity of the banks’ equity returns to sovereign bond returns. This result extends

to Spanish bonds as investment leg of the carry trade as well as book equity as alternative scaling

factor.

          We aggregate the monthly MMF holdings data to the quarter and estimate quarterly

           ,   using (1). As an example, we chose a carry trade with Italian bonds as the investment

leg. We find some variation in the value of                   ,    ranging from -3.92 to -0.93. Figure 5

explores the relationships between the factor loading estimates and MMF withdrawals

graphically.

                                                    30
                                                      [Figure 5]

        Figure 5.A plots time-series betas of Dexia’s equity and German government bonds

(           ) as well as monthly holdings of US MMF (dashed line). The betas were constructed

using a multivariate GARCH model with dynamic correlations (Engle, 2002, and Engle and

Sheppard, 2001). This plot strikingly shows the co-movement of                                 and US MMF

withdrawals. Figure 5.B. explores the correlation between                       ,   and MMF withdrawals in

the cross-section of banks in 2011. This correlation is 0.71 suggesting that US MMF exposure is

an important determinant of banks’ liquidity problems.

        We regress quarterly factor loadings on MMF withdrawals scaled by total assets (using

previous MMF exposure and short-term debt as alternative deflators) over the full sample period

starting October 2010:

                                                             ∆
                                          ,,                                ,         (4)
                                                                  ,


        We expect         to be negative. An decrease in MMF over a quarter should make German

long-term bond returns more negatively correlated with equity returns resulting in a lower value

of            ,,   . Panel B of Appendix IV reports the results. Our cross-sectional results suggest

that banks that experience larger withdrawals from US MMF have more negative factor

loadings.34

C. Real sector exposure

        In a second step, we use the data on banks’ real sector exposure in each country. One

could argue that our factor loadings reflect cross-border investments of internationally active

banks rather than exposure to sovereign debt. We construct a new variable Italy-Real/Assets


34
  We also scale MMF changes by book value of equity. Moreover, we repeat all cross-sectional tests using Spanish
government bonds as investment leg of the carry trade. The results are qualitatively similar but not reported for
brevity.
                                                       31
which is the sum of each bank’s exposure to firms, the retail sector (including retail real estate)

and commercial real estate scaled by total assets. The real sector exposure to Spain is constructed

accordingly. Table 8 reports the results of regressions of our factor loadings estimated 60 days

before and after 31 Dec 2010 on real sector and sovereign exposure.

                                                     [Table 8]

       Using Italy as an example, models (1) and (2) show that our factor loadings are positively

related to reported sovereign and real sector exposure in separate regressions. Model (3) includes

both types of exposures and model (4) excludes Italian banks. Particularly in our sample of non-

Italian banks, we find that sovereign holdings explain our factor loadings while real sector

exposures are not significantly related to the latter. Interestingly, around this reporting date, we

do not find a significant relationship between factor loadings and sovereign holdings among the

sample of non-Spanish banks. These findings point to interesting differences and dynamics

between countries and over time. They also suggest that Italian sovereign debt is the primary

asset class for banks’ investment in carry trades.

7. Carry Trade Incentives

         Who is doing the carry trades? In this section, we look at various explanations driving

this behavior and focus in particular on regulatory capital arbitrage and risk shifting. We then

show that actual portfolio holdings of banks are driven by the same factors as our carry trade

estimates. In the last part of this section, we analyze the time-series of carry trade estimates and

explain important differences in the behavior of GIPSI versus non-GIPSI banks, particularly after

the massive liquidity injections by the ECB in December 2011 and February 2012.

A. Factor loadings and bank risk

         The primary hypothesis studied in this paper is that investment behavior of European

banks reflects a moral hazard behavior in the form of risk taking that exploits low risk weights of

                                                 32
risky government bond positions. Particularly under-capitalized banks are more likely to invest in

carry trades to comply with regulatory capital requirement (“regulatory arbitrage”) and / or to

shift risk betting on their own survival (“risk shifting”).

           We use various bank risk factors, such as bank size (Log-Assets), short-term leverage

(ST-LVG) and the size of the loan portfolio (Loans/Assets) to investigate the investment behavior

of European banks. In all tests, we use the one-year lagged bank characteristics.35 As in previous

tests, standard errors are clustered at the bank and quarter level. We include all risk proxies

individually and collectively and run regressions on the full sample of banks. The results are

reported in Table 9.

                                                         [Table 9]

           We document that larger banks (that is banks with more international focus, more

wholesale funding and that are more systemically important) have larger sovereign exposures to

Italy. Also, riskier banks, i.e. banks with more short-term leverage and loan to asset ratios have

more exposure. These results provide strong support for the carry trade hypothesis but are not

consistent with alternative hypotheses such as home bias.36 We document similar results as to

European banks’ exposure to Spanish sovereign debt.

           A further motive as to why banks are heavily invested in government debt is regulatory

capital arbitrage because of how banks’ balance sheet exposure to sovereign debt is treated under

existing capital rules. Basel II encourages banks to hold sovereign debt. The Capital Requirement

Directive (CRD) assigns a zero risk weight for “exposures to Member States’ central government




35
   ST Debt and Loans/Assets are included in addition to the interaction terms in the respective models as well as a
constant term, but all remain unreported for brevity. Log-Assets is added as a control variable in all models.
36
   Analyzing a subsample of Italian banks, we find that larger Italian banks have more exposure to their own
domestic sovereign debt. Interestingly, riskier Italian banks have lower sovereign exposure suggesting that moral
hazard (even though there is some evidence) is not the only motive of these banks to hold domestic sovereign debt.
Among Spanish banks, we find strong evidence consistent with carry trade behavior.
                                                        33
[…] denominated and funded in the domestic currency of that central government” (BIS, 2011).37

That is, despite (even little) differences in country ratings, banks are allowed to reduce the capital

they hold against these positions to zero. Consequently, particularly undercapitalized banks, that

is, banks with low Tier 1 capital ratios, have an incentive to shift their portfolios into assets with

lower risk weights (regulatory capital arbitrage). We test this hypothesis using the Tier 1 ratio,

which is defined as Tier 1 capital divided by risk-weighted assets, and RWA/Assets as proxies

for capital adequacy. Table 9 contains the results of the cross-sectional regressions. We report the

results again separately for Italy (column (2)) and Spain (column (4)). In all regressions, we

include Log-Assets as well as interaction terms with GIPSI and Germany to control for bank size.

           Again, we focus on banks’ exposure to Italy first. Consistent with our earlier results, we

find that larger banks have a larger exposure to Italian sovereign debt. We find that banks with

higher Tier1 capital ratios have lower exposure to Italian sovereign debt. Tier 1 capital increases

if banks have higher RWA or if they decide to hold more economic capital. For a given amount

of RWA, the negative coefficient implies higher risk-shifting incentives. Moreover, the positive

coefficient on RWA/Assets (unlike the sign on Tier1) suggests that there is a regulatory arbitrage

motive. Only including one of these variables might result in biased estimates of the coefficients

due to confounding effects.38 Moreover, we find that banks with high exposure to short-term

funding have significantly more exposure to Italy. Additionally, European banks with more short-

term debt are also more exposed to funding shocks. These results provide strong evidence for



37
   Under the standardized approach, sovereign debt has a zero risk weight. Even under the Internal Ratings Based
(IRB) approach there is a loophole. Usually, banks have to hold capital based on an assessment of the default
likelihood estimated with their own internal models. However, they can choose to switch back to the standardized
approach for assessing capital requirements for sovereign debt eventually holding no capital (“IRB permanent partial
use”).
38
   In unreported results, we include either Tier 1 or RWA / Assets and find that the coefficient of Tier 1 is less
negative when we do not control for RWA / Assets. This result suggests that the discretionary part of Tier1 capital is
more strongly related to the risk-shifting motive. In other words, not controlling for RWA understates the risk-
shifting effect.
                                                         34
carry trade (moral hazard) behavior of European banks.39 The results extend to European banks’

exposure to Spanish government debt.40

B. Sovereign bond holdings and bank risk

           Our carry trade estimates show that particularly risky and undercapitalized banks are

purchasing more Italian and Spanish sovereign debt consistent with carry trade behavior of these

banks. Therefore and in line with the descriptive results from Table 3, we expect to find also

higher reported Italian and Spanish sovereign bond holdings of these banks around the EBA

stress tests. In separate tests, we regress Italian (Spanish) sovereign debt holdings by our sample

banks (scaled by total assets) on Tier-1 ratio, RWA/ Assets, Loans / Assets and Log-Assets using

OLS regressions. The results are reported in Table 10.

                                                           [Table 10]

           Bank risk characteristics are lagged by one year and standard errors are clustered at the

bank level. The results reported in column (1) in Panel A suggest that increasing Tier-1 ratios

from the first to the third quartile decreases Italian sovereign bond holdings over total assets by

one percentage point, ceteris paribus. The t-statistic is -4.42 and the R² suggests that a substantial

part of the variation of Italy / Assets can be explained by a bank’s capitalization. Similarly, we

find that banks with higher RWA / Assets and Loans / Assets have higher Italian bond holdings.

Moreover, larger banks also have higher bond exposures. Overall, these tests as well as the

previously reported results are consistent with the interpretation that riskier and weakly




39
   Interestingly, we do not find statistically significant evidence that riskier Italian banks (that is, banks with lower
capital ratios or higher RWA or short-term debt) are investing more in domestic sovereign debt, which is in line with
our earlier results. Domestic banks most likely have different motives to invest in own sovereign debt (over and
above the carry trade motive).
40
   In unreported tests and in a subsample only Spanish banks, we find strong evidence that even Spanish banks with
low Tier 1 capital ratios and high RWA / Assets invested more in domestic sovereign debt compared to better
capitalized Spanish banks and they also were more exposed to short term funding. In other words, these results are
consistent with carry trade (moral hazard) behavior among Spanish banks.
                                                           35
capitalized banks have stronger incentives to invest in carry trades using Italian and Spanish

sovereign debt.

C. Home Bias and LTROs

          Our descriptive results suggests a shift in risk exposure to peripheral sovereign debt

from non-GIPSI banks to GIPSI banks through the ECB interventions in December 2011 and

February 2012. In this sub-section, we show that the increase in home bias is also reflected in our

carry trade estimates. We estimate regression (1) and augment the model with time indicator

variables: Before March’10, March’10 – Dec’10, Dec’10 – Sept’11, and After Sept’11. We

interact sovereign bond returns with these indicator variables.               (        ) represents

banks’ equity sensitivity to GIPSI (German) bond returns in the period after September 2011,

including the two three year LTROs but also the ECB’s one year LTRO from October 2011. The

interaction terms then show incremental effects in each respective time period. Table 11 reports

the results.

                                                 [Table 11]

          Columns (1) to (3) report the results for banks’ exposure to Italian sovereign debt and

columns (4) to (6) for the exposure to Spanish sovereign debt. We always run the regression for

the full sample, non-domestic and domestic banks. The full sample results in column (1) and (4)

show that banks, on average, still have substantial exposure to Italian and Spanish sovereign debt.

The exposure, however, has decreased over time as shown by positive and significant coefficients

of the interaction terms. This is consistent with the summary statistics reported in Table 2. This

result extends to the subsample of non-domestic banks (columns (2) and (4)). The subsample of

non-Italian banks reflects the increase in home bias. The factor loading on         is 0.808 (which

is significantly higher as the factor loading of non-Italian banks (0.286, p-value < 0.001)) and the

incremental effects are negative. The incremental effect in the subsample of Spanish banks are
                                                36
insignificant which is consistent with the total exposures summarized in Table 2 indicating that

Spanish banks have reduced their bond holdings since March 2010 to some extent.

8. Conclusion

       During the past three years, increasing economic divergence between the core of Europe

and the periphery have caused a surge in the yield spread of peripheral countries (such as GIPSI,

or Greece, Italy, Ireland, Portugal and Spain) and a flight to German bunds. Our article argues

that European banks have placed bets on the opposite economic development – convergence –

within the euro area expecting yield spreads between, for example, Italy and Germany or Spain

and Germany to converge. These bets or “carry trades” were designed as investments in GIPSI

government bonds financed with short-term debt. As the sovereign debt crisis deepened,

European banks lost a substantial portion of their market value. In a series of cross-sectional and

time-series tests, we find evidence that these trades have been widespread among European

banks, not just GIPSI banks but even non-GIPSI European banks. We find convincing evidence

for bank moral hazard and regulatory capital arbitrage in that large banks, banks with more short-

term debt, and undercapitalized banks with high risk-weighted assets, are more likely to engage

in carry trades employing low risk-weight GIPSI government bonds to earn higher and riskier

returns on their diminished economic capital while meeting regulatory capital requirements.

       Several policy implications stem from our empirical findings. One, under-capitalized

banking sectors as the European countries had at the end of the financial crisis of 2007-08 can

lead to subsequent problems through excess risk-taking, a theme that is reminiscent of the

Japanese banking crisis of the 90’s (see Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap, 2008). The European

response in Fall of 2008 and early 2009 featured more debt and asset guarantees than bank

recapitalization, unlike the United States, and the ongoing sovereign crisis has again left several

banks under-capitalized sufficiently to the point that their market funding has dried up.

                                                 37
       Second, simply restoring bank capitalizations up to regulatory risk weight based

requirements does not suffice in environments where the regulatory risk weights have become out

of sync with market’s perception of risk of assets and indeed the underlying fundamental risk of

assets, the zero risk weights on sovereign bonds of peripheral countries being far from being risk-

free to deserve such regulatory capital treatment. Worse, the continuation of reliance on such

outdated risk weights, as in the first two stress tests of 2010 in Europe, can give under-capitalized

banks perverse incentives to shift portfolios towards assets with low risk weight but high

economic risk and return. In the case of Europe, this created a strengthening of the nexus

between sovereign and financial sectors, making sovereign crises in southern periphery a pan-

European concern. The stress tests of July 2011 in Europe did address the zero risk-weight issue

more seriously and the outcomes – at least for non-GIPSI banks – since then have been more

salubrious and their GIPSI bond holdings shrunk.

       Third, the European Central Bank’s LTRO facilities appear to have provided funding to

domestic Spanish and Italian banks to significantly build up their exposures to their sovereign

debt, a move that should have helped the sovereigns in question. However, the resulting “home

bias” in debt holdings of these sovereigns has nevertheless strengthened the financial sector and

sovereign’s nexus in the periphery, implying that a further deterioration of the sovereign health

would lead to a significant peripheral crisis, even if not a fully pan-European one (in similar

magnitude). Again, this form of ECB funding does not tackle head on the problem of bank

recapitalization for GIPSI banks and their incentives to load up on sovereign debt – and of their

sovereigns to encourage (or not discourage) such home bias – remain unaddressed.

       Finally, our results highlight the link between asset-side risk and short-term funding

problems of banks which has been ignored in the Basel-II regulation. The new Basel-III

framework addresses liquidity problems of banks requiring them to comply with new liquidity

                                                 38
ratios. However, it is still heavily debated as to which assets count as being “liquid”. If sovereign

bonds and other risky securities fall into that category, banks will have similar incentives to load-

up on these assets as when they had zero risk weights for capital requirements. Going forward it

will be important to investigate how bank solvency and liquidity risk interact. When assets held

by banks are risky, this generates funding problems for these banks if they heavily rely on short-

term wholesale funding. The months following the 3rd European stress-test showed some relief

for non-GIPSI banks’ funding conditions. For the first time, regulators stressed sovereign risk and

eventually required banks to increase their regulatory capital which has been addressed at least by

some banks issuing new equity. Non-GIPSI banks also broadly reduced their risky sovereign debt

positions. Again, this suggests that banks’ incentives to load-up on risky assets is driven by low

capital requirements to hold them on their balance sheets and similar regulatory arbitrage of

Basel-III liquidity requirements would have to be factored in by the regulators.


References

Acharya, V., Drechsler, I. and Schnabl, P. (2010) ‘A Pyrrhic Victory? – Bank Bailouts and
      Sovereign Credit Risk’, working paper, NYU-Stern.

Acharya, V., Engle, R. and D. Pierret. (2013) ‘Testing Macroprudential Stress Tests: The Risk of
      Regulatory Risk Weights’, working paper, NYU-Stern.

Acharya, V. and Rajan, R.G. (2011) ‘Sovereign Debt, Government Myopia and the Financial
      Sector’, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Acharya, V., Schnabl, P. and Suarez, G. (2011) ‘Securitization without Risk Transfer’, Journal of
      Financial Economics, forthcoming.

A&S (2013) ‘Bank of Cyprus – Holdings of Greek Government Bonds (Prepared for the Central
      Bank of Cyprus)’, Investigation Report Alvarez & Marsal Global Forensic and Dispute
      Services, LLP.

Becker, Bo and Ivashina, V. (2013) ‘Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market’, working paper,
      Harvard Business School.



                                                 39
Bolton, P. and Jeanne, O. (2011) ‘Sovereign default and bank fragility in financially integrated
       economies’, NBER working paper, 16899.

Boyson, N.M., Fahlenbrach, R., and Stulz, R. (2013) ‘Trust Preferred Securities and Regulatory
      Abritrage’, working paper.

Broner, F., Martin, A. and Ventura, J. (2010) ‘Sovereign risk and secondary markets’, American
       Economic Review 100, pp. 1523–1555.

Caballero, R.J., Hoshi, T., and Kashyap, A.K. (2008) ‘Zombie Lending and Depressed
       Restructuring in Japan’ American Economic Review 98 (5), 1943 – 1977.

Chernenko S., and A. Sunderam (2012) ‘Frictions in Shadow Banking: Evidence from Lending
      Behavior of Money Market Funds’, Working Paper, Ohio State University.

Diamond, D. and Rajan, R.G. (2011) ‘Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit Freeze’, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 126(2), pp. 557–591.

Duffie, D. (2011). ‘How Big Banks Fail and What to Do About It’, Princeton University Press,
       Princeton and Oxford.

EBA, (2010) ‘Aggregate outcome of the 2010 EU wide stress test exercise coordinated by CEBS
      in     cooperation    with     the    ECB’,     available      at:     http://stress-test.c-
       ebs.org/documents/Summaryreport.pdf.

EBA, (2011 a) ‘European Banking Authority: 2011 EU Wide Stress Test Aggregate Report’,
      available at:
       http://stress-test.eba.europa.eu/pdf/EBA_ST_2011_Summary_Report_v6.pdf.

EBA, (2011 b) ‘Capital buffers for addressing market concerns over sovereign exposures’,
      available at:
       http://stress-test.eba.europa.eu/capitalexercise/Methodology%20FINAL.pdf.

Engle, R. F., 2002, “Dynamic conditional correlation: a simple class of multivariate generalized
       autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models,” Journal of Business and Economic
       Statistics, 20, 339–351.

Engle, R. F., and Sheppard, K. (2001) ‘Theoretical and empirical properties of dynamic
       conditional correlation multivariate GARCH,” Discussion Paper 2001-15, University of
       California, San Diego.

Fischer, M., Hainz, C., Rocholl, J. and Steffen, S. (2012) ‘Government Guarantees and Bank
       Risk Taking Incentives’, working paper.

French K.R., R. S. Ruback, and G. W. Schwert (1983) ‘Effects of Nominal Contracting on Stock
       Returns’, Journal of Political Economy 91(1), 70 – 96.


                                                 40
Furlong, F. T. and M. C. Keeley (1987) ‘Bank Capital Regulation and Asset Risk’, Economic
       Review, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Spring 1987, 20 – 40.

Furlong, F. T. and M. C. Keeley (1989) ‘Bank Capital Regulation and Risk Taking: A Note’,
       Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 13, 883 – 891.

Gennaioli, N., Martin, A. and       Rossi, S. (2011) Sovereign Defaults, Domestic Banks, and
      Financial Institutions, available at: http://crei.cat/people/gennaioli.

Huang, R. and Ratnovski, L. (2011) ‘The Dark Side of Bank Wholesale Funding’, Journal of
      Financial Intermediation 20, pp. 248–263.

Hoshi, T., and Kashyap, A.K. (2010) ‘Will the U.S. Bank Recapitalization Succeed? Eight
       Lessons from Japan’, Journal of Financial Economics 97, 398 – 417.

Ivashina, V., D. S. Scharfstein and J. C. Stein (2012) ‘Dollar Funding and the Lending Behavior
       of Global Banks’, NBER Working Paper.

Kacperczyk, M. and Schnabl, P. (2013) ‘How Safe are Money Market Mutual Funds? Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Keeley, M.C. (1990) ‘Deposit Insurance, Risk and Market Power in Banking’ American
      Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 5, 1183 – 1200.

Jensen, M., and Meckling, W. (1976) ‘Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs
       and Ownership Structure’, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305 – 360.

Peek, J., and Rosengren, E.S. (2005) ‘Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the
       Misallocation of Credit in Japan’, American Economic Review 95 (4), 1144 – 1166.




                                               41
Figure 1.A. Pairwise Comparison of Government Bond Yield Spreads: Italy versus
Germany
This graphic shows the time series of 10-year government bond yields comparing Italian and German 10-year
government bond yields since January 2005. Vertical lines indicate rating downgrades by S&P.




                                                                      A
                                                                A+        BBB+




Figure 1.B. Pairwise Comparison of Government Bond Yield Spreads: Spain versus
Germany
This graphic shows the time series of 10-year government bond yields comparing Spanish and German 10-year
government bond yields since January 2005. Vertical lines indicate rating downgrades by S&P.




                                                           AA
                       AA+                                                 A




                                                                     AA-




                                                   42
Figure 2.A. Dexia Stock Price and US Money Market Mutual Fund Holdings
(Nov 2010 – September 2011)
This graphic shows Dexia’s stock price and commercial paper and repo holdings of US Money Market Mutual Funds
over the November 2010 to September 2011 period.




Figure 2.B. Dexia Return Correlations
This graphic shows the time-series of 30-day rolling correlations of Dexia’s stock returns with 10-year Italian and
10-year German government bond returns since January 2011. The vertical red lines indicate the two 3-year Long-
Term-Refinancing-Operations (LTRO) of the European Central Bank (ECB) in December 2011 and February 2012.




                                                        43
Figure 3.A. US Money Market Fund Holdings of European Banks
This figure depicts the investments of US MMF in European banks since October 2010.




Figure 3.B. % Sell off of US MMF in 2011
Sale of commercial paper and repurchase agreements of European banks during the January to December 2011
period.




                                                      44
Figure 4. Factor Loadings and Bond Portfolio Holdings
The graph depicts a scatter plot of Log(Beta) estimated from a cross-sectional regression of stock on 10-year Greek
and German government bond returns on Log(Holdings / Assets). Factor loadings are estimated within 60 days
before and after the reporting date of the portfolio holdings.




                                                        45
46
Figure 5.A. Dexia S.A. – Time Varying Betas and MMF Exposure
This graphic shows time-varying betas of Dexia’s equity with 10-year German government bond returns estimated
using an MGARCH-DCC model and monthly US MMF holdings in Dexia since November 2010.




Figure 5.B. Cross-Sectional Differences
This graphic plots             .   measured during the Jan 2011 – Dec 2011 period against US MMF withdrawals in
2011 scaled by total assets.




                                                            47
Table 1
Descriptive Statistics on Return Correlations
This table contains descriptive statistics (Panel A) and correlations (Panel B and C) of ten-year sovereign bond
returns of Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Ireland, Germany and France during the 2007 to 2012 period.


Panel A. Descriptive statistics of daily sovereign bond returns
      Country          Mean (bps)         Std. Dev. (bps)    Variance (bps)       Min (bps)        Max (bps)
Greece               -9.537             176.35              3.11              -2,449.1           4,253.8
Italy                -0.669             50.45               0.26              -445.7             755.1
Portugal             -2.999             107.91              1.16              -1,868.4           1,549.3
Spain                -0.602             50.68               0.26              -362.6             837.1
Ireland              -1.619             71.55               0.51              -791.1             1,076.1
Germany               0.662             38.69               0.15              -224.4             252.22



 Panel B. Soverein bond return correlations (2001 - 2006)
              Greece    Italy Portugal      Spain Ireland        Germany
 Greece           1.00
 Italy            1.00    1.00
 Portugal         0.97    0.96       1.00
 Spain            1.00    1.00       0.97     1.00
 Ireland          0.99    0.99       0.97     0.99      1.00
 Germany          0.99    0.99       0.97     0.99      0.99          1.00


 Panel C. Soverein bond return correlations (2007 - 2012)
              Greece    Italy Portugal      Spain Ireland        Germany
 Greece           1.00
 Italy            0.79    1.00
 Portugal         0.95    0.80       1.00
 Spain            0.78    0.79       0.80     1.00
 Ireland          0.72    0.54       0.82     0.77      1.00
 Germany         -0.79 -0.43        -0.71    -0.62     -0.67          1.00




                                                       48
Table 2
Summary Statistics of Sovereign Bond Holdings
This table reports summary statistics of sovereign bond holdings as reported along with the EBA stress test results.
Reporting dates are March 2010, December 2010, September 2011, December 2011 and June 2012.

Panel A
                               Greece            Italy   Portugal       Spain         Ireland
March 2010                     94,912       264,500      27,154        174,833        24,878
December 2010                  85,558       303,999      30,799        200,283        18,221
September 2011                 24,579       267,218      28,723        177,466        17,016
December 2011                  19,939       223,208      22,267        137,874        16,327
June 2012                      1,818        258,894      25,600        148,422        17,494

Panel B
                               Greece            Italy   Portugal       Spain         Ireland
No GIPSI banks
March 2010                     34,814       115,472      14,776        29,190         18,677
December 2010                  28,208       132,803      14,636        41,923          5,017
September 2011                 21,832       103,137      13,975        30,039          3,845
December 2011                  17,355        69,243      10,390        22,311          3,528
June 2012                      1,672         69,344      10,169        20,615          2,961
GIPSI banks
March 2010                     56,148       144,856       5,176        143,869         5,322
December 2010                  54,447       164,011      10,351        154,793        12,466
September 20111)                NA          156,043      10,972        143,629        12,455
December 20111)                 NA          147,746       8,180        111,774        12,109
          1)
June 2012                       NA          184,171      10,657        124,385        13,848


1) Greek banks were excluded from stress tests




                                                         49
Table 3
Increasing Sovereign Exposure
This table analyses changes in bond holdings between March and December 2010, January and December 2011 as
well as between January and June 2012. Panel A reports the change in holdings in Italian and Spanish sovereign debt
of Italian and non-Italian (Spanish and non-Spanish) banks as well as the percentage change. Panel B reports the
change in Italian (Spanish) bond holdings scaled by total assets segregated by risk factors. High Tier 1 is an indicator
variable equal to 1 if a bank’s Tier 1 ratio is in the first quartile of the distribution among all banks. High
RWA/Assets and High Loans/Assets are indicator variables equal to 1 if the bank’s RWA/Assets ratio and
Loans/Assets ratio are within the upper quartile of the distribution among all banks. Panel C reports changes in
sovereign bond holdings by publicly listed European banks between Dec 31st, 2011 and June 30th, 2012 aggregated
to the country level. Changes are reported by bond maturity. <= 3 years (> 3 years) denotes bonds that have a
remaining maturity of below / equal to (greater than) 3 years.

Panel A. By Country (Holdings in million euros)

 Italian Bank   ∆ Italy March‘10-Dec‘10   ∆ Italy Jan‘11-Dec‘11    ∆ Italy Jan‘12 – June‘12   % Change (2010) % Change (2012)
       No                21,358                   -19,345                     -589               19.26%           -0.86%
      Yes                19,155                    -8,297                   36,424               13.22%          24.65%
Spanish Bank    ∆ Spain March‘10-Dec‘10   ∆ Spain Jan‘11-Dec‘11    ∆ Italy Jan‘12 – June‘12   % Change (2010) % Change (2012)
       No                16,762                    -6,226                    -1,758              66.34%           -7.69%
      Yes                 5,335                    -2,464                   12,611                3.71%          11.28%




Panel B. By Bank Risk (Holdings scaled by Total Assets)

                  ∆ Italy March‘10-Dec‘10 ∆ Italy Jan‘11-Dec‘11 ∆ Italy Jan‘12 – June‘12
High Tier 1                0.022                   -0.084                  0.365
Low Tier 1                 0.491                   0.100                  0.002
High RWA/TA                 0.696                   0.145                  0.685
Low RWA/TA                  0.004                  -0.135                 0.180
High Loans/TA              0.387                   -0.059                  0.731
Low Loans/TA               -0.022                  -0.031                 -0.018




                  ∆ Spain March‘10-Dec‘10 ∆ Spain Jan‘11-Dec‘11 ∆ Spain Jan‘12 – June‘12
High Tier 1                -0.015                 -0.023                 -0.001
Low Tier 1                  0.679                 -0.100                  0.303
High RWA/TA                 0.543                 -0.029                  0.160
Low RWA/TA                  0.072                 -0.045                 -0.032
High Loans/TA               0.505                 -0.028                  0.077
Low Loans/TA               -0.066                 -0.050                 -0.025




                                                              50
Panel C. Home Bias

                                Italy                                                  Spain
          <= 3 years                    > 3 years                 <= 3 years                > 3 years
AT                      -473                           -4                      -100                       1
BE                      -137                         -232                      -814                     -189
CY                        30                          -27                        0                        -5
DE                       -48                          767                        56                     -588
DK                       158                         151                        -31                       8
ES                     1,531                        -2,450                     6,032                    6,579
FR                      4,009                        -881                       345                      231
GB                     -1,468                       -1,791                     -956                      528
HU                        0                            0                         0                        0
IE                        1                            15                       -30                       0
IT                     28,643                       7,782                       -65                     -271
MT                        0                            0                         0                        0
NL                       230                         -187                      -319                      142
NO                        0                            0                         0                        0
PT                        -1                           65                       -19                       27
SE                        11                           -6                       -13                       0




                                                             51
Table 4 Panel A
Summary Statistics of Factor Loadings and Bond Holdings
This table reports summary statistics of our carry trade estimates (Panel A), Italy , Spain and Germany . The carry trade
estimates are measured on a quarterly basis for each bank for the pre-2007 as well as 2007-2012 periods.

2007 -2012
                              Obs             Mean           Std-Dev           Min             P50             Max
Factor loadings
 Italy                        833             1.84              2.00           -3.17           1.40            16.42
 Spain                        833             1.42              2.13           -9.45           0.95            18.64
 Germany                      833             -2.76             2.13          -20.81           -2.44           5.97
No GIPSI banks
 Italy                        765             1.85              2.05           -3.17           1.39            16.42
 Spain                        731             1.47              2.24           -9.45           0.97            18.64
 Germany                      459             -2.86             2.14          -16.86           -2.54           2.14
GIPSI banks
 Italy                        68              1.75              1.14           -0.11           1.52            4.98
 Spain                        102             1.02              0.84           -0.90           0.81            3.56
 Germany                      374             -2.63             2.12          -20.81           -2.40           5.97
Pre 2007
Factor loadings
 Italy                        769             0.38              3.82          -24.11           0.35            21.18
 Spain                        769             -0.98             7.55         -108.21           -0.13           37.77
 Germany                      769             -0.91             3.87          -19.71           -0.69           19.63
No GIPSI banks
 Italy                        707             0.29              3.85          -24.11           0.28            21.18
 Spain                        673             -0.94             7.83         -108.21           -0.12           37.77
 Germany                      448             -0.94             3.97          -19.71           -0.72           11.46
GIPSI banks
 Italy                        62              1.38              3.31           -3.54            1.14           12.85
 Spain                        96              -1.23             5.24          -18.96           -0.24           9.55
 Germany                      321             -0.87             3.72          -16.77           -0.67           19.63




                                                           52
Table 4 Panel B
Banks’ Carry Trade Behavior Estimates
This table contains the results of a pooled OLS regression of banks’ stock returns on sovereign bond returns during
the 2007 to 2012 period. Columns (1) to (5) of Panel A show factor loadings on GIPSI sovereign bond returns
individually for Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Ireland and jointly in column (6). All regressions include ten-year
German bond returns (              , ) as the “funding leg” of the carry trade.  , is the residual from the regression
of the domestic stock market’s daily returns on daily 10 year domestic sovereign bond and German bond returns.
***,** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.


                               ,                   ,                      ,          ,     ,



                     (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)                  (5)           (6)


                  0.095***                                                                                 0.048***
                    (5.73)                                                                                    (2.73)
 Italy                              0.432***                                                               0.261***
                                      (5.12)                                                                  (2.93)
 Portugal                                              0.130***                                               0.007
                                                         (3.05)                                               (0.57)
 Spain                                                                 0.427***                               0.077
                                                                         (8.78)                               (1.46)
 Ireland                                                                                  0.267***          0.132**
                                                                                             (5.32)           (2.49)
 Germany          -2.460***        -2.563***           -2.500***       -2.611***         -2.517***        -2.558***
                    (-19.09)         (-23.64)            (-19.40)        (-23.07)          (-19.78)         (-22.70)
 m                 1.359***         1.363***            1.373***        1.367***          1.371***         1.354***
                     (14.98)          (15.17)             (15.02)        (15.27)           (15.30)          (15.25)
                   -0.001**        -0.001***           -0.001***       -0.001***          -0.001**        -0.001***
                     (-2.56)          (-2.94)             (-2.75)         (-2.64)           (-2.58)          (-2.73)
                     55,206           55,206              55,206          55,206            55,206           55,206
                    45.66%           45.88%              45.54%          45.86%            45.78%           46.22%




                                                            53
Table 5
Robustness
This table contains the results of a pooled OLS regression of banks’ stock returns on sovereign bond returns during the 2007 to
2012 period. Model 1 includes BondIndex, the daily average return of sovereign bonds from Euro area members other than GIPSI
countries or Germany or France. Model 2 reports factor loadings of home country bond returns (Home). Model 3 includes various
macro variables: (1) VSTOXX is the return of the VSTOXX Index; (2) TermStructure is measured as the difference between the
yield on a ten-year euro area government bond and the one-month Euribor; (3) BondDefSpread is the difference between the yield
on ten-year German BBB bonds and yields on ten-year German government debt; (4) 1mEuribor is measured as the one-month
Euribor; (5) ∆ESI is the monthly change in the European economic sentiment indicator; (6) ∆IndProd is the monthly change in the
level of industrial production; (7) ∆CPI is the change in inflation measured as the monthly change in the European Consumer Price
Index. Model 4 reports the results of a principal component analysis (PCA); Model 5 uses French bond returns as the funding leg
of the carry trade; Model 6 includes Fama-French factors (SMB, HML). Models 7 and 8 report the results of the cross-sectional
analyses of bank CDS spread changes on GIPSI bond returns. The dependent variable in both models is Δ Log (Bank CDS).
Standard errors are clustered at bank and quarter level. t-statistics are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate significance at 1,
5 and 10% levels respectively.

                           (1)             (2)            (3)        (4)             (5)              (6)         (7)               (8)
                      Bond Index      Home Bias        Macro        PCA         Funding Leg    Fama-French             CDS 5 year
                       0.046***          0.008       0.052***                    0.073***        0.046***     -0.150***
                         (2.66)          (0.49)         (3.07)                     (4.50)           (2.77)       (-4.77)
 Italy                 0.247***        0.217**      0.256***                     0.735***        0.253***        -0.161
                         (2.80)          (2.39)         (2.84)                     (6.68)           (2.92)       (-0.93)
 Portugal                0.048            0.029        0.095*                      -0.009           0.076       -0.270*
                         (0.79)          (0.55)         (1.80)                     (-0.06)          (1.38)       (-1.67)
 Spain                   0.008           -0.005         0.007                      -0.007           0.008       -0.117*
                         (0.66)         (-0.46)         (0.62)                     (-0.13)          (0.70)       (-1.94)
 Ireland               0.129**         0.119**        0.135**                     0.143**         0.132**       -0.203*
                         (2.47)          (2.42)         (2.57)                     (1.99)           (2.57)       (-1.90)
 Germany              -2.696***       -2.662***     -2.717***    -2.570***                      -2.542***      2.913***         2.983***
                       (-18.38)        (-23.74)       (-21.47)     (-21.77)                       (-22.49)        (6.39)          (6.15)
 m                     1.346***        1.365***     1.419***      1.357***       1.355***        1.348***     -0.745***        -0.755***
                        (14.55)         (14.94)        (16.29)      (15.29)       (15.22)          (15.50)       (-7.61)         (-7.62)
                         0.284
                         (1.59)
                                       0.295***
                                         (8.34)
                                                     0.088***
                                                       (3.91)
 ∆                                                      0.024
                                                       (0.24)
                                                       0.014
                                                       (0.51)
                                                       0.043
                                                       (0.64)
 ∆                                                    0.037**
                                                       (2.38)
 ∆                                                    0.044*
                                                       (1.84)
 ∆                                                     -0.084
                                                      (-0.75)
                                                                  0.002***                                                    -0.004***
                                                                    (8.60)                                                      (-4.70)
                                                                                 -2.294***
                                                                                   (-8.21)
                                                                                                   0.002
                                                                                                   (0.08)
                                                                                                 0.054***
                                                                                                   (4.50)
 0                     -0.001***      -0.001***      -0.002      -0.001***       -0.001***      -0.001***      0.002*          0.003**
                         (-2.89)        (-2.80)      (-0.87)       (-3.11)         (-2.77)        (-2.94)       (1.80)          (2.27)
                         55,206         55,206       55,005        55,206          55,206         55,206       29,832          29,832
                        46.27%         46.88%        46.47%       46.17%          41.63%          46.34%       13.34%          13.19%

                                                                  54
Table 6
Alternative Return Indices
This table reports the results from OLS regressions of daily returns on a value weighted index of EBA Banks (EBA Banks),
UK banks (EBA UK Banks), US Banks, macro hedge funds (HFRX Macro), and various country specific industrial indices
during the 2007 to 2012 period. There are: MSCI GIPSI, which is an equally weighted index formed from the underlying
indices for Italy, Spain and Portugal, MSCI Germany, MSCI Non GIPSI, which is an equally weighted index of the most
important countries in Europe other than Germany or the periphery (France, Netherlands, Norway, Denmark and Sweden),
and MSCI UK. As market return, we include the Euro Stoxx 600 (STOXX 600) for European indices, the S&P 500
(S&P500) for the US index and MSCI World for the HFRX Macro Hedge Fund index. We also include the Fama-French
Factors (SMB and HML). The standard errors were adjusted for heteroscedasticity and auto-correlation using Newey-West
with 8 lags. ***,** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.

                      (1)         (2)       (3)            (4)        (5)               (6)            (7)            8
                     EBA         EBA                    HFRX       MSCI GIPSI      MSCI Germany   MSCI Non GIPSI   MSCI UK
                    Banks    UK Banks    US Banks       Macro
                    0.005       -0.004     -0.005        0.000           -0.009      -0.012**          0.002         0.004
                    (0.62)     (-0.58)     (-1.29)       (0.05)          (-1.10)      (-1.99)          (0.40)        (0.88)
 Italy           0.234***        0.179     -0.005    -0.056***         -0.211**        0.095           0.029       0.170**
                    (3.39)      (1.62)     (-0.06)      (-2.83)          (-2.19)       (0.97)          (0.61)        (2.43)
 Portugal           0.013        0.011      0.028        0.003            0.017       -0.037          -0.023        -0.036
                    (0.74)      (0.42)      (1.40)      (0.54)            (0.71)      (-1.46)         (-1.62)       (-0.95)
 Spain              0.091       -0.160     -0.041        0.021           0.162*       -0.055           0.048        -0.112
                    (1.26)     (-1.48)     (-0.49)      (0.94)            (1.79)      (-0.57)          (1.03)       (-1.48)
 Ireland          0.124**        0.144     -0.047      0.034**          0.086*        -0.001           0.019        -0.021
                    (2.23)      (1.64)     (-0.84)      (2.19)            (1.79)      (-0.03)          (0.68)       (-0.40)
 Germany         -2.499***   -2.039***   -1.971***    0.128***           -0.052       -0.094          -0.044         0.069
                  (-30.30)    (-16.09)    (-18.46)      (4.27)           (-0.67)      (-0.69)         (-0.73)       (0.72)
 m               1.406***    1.312***    1.646***      0.031**         0.176***        0.035         0.494***        0.002
                   (29.66)     (19.64)     (22.15)      (2.18)            (7.43)       (0.67)         (19.45)       (0.04)
                    0.000        0.031     -0.012        0.010           -0.000       -0.000           0.000        -0.000
                    (0.01)      (0.90)     (-0.39)       (1.46)          (-0.36)      (-0.34)          (0.67)       (-0.25)
                 0.050***      0.045*       0.019       -0.000          0.000**       0.000*          -0.000        -0.000
                    (3.15)      (1.77)      (0.78)      (-0.08)           (2.23)       (1.83)         (-0.47)       (-0.34)
 0                 -0.000       -0.000     -0.000       -0.000          -0.001*        0.000          -0.000        -0.000
                   (-1.20)     (-0.81)     (-0.14)      (-0.51)          (-1.70)       (0.22)         (-0.71)       (-0.03)
N                   1,400       1,361       1,336        1,386            1,406        1,406           1,406         1,406
                  77.85%      53.48%      70.27%        2.18%            7.36%        0.63%           38.69%        0.43%




                                                                  55
Table 7
Results from Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR)
This table reports the results from seemingly unrelated regression. The sensitivity of equity to GIPSI sovereign bond returns
                                                                                                                                 ,,      1
          (measured during the 2010 to 2012 period) is taking the form                                                                       . The sensitivity of equity to
                                                                                                                         ,       1
                                                                            ∆           ,
German bond returns                is taking the form                                       .            ,   ,       and                 are point estimates under the
                                                                                    ,
constraints:          ,       ,         ,   ,              ,           ,        ,               ,                    ,           ,              ,                  and   ,
  ,               .



                                                      ,,       1                                                 ∆                   ,
      ,      ,            ,                                        ,                                 ,                                                ,       ,      ,       ,
                                                ,    1                                                                       ,




GIPSI                              N                                                                                                                Prob > chi2
Italy                             161               0.296***       11.203***                        -2.210***             -8.091***                    <0.001
                                                       (7.2)        (10.53)                          (-25.47)               (2.58)
Spain                             161               0.399***       4.736***                          -2.32***            -10.389***                       <0.001
                                                      (8.29)          (8.9)                          (-32.48)               (3.45)




                                                                       56
Table 8
Non-Sovereign Cross-Border Exposure of Banks
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ,,
This table reports the results from cross-sectional regressions of factor loadings (       Italy ,      Spain )   on sovereign bond and real sector holdings of European banks.                       are portfolio holdings by
                                                                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                   ,,
banks of Italian and Spanish government bonds scaled by lagged total assets.                                are real sector holdings by banks in Italy, Spain or Greece scaled by lagged total assets. Real sector exposure
                                                                                               ,
is the sum of each banks’ exposure to the corporate sector, retail sector and commercial real estate sector. All data are from December 2010 (reporting date) and disclosed in the July 2011 stress tests.
t-statistics based on White’s heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.


                                                                                                                        ,,                       ,,
                                                                            .,                                                                                ,
                                                                                                                    ,                        ,


                                                                                 Italy                                                                            Spain
                                                        All           All                  All                    Non-Italian         All               All            All     Non-Spanish
                                                        (1)           (2)                  (3)                        (4)             (5)               (6)            (7)         (8)
                                                    1.148***                             -0.602                     4.990          0.657**                           -0.808      -3.556
                                                      (4.09)                             (-0.63)                    (0.73)          (2.66)                          (-1.41)      (-0.81)
                                                                   8.565***              12.091                   36.248***                           6.847***     13.158***     71.094
                                                                     (2.95)              (1.52)                     (2.81)                              (3.53)       (3.37)      (1.39)

                                                    0.845***       0.807***         0.799***                       0.685***       0.691***            0.676***      0.676***      0.625***
                                                      (6.84)         (6.38)           (6.20)                         (5.14)         (9.53)              (9.36)        (9.32)        (6.56)
                              N                         51             51               51                             46             51                  51            51            45
                              R2                     6.01%          8.26%            8.51%                          8.47%          6.98%               10.80%        12.17%        5.40%




                                                                                                                             57
Table 9
Carry Trade Behavior and Bank Risk
This table reports the results from OLS regressions of banks’ stock returns on GIPSI sovereign bond returns (Italy
and Spain) and interaction terms of these returns with various bank characteristics during the 2007 to 2012 period:
Log-Assets, ST-LVG, Loans-Assets, Tier 1 and RWA/Assets. Bank characteristics are lagged by 1 year and are also
included as separate variables which are omitted for brevity. Standard errors are clustered at bank and quarter level.
t-statistics are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.

                                             Italy                             Spain
                                      (1)                (2)            (3)                (4)
                                 -1.567***            -0.576       -1.364***            -0.849*
                                   (-3.80)            (-1.19)        (-3.72)            (-1.72)
       Log‐Assets                0.083***            0.073***      0.076***            0.081***
                                    (3.43)             (3.05)        (3.81)              (4.06)
       ST‐LVG                     0.828**            0.917***        0.610*             0.730**
                                   (2.31)              (2.84)        (1.81)              (2.15)
       Loans/Assets              1.229***                          1.152***
                                    (6.01)                            (5.66)
       Tier 1                                        -0.053***                           -0.038
                                                        (-3.47)                          (-1.55)
       RWA/Assets                                    0.726***                          0.870***
                                                        (3.02)                           (4.27)
                                   -0.734                0.150      -0.676                0.139
                                   (-0.47)              (0.09)      (-0.43)              (0.08)
            Log‐Assets             -0.091              -0.129*      -0.096              -0.132*
                                   (-1.21)             (-1.68)      (-1.25)             (-1.73)
            ST‐LVG                -1.257**            -1.249**     -1.243**            -1.271**
                                   (-2.08)             (-2.06)      (-2.06)             (-2.10)
            Loans/Assets           -0.507                           -0.595
                                   (-0.46)                          (-0.54)
            Tier 1                                     -0.053                            -0.047
                                                      (-1.10)                           (-1.03)
            RWA/Assets                                 -0.528                            -0.598
                                                      (-0.53)                           (-0.61)
 m                                1.322***           1.321***      1.326***            1.326***
                                   (16.04)            (15.90)       (16.15)             (16.03)
 0                                  -0.001             -0.002          0                 -0.002
                                   (-0.44)            (-1.08)       (-0.35)             (-0.55)
N                                  39,925             39,711        39,925              39,711
R2                                 45.97%             46.08%        45.95%              46.03%




                                                              58
Table 10
Carry Trade Behavior and Bank Risk
This table reports the results from OLS regressions of bank’s individual bond holdings on bank risk factors: Log-
Assets, ST-LVG, Loans-Assets, Tier 1 and RWA/Assets. Holdings are available during the March 2010 to June 2012
period and are scaled by banks’ total assets. Panel A (Panel B) reports the results for exposures to Italian (Spanish)
sovereign debt. All bank characteristics are lagged by 1 year (half-year if available). Standard errors are clustered at
the bank level. t-statistics are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels
respectively.



Panel A. Italian bond holdings

                                                   ,,
                                                                                ,      ,
                                               ,


                                                   Dependent Variable: Italy / Assets
                          (1)           (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)         (6)
 Tier 1               -0.310***                                     -0.317***         -0.278***   -0.229***
                        (-4.42)                                       (-4.14)           (-3.37)     (-2.78)
 RWA/Assets                          0.031***                          0.005            -0.021      -0.006
                                       (3.19)                          (0.49)           (-1.30)     (-0.30)
          /Assets                                    0.028***                          0.034**     0.041**
                                                       (2.76)                            (2.11)      (2.50)
 Log‐Assets                                                                                        0.003**
                                                                                                     (2.30)
 0                    0.049***        0.000             -0.006       0.049***        0.034***       -0.023
                        (5.06)        (0.10)            (-1.46)        (4.05)          (3.69)       (-0.90)
N                        180           195                173           171             148           148
R2                     11.57%         3.13%             3.54%         13.10%          13.66%       15.53%




Panel B. Spanish bond holdings

                                               Dependent Variable: Spain / Assets
                          (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)               (6)
 Tier 1               -0.179***                                    -0.087**       -0.131***          -0.062
                        (-4.08)                                     (-2.26)         (-2.75)          (-1.10)
 RWA/Assets                           0.036***                     0.034***          0.015          0.038**
                                        (3.87)                       (3.19)         (1.24)            (2.08)
          /Assets                                  0.032***                        0.021**         0.031***
                                                     (3.59)                         (2.09)            (2.75)
 Log‐Assets                                                                                         0.004**
                                                                                                      (2.31)
 0                    0.030***        -0.008***         -0.010**        0.004           0.006      -0.072**
                        (4.47)          (-2.78)          (-2.57)        (0.62)          (0.98)       (-2.10)
N                        180              195              173           171             148           148
R2                     5.22%            7.54%            4.82%         10.20%          10.66%          14%




                                                             59
Table 11
Home Bias and LTROs
This table reports the results of OLS regressions of bank stock returns on GIPSI bond returns interacted with time
indicator variables (Before March’10, March’10 – Dec’10, Dec’10 – Sept’11, and After Sept’11). Individual time
indicator variable are included but not reported. t-statistics are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate
significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.

                                  (1)               (2)                 (3)       (4)              (5)               (6)
                                                   Italy               Italy                      Spain            Spain
                                   Italy    non-Italian banks   Italian banks    Spain    non-Spanish banks   Spanish banks
                               0.345***        0.286***           0.808***    0.321***        0.320***          0.311***
                                  (8.00)          (7.63)             (10.84)    (7.88)           (6.81)          (10.87)
       Before March'10           0.261**       0.349***            -0.399**   0.389***         0.446***            0.017
                                  (2.51)          (3.32)             (-2.25)    (3.75)           (3.90)            (0.08)
       March'10‐Dec'10           0.162**       0.229***            -0.324**     0.109*           0.131*            0.136
                                  (2.61)          (3.82)             (-2.13)    (1.80)           (1.95)            (1.18)
       Dec'10                    0.105**        0.128***              -0.042  0.141***         0.142***            0.191
                                  (2.27)          (2.72)             (-0.37)    (3.28)           (3.01)            (1.99)
                               -2.748***       -2.800***          -2.426*** -2.908***         -3.088***         -1.800***
                                 (-19.45)        (-18.76)           (-13.95)   (-19.92)         (-21.00)          (-7.98)
           Before March'10         0.077           0.065              0.222      0.072            0.113           -0.194
                                  (0.59)          (0.47)              (1.00)    (0.48)           (0.65)           (-1.59)
           March'10‐Dec'10         0.146           0.161              0.072   0.356***        0.422***            -0.160
                                  (1.46)          (1.55)              (0.36)    (3.41)           (3.71)           (-1.46)
           Dec'10              0.310***         0.337***               0.092  0.497***         0.559***            0.062
                                  (4.66)          (4.96)              (0.42)    (7.25)           (7.65)            (0.91)
                                1.361***        1.378***           1.215***   1.368***        1.421***          1.025***
                                 (26.20)         (24.64)            (44.65)    (26.15)          (27.58)            (7.58)
                                -0.001**         -0.001*              -0.001  -0.001**         -0.001**           0.001*
                                  (-2.11)         (-1.90)            (-0.79)    (-2.06)          (-2.59)           (2.14)
N                                 55,206          49,063               6,143    55,206           47,745            7,461
R2                               45.91%          44.85%             60.17%     45.93%           45.38%           63.64%




                                                          60
Appendix I
Variable Definitions

Variable                    Definition
Greece, Italy, Spain,       Daily returns on 10-year government bonds issued by Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal and
Portugal, Ireland (GIPSI)   Ireland
Home                        Home is the return from the 10-year government bond of the country in which the bank is
                            headquarters.
BondIndex                   BondIndex is the daily average return of sovereign bonds from Euro area members other than
                            GIPSI countries or Germany or France.
PC1                         The first principal component (PC1) is the linear combination of GIPSI bond returns with the
                            highest eigenvalue.
Germany                     Daily returns on ten-year government bonds issued by Germany.
France                      Daily returns on ten-year government bonds issued by France.
Log-Assets                  Log-Assets is the natural logarithm of total book assets.
ST-LVG                      ST-LVG is short-term debt divided by total debt.
ST-Debt                     ST-Debt is short-term debt in million euros.
RWA/TA                      RWA/TA is risk-weighted assets divided by total assets.
Loans/Assets                Loans/Assets is customers’ loans divided by total assets.
Tier 1                      Tier1 is Tier 1 capital divided by risk-weighted assets.
Bank Stock Return (%)       Realized Return is the bank’s equity return.
Bank CDS (bps)              Bank CDS is the five-year CDS spread of European banks.
∆Log(Bank CDS)              Δ Log (Bank CDS) is the change in the log of daily CDS spreads.
βItaly, βSpain              Estimated factor loadings from cross-sectional regressions from banks’ stock returns on ten-
                            year government bond returns from Italy and Spain.
∆MMF                        ∆MMF is the monthly withdrawal by US Money Market Mutual Funds in million euros.

Macro-State Variables &
Indices
Stock Index “m”             Stock Index is the residual from the regression of the domestic stock market’s daily log
                            returns on daily domestic sovereign bond and German bund returns.
STOXX600                    STOXX600 is the daily return of the Euro STOXX 600 Index
S&P 500                     S&P 500 is the daily return of the S&P 500 Index.
VSTOXX                      VSTOXX is the daily return of the VSTOXX Index for the European stock market.
TermStructure               Term Structure is the slope of the term structure of interest rates measured as the difference
                            between the yield on a ten-year euro area government bond and the one-month Euribor.
BondDefSpread               Bond Default Spread is the difference between the yield on ten-year German BBB bonds and
                            yields on ten-year German government debt.
1 month EURIBOR             One-month EURIBOR is level of the short-term risk-free interest rate measured as the one-
                            month Euribor.
∆ESI                        ∆European Economic Sentiment is the monthly change in the economic sentiment indicator
                            obtained from opinion surveys conducted by the European Central Bank.
∆IndProd                    ∆Level of Industrial Production is the monthly change in the level of industrial production.
∆CPI                        European Consumer Price Index is the change in inflation measured as the monthly change in
                            the European Consumer Price Index.
Fama-French Factor
SMB                         Fama-French-Factor: Small-minus-Big
HML                         Fama-French-Factor: High-minus-Low

Time Indicator
Before March’10             Indicator variable equal to 1 if banks’ equity return is observed before March 2010.
March’10 – Dec’10           Indicator variable equal to 1 if banks’ equity return is observed between March and
                            December 2010.
Dec’10 – Sept’11            Indicator variable equal to 1 if banks’ equity return is observed between December 2010 and
                            September 2011.
After Sept’11               Indicator variable equal to 1 if banks’ equity return is observed after September 2011.




                                                            61
Appendix II
List of Banks
This table provides a list of all public banks included in the EBA stress tests sorted by asset size as of December 31,
2011. We provide the identifier used to match the banks to SNL Financial, Bloomberg and the EBA stress test data.
                      Bank                   Ticker      Ticker-Exchange     EBA-ID         Country       Total Assets
Deutsche Bank AG                           DBK         DBK-ETR              DE017     Germany                2,164,103
HSBC Holdings Plc                          HSBA        HSBA-LON             GB089     United Kingdom         1,967,796
BNP Paribas SA                             BNP         BNP-PAR              FR013     France                 1,965,283
Barclays Plc                               BARC        BARC-LON             GB090     United Kingdom         1,871,469
Royal Bank of Scotland Group Plc           RBS         RBS-LON              GB088     United Kingdom         1,803,649
Crédit Agricole SA                         ACA         ACA-PAR              FR014     France                 1,723,608
ING Groep N.V.                             INGA        INGA-AMS             NL047     Netherlands            1,273,580
Banco Santander SA                         SAN         SAN-MAD              ES059     Spain                  1,251,525
Société Générale SA                        GLE         GLE-PAR              FR016     France                 1,181,372
Lloyds Banking Group Plc                   LLOY        LLOY-LON             GB091     United Kingdom         1,161,698
UniCredit SpA                              UCG         UCG-MIL              IT041     Italy                     926,769
Nordea Bank AB                             NDA         NDA-OME              SE084     Sweden                    716,204
Commerzbank AG                             CBK         CBK-ETR              DE018     Germany                   661,763
Intesa Sanpaolo SpA                        ISP         ISP-MIL              IT040     Italy                     639,221
Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, SA        BBVA        BBVA-MAD             ES060     Spain                     597,688
Danske Bank A/S                            DANSKE      DANSKE-CSE           DK008     Denmark                   460,832
Dexia SA                                   DEXB        DEXB-BRU             BE004     Belgium                   412,759
Bankia                                     BKIA        BKIA-MAD             ES061     Spain                     312,343
KBC Group NV                               KBC         KBC-BRU              BE005     Belgium                   285,382
Svenska Handelsbanken AB                   SHBA        SHB.A-OME            SE086     Sweden                    275,514
DNB ASA                                    DNB         DNB-OSL              NO051     Norway                    274,216
Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken AB           SEBA        SEB.A-OME            SE085     Sweden                    264,852
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena SpA        BMPS        BMPS-MIL             IT042     Italy                     240,702
Hypo Real Estate                           HRX         HRX.ETR              DE023     Germany                   236,586
Erste Group Bank AG                        EBS         EBS-WBO              AT001     Austria                   210,006
Swedbank AB                                SWEDA       SWED.A-OME           SE087     Sweden                    208,464
Bank of Ireland                            BIR         BIR-DUB              IE038     Ireland                   154,880
Raiffeisen Bank International AG           RBI         RBI-WBO              AT002     Austria                   146,985
Allied Irish Banks, Plc                    AIB         AIB-DUB              IE037     Ireland                   136,651
Banco Popolare Società Cooperativa         BP          BP-MIL               IT043     Italy                     134,127
SNS Real                                   SR          SR-AMS               NL050     Netherlands               132,174
Landesbank Berlin Holding AG               BEB2        BEB2-ETR             DE027     Germany                   131,175
Banco Popular Español SA                   POP         POP-MAD              ES064     Spain                     130,926
Unione di Banche Italiane SCpA             UBI         UBI-MIL              IT044     Italy                     129,804
National Bank of Greece SA                 ETE         ETE-ATH              GR031     Greece                    106,732
Banco Sabadell SA                          SAB         SAB-MAD              ES065     Spain                     100,437
Banco Comercial Português SA               BCP         BCP-LIS              PT054     Portugal                   93,482
Espirito Santo Financial Group SA          ESFN        ESFN-LIS             PT055     Luxembourg                 84,020
EFG Eurobank Ergasias SA                   EUROB       EUROB-ATH            GR030     Greece                     76,822
Permanent TSB Group Holdings Plc           IL0         IL0-DUB              IE039     Ireland                    72,037
Bankinter SA                               BKT         BKT-MAD              ES069     Spain                      59,491
Alpha Bank AE                              ALPHA       ALPHA-ATH            GR032     Greece                     59,148
Piraeus Bank SA                            TPEIR       TPEIR-ATH            GR033     Greece                     49,352
Banco BPI SA                               BPI         BPI-LIS              PT056     Portugal                   42,956
Österreichische Volksbanken AG             VBPS        VBPS-WBO             AT003     Austria                    41,135
Bank of Cyprus Public Company Limited      BOCY        BOCY-CYP             CY007     Cyprus                     37,474
Jyske Bank A/S                             JYSK        JYSK-CSE             DK009     Denmark                    36,364
Cyprus Popular Bank Public Co. Ltd.        CPB         CPB-CYP              CY006     Cyprus                     33,762
OTP Bank Nyrt.                             OTP         OTP-BUD              HU036     Hungary                    32,413
Banco Pastor SA                            PAS         PAS-MAD              ES074     Spain                      30,376
ATEbank SA                                 ATE         ATE-ATH              GR034     Greece                     28,818
Sydbank A/S                                SYDB        SYDB-CSE             DK010     Denmark                    20,649
TT Hellenic Postbank SA                    TT          TT-ATH               GR035     Greece                     16,396
Bank of Valletta Plc                       BOV         BOV-MAL              MT046     Malta                       6,623
FHB Jelzalogbank Nyrt                      FHB         FHB-BUD              HU111     Hungary                     2,593
Caja de Ahorros del Mediterráneo           CAM         CAM-MAD              ES083     Spain




                                                          62
Appendix III
Descriptive Statistics
This table reports descriptive statistics of bank characteristics, bond portfolio holdings and short-term funding
exposure (Panel A) and of time-series variables (Panel B). All bank characteristics are calculated at the bank level.
Variables are defined in Appendix I.

Panel A. Cross-Section

                                             Obs        Mean       Std-Dev       Min         P50        Max
Log-Assets                                   56         12.03        1.51        7.91       11.92       14.53
ST-LVG                                       44          0.33        0.11        0.00       0.32        0.63
RWA / Assets                                 56          0.49        0.17        0.17       0.52        0.76
Loans / Assets                               56          0.59        0.15        0.19       0.63        0.80
Tier 1 Ratio (%)                             56         10.15        2.80        5.97       9.63        23.98
Bond Holdings
Italy / Assets (%)                            52         1.12        2.67        0.00        0.14       12.57
Spain / Assets (%)                            52         1.00        2.45        0.00        0.05       9.56
ST Funding Exposure
∆MMF / Assets (%)                             25         0.12        0.73       -1.52        0.18        1.44

Panel B. Time Series

                                             Obs        Mean       Std-Dev       Min         P50        Max
Daily returns January 2007 - March 2012
Bank Stock Return (bps)                     1,326       -13.21      228.30     -1178.07     -13.38     1338.71
Bank CDS (bps)                              1,316       185.22      152.23       6.35       138.53     654.37
Δ Log (Bank CDS) (bps)                      1,316        33.92      392.54     -2086.89      15.52     2433.56
Daily Time Series Variables
STOXX 600 (bps)                             1,312       -2.47       153.40      -793.00      3.00      941.00
VSTOXX (bps)                                1,304       2.75        630.82     -2491.90     -52.45     3276.70
S&P 500 (bps)                               1,245       -0.48       166.83      -946.97      8.39      1095.79
TermStructure (%)                           1,315       1.53         1.29        -1.12       1.85       3.41
BondDefSpread (%)                           1,326       2.14         1.15         0.74       1.82       5.67
1mEuribor (%)                               1,315        2.16        1.66         0.40       1.31        5.20
Monthly Time Series Variables
SMB                                           62        -0.08        2.17       -4.64       -0.09        4.85
HML                                           62        -0.33        2.44       -4.61       -0.47        7.45
∆ESI                                          62        -0.29        2.35       -6.60       -0.30        4.80
∆IndProd                                      62        -0.12        1.23       -4.10        0.04        1.85
∆CPI                                          62         0.01        0.32       -1.10       0.00         0.80




                                                         63
Appendix IV
Factor Loadings, Portfolio Holdings and Funding Risk
This table contains the results regressing factor loadings (              Italy ,        Spain ,        Greece )   on sovereign bond holdings.
             ,,
                   are portfolio holdings by banks of Italian, Spain or Greek government bonds scaled by lagged total
         ,
assets. Scale variables are total assets (TA) and book value of equity (BV). Factor loadings are estimated 60 days
before and 60 days after the reporting date for each bank. Quarterly fixed effects are included. t-statistics based on
White’s heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate significance at
1, 5 and 10% levels respectively.

Panel A. Sovereign bond exposures

                                                                                        ,,
                                          .,                                                                 ,
                                                                             ,


GIPSI                            N                                                                 R2
Scaled by Total Assets
Italy                           194            0.756***         7.845***                     7.41%
                                                (11.10)           (5.26)
Spain                           194            0.653***         6.161***                     4.31%
                                                (13.10)           (2.70)
Scaled by Book Value of Equity
Italy                          194             0.753***         0.468***                     6.53%
                                                (10.91)           (4.46)
Spain                           194            0.650***         0.372***                     4.18%
                                                (12.96)           (2.66)




Panel B. Money Market Fund Withdrawals
Panel B reports the results from cross-sectional regressions of factor loadings (    ) on measures of US MMF
withdrawals of European banks. We use total assets (TA), lagged MMF exposure (MMFt-1) and short term debt (ST-
LVG) as scale variables. Quarterly fixed effects are included. T-statistics based on White’s heteroscedasticity
consistent standard errors are given in parentheses. ***,** and * indicate significance at 1, 5 and 10% levels
respectively.

                                                                      ∆                  ,
                                                 .,                                                      ,
                                                                                    ,



                                          N                                                                          R2
∆MMF / MMFt-1                            135              -2.451***              -0.538***                         6.54%
                                                           (-33.65)                (2.98)
∆MMF / Assetst-1                         135              -2.467***              -12.391***                        10.81%
                                                           (-34.59)                (3.92)
∆MMF / ST-Debtt-1                         89              -2.486***              -1.580***                         14.51%
                                                           (-31.86)                (3.71)




                                                              64
