                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      IS SMOKING BEHAVIOR CULTURALLY DETERMINED? EVIDENCE FROM
                          BRITISH IMMIGRANTS

                                     Rebekka Christopoulou
                                        Dean R. Lillard

                                      Working Paper 19036
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19036


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2013




We gratefully acknowledge research assistance from Jeffrey Han and funding from National Institute
on Aging grant 1 R01 AG030379-01A2. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Rebekka Christopoulou and Dean R. Lillard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Is Smoking Behavior Culturally Determined? Evidence from British Immigrants
Rebekka Christopoulou and Dean R. Lillard
NBER Working Paper No. 19036
May 2013
JEL No. I10,J15,Z10

                                            ABSTRACT

We exploit migration patterns from the UK to Australia, South Africa, and the US to investigate whether
a person’s decision to smoke is determined by culture. For each country, we use retrospective data
to describe individual smoking trajectories over the life-course. For the UK, we use these trajectories
to measure culture by cohort and cohort-age, and more accurately relative to the extant literature. Our
proxy predicts smoking participation of second-generation British immigrants but not that of non-British
immigrants and natives. Researchers can apply our strategy to estimate culture effects on other outcomes
when retrospective or longitudinal data are available.


Rebekka Christopoulou
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
235C Campbell Hall
Columbus, OH 43210
Christopoulou.1@osu.edu

Dean R. Lillard
Department of Human Sciences
The Ohio State University
1787 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
lillard.13@osu.edu
1    Introduction

A new strand of literature has emerged in economics to investigate the hypothesis that culture de-
termines behavior. To identify culture effects, this literature typically examines immigrant groups
in a host country and tests whether their behavior varies systematically with behavior of people
living in their country of origin. The underlying assumption is that immigrants who arrive from
different countries bring different inherited norms and values that may induce them to behave dif-
ferently even though they face a common context. Because this literature assumes that immigrants
are “infected” with the culture of their home country, its empirical strategy is sometimes termed
the “epidemiological” approach (see reviews by Guiso et al. 2006 and Fernandez 2010). Evidence
suggests that culture, measured in this way, significantly influences immigrant behavior. For ex-
ample, Fishman and Miguel (2007) analyse the parking behavior by diplomats in New York City
to examine the link between culture and corruption. They show that parking law violations by
diplomats are strongly correlated with measures of corruption in their country of origin. Fernan-
dez and Fogli (2009) investigate whether second generation immigrant women are influenced by
their inherited culture when they decide whether or not to participate in the labor force or to bear
children. They proxy for inherited culture using the labor force participation rate and fertility rate
of the previous generation in the parents’ country of origin. They too find evidence of a strong
culture effect. Using similar strategies, other papers find a causal effect of culture on bilateral eco-
nomic exchange (Guiso et al. 2009), economic growth (Algan and Cahuk 2010), preferences for
redistribution (Luttmer and Singal 2011), and other outcomes.
    We are the first in this growing body of economic research to investigate whether culture deter-
mines health decisions in general and smoking decisions in particular. Although a group of studies
in health economics builds a role for culture to determine health behavior, they do not test for it
explicitly. For example, Bhalotra et al. (2010) appeal to transmission of religious values and cul-
ture as a possible explanation for persistent differences in the child mortality rates of Muslims and
Hindus in India. In another example, Levy (2002) incorporates socio-cultural norms in a model
of ideal weight. In that model, culture partly determines the stationary optimal weight to which

                                                   2
members of the culture refer and use to guide consumption decisions. There is also a literature
in public health that has long averred that a smoking “culture” exists and determines smoking be-
havior but, to date, this literature has failed to statistically identify causality (e.g. Wilkinson et al.
2005, Lazuras et al. 2009, Agyemang et al. 2010). In this paper, we test explicitly, with better data,
and a stronger identification strategy, the hypothesis that a person’s decision to smoke is influenced
by the culture s/he inherits.
   We are also the first study to elaborately address culture dynamics. Due to data limitations, the
bulk of the research tests the influence of immigrant culture on outcomes of interest with measures
of culture that do not vary over time. Typically used culture measures only vary across the different
countries of origin. To our knowledge, Algan and Cahuc (2010) is the only study to date that
exploits time variation. To proxy for culture, they use indicators of social attitudes of two cohorts
of second generation Americans, whose parents immigrated in different periods. Therefore, they
exploit differences between only two periods. However, observers argue that culture, or most its
expressions, evolves in a highly dynamic way in reaction to forces associated with globalization,
technical change, and general socioeconomic development (Inglehart and Welzel 2005). Further,
when one uses a time-invariant measure of culture, one cannot determine whether differences
associated with culture measure the effect of culture, the effect of omitted time-invariant factors
that vary similarly across countries, or both. For example, Kapoor and Shamika (2012) show
that the culture effect on corruption that Fishman and Miguel (2007) predict does not survive
after controling for goverment effectiveness. Thus, to claim that they identify a culture effect, all
existing studies had to maintain and defend the underlying assumptions that culture changes slowly
over time and across the life-course, and that it is not shared across countries.
   Our contribution is to observe that there is an important class of economic behaviors - those
that are subject to culture dynamics - that cannot be accurately analysed by the standard cross-
sectional approach. This class includes behaviors that have already been studied in the literature,
such as fertility and labor force participation of women, which are closely tied to dynamic cultural
forces like feminism. It also includes a range of behaviors tied to the production of health such


                                                    3
as smoking, drinking, early sex, eating habits, driving practices, and exercise. Here, we use the
example of smoking behavior to demonstrate how one can test for culture effects when there exists
a behavior-specific culture that may be changing rapidly over time and across generations. Our
technique relies on the fact that our smoking data are retrospectively reported and allow us to track
lifetime smoking histories. Researchers can generally apply our approach to study any type of
behavior reported retrospectively or longitudinally.
   We use a natural experiment design that exploits historical patterns of migration from Great
Britain to other Commonwealth countries (Australia, South Africa) and the US. We use data from
cross-sectional or panel surveys, administered in each host country, that collects information on
each individual’s smoking history and country of origin. With the retrospective information on
smoking we describe individual smoking trajectories over the life-course. With the data on coun-
try of origin we define samples of British immigrants, immigrants from other countries, and na-
tives. We then relate each group’s smoking participation in every year of life to a proxy of British
smoking culture that varies by cohort and year of life. We measure smoking culture of a British
immigrant by the smoking prevalence rate of UK residents who belong to the same generation as
the immigrants’ parents. This measure lets us test whether and to what degree the smoking behav-
ior of each group reflects the smoking behavior of their parents’ generation in the UK when that
generation was at the same point in their life-cycle. If culture matters, our proxy should predict
smoking behavior of children of British immigrants if parents carried cultural beliefs with them
when they emigrated from the UK and if they transmitted those beliefs to their children. Our proxy
should not predict the smoking prevalence rates of children of native-born parents and parents who
immigrated from other countries.
   This exercise is innovative in two ways. First, our measure of smoking culture varies by cohort
and year of life. It therefore captures dynamically how attitudes about smoking changed. Thus,
compared to studies that measure culture at the country level, we use a measure that suffers less
from measurement error that arises when culture changes. Second, we measure culture as the
outcome variable (smoking) in the UK only after we net out any determinants that are correlated


                                                 4
across the UK and the host countries. Thus, relative to studies that measure culture as the (gross)
outcome variable in the country of immigrant origin, we use a finer measure. Our measure avoids
the bias that may arise when contextual factors that affect smoking behavior develop simultane-
ously in many countries. For example, countries often adopt and sustain policies that are informed
by experiences of others; especially countries like the UK, US, Australia, and South Africa that
have (had) close political and economic ties. Relative to studies that measure culture with variables
that represent specific aspects of culture in the country of immigrant origin (religion, trust etc.),
we use a more comprehensive measure. In his review, Nichter (2003) argues that smoking-related
culture transmits through parenting styles, role models, peer relations, social perceptions of the
timing of adolescence, gender roles, and aesthetics. Although it goes beyond the scope of this
paper to formally model these channels of transmission, our measure captures the aggregate effect
of culture that is transmitted via these channels to the extent that they drive smoking behavior and
differ across home and host countries.
   Apart from the novel technique, our paper also contributes evidence that suggests that culture
causally affects smoking choices. We find that British smoking culture significantly predicts the
smoking behavior of British immigrants. It does not predict the smoking behavior of the local
population in the host countries or of non-British immigrants. We also find that the culture effects
differ by gender and country of immigrant destination. We argue that these differences may be ex-
plained by the influence of feminist smoking related attitudes; by the degree of ethnic homogeneity
in the host countries; by gender-differences in health-based selection to migration; and by gender
differences in the timing of migration.
   To proceed, we discuss our empirical strategy in section 2, we describe the data in section 3,
and we present our results in section 4. A final section concludes the paper.




                                                 5
2      Empirical strategy

2.1        The model

Consider a model of smoking participation where the cost of quitting is fixed. An individual i who
belongs to cohort c and is of age t smokes (Sict = 1) if current utility from smoking uict is greater
than current costs cict of smoking minus a cost of quiting q. One can think of this cost as a utility
loss due to nicotine withdrawal that rises linearly with the amount one consumes:

                                               
                                               
                                               1
                                                    i f uit > cict − q̄Sict−1
                                      Sict =                                                                      (1)
                                               
                                               0
                                                    otherwise

     To implement the model statistically, we follow the standard latent variable approach that spec-
ifies the observed data as a binary outcome which is observed if an index passes a critical value.
The index is posited to be linear in a set of observed covariates. Under standard assumptions we
estimate the relationship given by:

                                          
                                          
                                          1
                                               i f α1 Sict−1 + α2 Xict + ηit > 0
                                 Sict =                                                                           (2)
                                          
                                          0
                                               otherwise,

where Xict is a vector of time-varying variables that potentially determine smoking behavior, and
α1 captures a more general persistence effect of smoking that reflects not only the cost of quitting,
q̄, but also the effect of other factors that persist over time and that are correlated with smoking.
     We further modify (2) in two ways. First, in choosing an estimation strategy for this binary-
choice framework, one needs to decide whether unobserved individual heterogeneity is better ap-
proximated by fixed or random effects. To use random effects the individual effects must be uncor-
related with the regressors. Because this condition is unlikely to hold for smoking participation,
we specify a model that includes individual fixed effects.1 Thus, we model the error term ηit as
    1 In
       Xict we include regressors (age and income) that are probably correlated with individual and contextual factors
that we do not observe in our data (e.g. education, unemployment rates etc). A random effects specification would
capture those associations.


                                                          6
consisting of a permanent individual-specific component αi , and an individual- and age-varying
term εit . Second, because our objective is to estimate a culture effect, we include our measure of
British smoking culture, SeUK , as a separate covariate from the other controls in X. For each host
country, we estimate a linear probability model of the form:


                          HOST       HOST
                         Sict  = α1 Sic,t−1 + α2 XtHOST + α3 SeUK               HOST
                                                               c−5,t−25 + αi + εit                                        (3)

where c comprises a 5-year range of birth-years. Superscripts HOST and UK identify variables
measured in the country of destination and origin, respectively.
    To construct SeUK , we follow the epidimiological literature and measure culture in the country
of immigrant origin. That is, we proxy for British smoking culture using cohort-specific smoking
prevalence rates in the UK. However, we also advance the literature by further refining our proxy;
namely, we purge it of persistence effects and the effect of any causal contextual factors common
in the home and host countries.2 To do this, we estimate a model of smoking participation of
British natives for each of the host countries. In each model, we control for the average smoking
                                                                         HOST = (SHOST )/N if
                                                                                                
prevalence of the corresponding native-born cohort in the host country, Sct       ∑ ict      ct

i is native-born. Similar to the model in equation (3), we allow for persistence effects (β1 ) and
individual fixed effects (βi ). The model we estimate is given by:


                                      SUK        UK           HOST
                                       ict = β1 Sic,t−1 + β2 Sct   + βi + εitUK                                           (4)

    We use the time-varying residual in (4) to construct our proxy of British smoking culture.
We first average εit across all members of each (five-year) birth cohort. The resulting time se-
ries, εctUK = ∑(εict
                 UK )/N , consists of that cohort’s smoking prevalence rate in every year of life,
                           
                        ct

purged of persistence and shared determinant factors. Then, to every individual in our host country
   2 Absent this adjustment, the estimated effect of culture will be biased upwards when the contextual factors that
determine smoking are highly correlated across home and host countries and over time. For example, let tax, τ be
an element of X in (3) so that Xict = xict + τt and Xec−5,t−25 = xec−5,t−25 + τet−25 . Also, let τtHOST =ρ τet−25
                                                                                                             UK . Substitution
                                                    UK
shows that the culture effect is a function of α3 xec−5,t−25 + (α3 /ρ)τtHOST . The latter term is the bias from the common
context.



                                                              7
samples, we assign the value of εct of the cohort to which her parents belong, assuming (for now)
that parents and offspring are born twenty five years apart. For example, individuals who are 10-15
years old have parents who are 35-40 years old. Similarly, individuals who are 15-20 years old
have parents who are 40-45 years old, and so on. Finally, we lag this value by twenty five years.
That is, we use the year when the parents’ cohort in the UK was the same age as their children
currently are.3 Formally, we set:


                                              SeUK          UK
                                                c−5,t−25 = εc−5,t−25                                               (5)

With this variable, we test whether a person of a given age who lives in one of the host countries
smokes like his/her parents’ cohort smoked when that cohort was the same age and living in the
UK.
    By construction, our culture proxy aids identification of a “culture effect” in four ways. First,
it measures all determinants of smoking of the parent generation that differ across countries. Thus,
it captures all differences that may affect smoking rather than individual aspects of culture, such as
religion or a particular social image. Second and following from the above, the proxy is orthogonal
to non-cultural determinants of smoking decisions in the host countries (SeUK           HOST
                                                                           c−5,t−25 ⊥ Xt−25 and

therefore SeUK
            c−5,t−25 ⊥ Xt
                         HOST ). Third, it reflects differences in smoking-related attitudes across


generations and over time. Finally, our proxy measures cohort-specific smoking behavior in the UK
both before and after the immigrant parents left the country. Thus, although it is likely correlated,
it does not exactly match with the parental smoking behavior (which is not reported in our data).
Our proxy tests for a correlation between the smoking habits of immigrants and their parents’
generation in the UK and not for a correlation between the smoking habits of immigrants and the
smoking behavior of their own parents. The underlying hypothesis is that, independently of their
own smoking behavior, immigrant parents transmit smoking-related values to their children. For
   3 As an example, consider how we match a UK smoking proxy to a person in Australia who, in the survey year, is
15-20 years old. We assume her parents are 25 years older. That means her cohort is separated by 5 cohorts from her
parent’s cohort. So, her parent’s cohort comprises those who are 40-45 years old in the survey year. We find the cohort
of people in the UK sample who are 40-45 years old in that same year. Then we find the value of ε UK of that cohort in
the year they were 15-20 years old (t-25).


                                                          8
example, if an immigrant parent grew up in a culture that tolerated (or even condoned) smoking,
she will carry and transmit those values (consciously or subconsiously) to her child, increasing the
probability that her child smokes.


2.2    Methods

We consider two methods to estimate our models: the Arellano and Bond (1991) difference GMM
and its augmented version, the Arellano and Bover (1995) system GMM. The difference GMM
purges fixed effects by taking first differences, and instruments the (differenced) lagged dependent
variable and other endogenous regressors using their lags in levels. Because the lagged levels of
the regressors may be poor instruments for the first-differenced regressors, the system GMM es-
timator consists of two simultaneously determined equations: one differenced and one in levels.
The variables in levels in the second equation are instrumented with their own first differences.
This specification increases efficiency (Roodman, 2006). While both methods have characteristics
that recommend them, we reject the system GMM estimator because one of its key identifying
assumptions is probably violated in our data. In particular, the system GMM estimator requires
that individual deviations from the long-run mean of the dependent variable (conditional on the in-
dependent covariates) be uncorrelated with the fixed effects (Blundell and Bond, 1998; Roodman,
2009). In our data on smoking participation, we expect the deviation from the long run mean of Sit
to be zero for individuals who never smoke, and non-zero for individuals who do smoke for some
period in their lives. We also expect these deviations to be correlated with the factors that our fixed
effects capture, e.g. education. We use the difference GMM estimator because it is not sensitive to
this correlation.
   In estimating the models, we have paid special attention to the choice of instruments for our
endogenous variables. The literature warns that, depending on the time dimension (T ) of the panel,
difference GMM can generate an instrument count that is large relative to the sample size (Rood-
man, 2009). For T = 3, the method produces one instrument per endogenous variable, but as T
grows the instrument count can explode. When one uses too many instruments it is easier to over-


                                                  9
fit the endogenous variable and thereby fail to account for its endogeneity. Moreover, the Hansen
tests of overidentifying restrictions are vulnerable to instrument proliferation. In this situation, they
more often fail to detect overfitting. To avoid this problem we significantly restrict the number of
lags that we use as instruments. In doing so, we aim to choose lags that capture, on average, the
time of smoking initiation of the individuals in our sample, which is where most of the variation in
our dependent variable is concentrated. Because women typically initiate smoking later and over
a longer time period than men, we generally use smaller lags for women than men. The exact
number of lags we use differs by sub-sample and is guided by the Hansen tests for instrument
validity.4
    One can also estimate our model with the dymanic random effects probit because it controls for
both persistence and individual heterogeneity. An advantage of that estimator is that it produces
predictions strictly within the 0-1 range. However, we do not use it because it relies on assumptions
that are more difficult to defend. In particular, this estimator requires the assumption that the
initial observations, Sic1 , of the individuals are exogenous to the random effects. This assumption
would hold if our sample included the year of birth for every individual irrespective of individual
characteristics (i.e. when Sic1 = 0). In our Australian and South African samples, we lack tax data
for the early years of life of the oldest cohorts and, therefore, we cannot include those years in our
estimation. Thus, those data do not satisfy the initial conditions assumption.5 Further, as noted
previously, random effects models are valid only under the restrictive (and we believe invalid)
assumption that all regressors are uncorrelated with the random effects.
    For each host country, we estimate (3) separately for the children of British immigrants, immi-
grants from other countries, and native-born parents. We focus on smoking behavior of children
of immigrants who moved from the UK. We exclude first-generation immigrants because their
decision to smoke and their decision to immigrate may be simultaneously determined. Because
   4 When we include large numbers of instruments the Hansen tests of overidentifying restrictions produce probability

values that are equal to 1, which is the classic symptom of instrument proliferation.
   5 Heckman (1981) proposes a procedure where one can instrument for the initial values. However, the procedure

requires instruments that affect the smoking status in the initial observation of each individual (i.e at birth), but that does
not affect his smoking status in subsequent years. We cannot think of any variable that satisfies these requirements.



                                                             10
second-generation immigrants did not themselves choose to be born in the destination country,
bias due to selective migration will be weaker (and will derive from their parents). To the degree
that selection bias affects our results, we expect it to work in the opposite direction to the culture
effect. This would be consistent with the hypothesis that it is healthy people who select to migrate
because they are more able to move, to manage the difficulties of transition, and to undertake often
physically demanding work in the destination country. As a result of this selection, immigrants
are reportedly healthier upon arrival to the host countries in comparison to the native population
(e.g. McDonald and Kennedy 2004; Newbold 2005). Lillard and Christopoulou (2011) provide
evidence of a healthy immigrant effect with data specific to the smoking behavior of British immi-
grants in the US. Given this evidence, we expect that in the presence of selection bias, our evidence
of the culture effect will be underestimated.
    We also want to exclude immigrants whose connection to the UK operates through a third
or higher generation (grandparents, great-grandparents etc) because they are more likely to have
assimilated to local culture than second-generation immigrants. Excluding them assures a certain
degree of homogeneity of cultural assimilation in our immigrant samples. As we describe below,
the precision with which we are able to define each sample varies with the information available
in each country’s survey.



3     Data and descriptive evidence

3.1    Sources and definition of panels and sub-samples

To describe life-course smoking trajectories in the home and host countries we use retrospective
smoking questions from national cross-sectional and panel surveys. For Australia, we use the
2007 wave of the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA) survey; for
South Africa we use the 2008 wave of the National Income Dynamics Study (NIDS); for the UK
we use the 1999 and 2002 waves of the British Household Panel Study (BHPS); and, for the US,
we use the 1995, 1996, 1998-2003, 2006, and 2007 waves of the Tobacco Use Supplement of

                                                 11
the Current Population Survey (TUS-CPS).6 All surveys ask respondents to report four types of
smoking behavior: whether respondents ever smoked regularly, whether they currently smoke,
what age they started to smoke, and when (ex-smokers) quit.
    Together with information on the date of each survey, we use these data to create a smoking
status indicator for each respondent in each year of her life (from birth to the survey year). The
indicator equals 0 in every year a person did not smoke and it equals 1 in every year she smoked.
The indicator “turns on” in the year (at the age) a current or former smoker reported she began to
smoke. It stays on (i.e. remains equal to 1) in all subsequent years (up to and including the survey
year) if the person currently smokes. For ex-smokers, the indicator “turns off” in the year she said
she quit and remains off (i.e. equal to 0) in all subsequent years (up to and including the survey
year). Thus, our smoking data follow a panel of individuals over all years of their lives.
    The distinct advantage of the long behavioral history from retrospective reports is tempered
somewhat by the potential for bias due to bad recall or due to the lack of information on temporary
quits. We recognize both possibilities but expect that they pose few challenges to our analysis.
Ample evidence suggests that retrospectively reported data more generally (Berney & Blane, 1997;
Koenig et al., 2009), and on smoking behavior in particular (Christopoulou et al. 2011; Brigham
et al., 2010; Kenkel et al., 2003), are both valid and reliable. Researchers in the health economics
literature increasingly rely on retrospective smoking data, e.g. to examine how individual smoking
behaviors vary with price (Douglas and Hariharan, 1994; Douglas, 1998; Forster and Jones, 2001;
Nicolas, 2002; Kenkel et al., 2009; Lillard et al., 2013).
    Another source of concern is that retrospective data do not measure the past smoking behavior
of all members of a given cohort because smokers die sooner than non-smokers. Due to this
differential mortality, in any given sample of people who survive to answer a survey, one may
underestimate past smoking prevalence rates. This issue is especially important for our study
because we rely on reconstructed historical smoking trajectories by birth-cohort. We use cause,
   6 We pool multiple TUS-CPS surveys to maximize the size of the British immigrant sample. However, this strategy

results in enormous samples of natives and non-British immigrants. To speed model estimation, we draw random
subsamples of these groups, which we use throughout the analysis.



                                                       12
age, and sex-specific mortality data and the algorithm described in Christopoulou et al. (2011) to
correct for this bias. The adjustment doesn’t change smoking rates by much except for the oldest
cohorts.7
    The surveys that generate our data also collect information on country of origin. With this
information we define immigrant and native subsamples but with varying degrees of precision. For
example, the HILDA and TUS-CPS collect information about each person’s mother tongue and
the country of birth of himself, his mother, and his father. For those samples, we label a person to
be of British “origin” only if he is native-born, speaks English as his mother tongue, and at least
one of his parents was born in the UK. The TUS-CPS sample is large enough for us to estimate our
models on three subsamples of children of British immigrants - individuals whose parents were
both born in the UK, individuals whose father is the only parent born in the UK, and individuals
whose mother is the only one born in the UK. In South Africa the NIDS does not ask respondents
to report their mothers’ or fathers’ country of birth. However, it collects information about each
respondent’s country of birth, language, and race. We use those data to label a respondent as of
British-origin if he was born in South Africa, speaks English proficiently or as a mother tongue,
and is “white” or “colored.”
    These rules select samples in Australia and the US that precisely fit our objective - all respon-
dents are native born and all have at least one parent who was born in the UK - but only imprecisely
for the South African sample. Our British immigrant subsample in South Africa will include chil-
dren or descendants of English-speaking immigrants who do not meet our preferred selection rule.
The South African sample will include native-born individuals whose UK heritage flows from
grandparents or older ancestors. It will also include people with high English-skills (i.e. those who
“speak English at home” or “prefer to speak English” or “read and write English very well”), but
    7 At the very peak of each cohort’s lifetime smoking prevalence, the correction adds 2, 5, and 14 percentage points

respectively for US men ages 60-69, 70-79, and over 80. The correction adds 1, 2 and 6 percentage points for US
women; 0.4, 1, and 8 percentage points for Australian men; and 0.1, 0.4, and 1 percentage point for Australian women
(for the same cohorts respectively). Because we lack detailed South African mortality data by age, race, sex, and
cause, we cannot correct the South African prevalence rates. However, we suspect that any bias will be minimal
because South African mortality rates are relatively high and mostly due to causes unrelated to smoking. For South
African women in particular we expect that the adjustment would leave estimated rates unchanged because so few
older South African women smoked.


                                                         13
who come from other countries where English is spoken (e.g. the US, Canada, India, Pakistan).
The first type of person has a direct (but presumably weakening link to UK culture). The second
type of person has (presumably) even weaker links to British culture.
   The presence of such people will potentially introduce two sources of downward bias into the
coefficient on culture. First, if immigrants increasingly adopt local culture in successive gener-
ations then the smoking behavior of parents will reflect less of UK culture when the historical
connection is temporally more distant. Second, for respondents whose relatives were locals or
immigrated from an English-speaking country other than the UK, we expect UK culture to matter
less. Both effects bias our coefficient on culture towards zero. If we do find evidence of an effect
of culture on smoking behavior in South Africa, it is likely to be a lower bound estimate.
   Similar issues arise in defining the “native” and “non-British immigrant” subsamples because
we use the same information in our selection rules. For Australia and the US, we label a person as
of native-origin if she and both of her parents are native-born. We label a person as a non-British
immigrant if she is native-born and one or both of her parents were born in any country other than
the UK. In the South African sample, we label a person as “native” if she is not white, was born
in the country, and her preferred language is not English. Again, this selection rule is restrictive.
Because we cannot distinguish between parents who were native-born and those who were born
abroad, we do not define a non-British immigrant sample for South Africa. In this case, non-British
immigrants are included in the “native” group.
   Finally, when using the UK data to select the people who represent “British” culture, we also
apply a very strict selection rule. In particular, we define the “British” sample as UK residents who
report their race to be “white British”, were born in the UK, and both their parents were born in
the UK.
   With each of the sub-samples, we regress the smoking status of each individual on the cultural
proxy, cigarette tax, GDP per capita, age and age squared. Taxes and GDP per capita vary only
temporally, apart from US where taxes also vary by state. The per capita GDP data are from Barro
and Ursúa (2008) while the tax data are from various national sources (see Table 1).


                                                 14
3.2     Smoking habits by country and immigrant status

Table 1 provides sample means of smoking participation and our control variables by country,
immigrant status, and sex. The smoking data reveal three interesting patterns. First, overall and
among all sub-groups, the average smoking prevalence rate in the UK is higher than the rate in
the host countries. Second, the smoking prevalence rate is almost identical for children of native-
born parents and children of British immigrants in Australia. For those groups it differs little in
the US. But in South Africa, the difference is sizable, especially for women. The proportion of
South African women who smoke is almost six times higher among women with a UK heritage
than it is among South African women with some other heritage. Third, in both the US and in
Australia, children of immigrant parents from countries other than the UK appear to smoke less
than children of parents who were both born in the country or children who have at least one parent
who immigrated from the UK. These patterns suggest that smoking behavior differs significantly
across countries and sub-samples; variation we exploit in the empirical analysis.
    It is also informative to examine the smoking behavior of different birth cohorts. We create 12
sex-specific birth cohorts of people born in the same five-year period. The cohorts include those
who were ages 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, ... , 70-74 in 2002.8 For each cohort of men and women, we
compute the smoking prevalence rate in each year (as the mean smoking status indicator weighted
by sampling and differential-mortality weights).
    Figure 1 plots the resulting data for the UK sample. Our measure of British culture will be
based on the smoking prevalence rates among the eight oldest British cohorts in the UK, as shown
in this figure. Because we observe 12 cohorts overall in the UK and because we assume that, in
each generation, the average parent is 25 years older than the average child, we can only define the
cultural variable for those in the host countries that were younger than 55 in 2002 (i.e. for the 8
youngest cohorts).
    It is clear in Figure 1 that there is substantial variation in the smoking prevalence rate across
    8 We define birth-cohorts in each country that are standardized by calendar and chronological year. We use 2002 as

the reference year because it is the latest survey year common to all of the surveys we use.




                                                         15
cohorts, sex, and calendar years. The prevalence of smoking in each cohort generally follows a
bell-shaped pattern over time, reflecting a common pattern of smoking initiation that occurs in a
fairly narrow chronological window - during puberty and early adolescence - and a longer period
that stretches over the decades of adulthood during which smokers quit (at a much lower annual
rate). While the general life-course pattern is similar for men and women in different cohorts, the
peak prevalence rates differ. In older cohorts, men smoke more than women, but this difference
fades among younger cohorts. For both men and women, smoking prevalence reaches its highest
peak for the oldest cohort that entered puberty during World War II. In subsequent cohorts, the
peak smoking prevalence rate of men generally declines. Smoking prevalence increases once more
for the cohort whose members came of age in the mid- to late-1980s. While we do not investigate
formally here, these patterns are consistent with the pattern of increasing awareness and dissem-
ination of information on the health impact of smoking over time9 and a sharply lower income
tax enacted during the Thatcher administration. Among women, the peak rate of smoking preva-
lence increases and falls more sporadically. Some of the rise and fall of the life-course smoking
trajectories may be associated with changes in social norms that are associated with the feminist
movement.
    For each gender and cohort of Figure 1, Table 2 reports the corresponding sample sizes and
three summary measures of the smoking-trajectories: the peak smoking prevalence rate, mean age
at peak prevalence, and average years of smoking. These measures reflect the popularity, timing,
and duration of the smoking habit, respectively. The first two of these measures are essentially fixed
for every cohort; that is, they are directly comparable across genders and birth cohorts. Because we
do not observe the full life-course of each cohort, one cannot directly compare smoking duration
across all cohorts. However, one can compare the level of these variables from a given cohort
across genders and countries. We explore this comparability in Figure 2.
    Figure 2 plots the ratio of the summary measures (in Table 3) of British immigrant descendants
    9 The first Royal College of Physicians (RCP) report on Smoking and Health was published in the UK in 1962. It

received massive publicity. The main recommendations were: restrict tobacco advertising; increase taxes on cigarettes;
more strictly regulate sales of cigarettes to children, limit smoking in public places; and provide information on the
tar/nicotine content of cigarettes.


                                                         16
to their native-born counterpart by cohort, gender, and host country. Our data again show that the
most interesting differences appear in South Africa. The smoking habits of British decendants in
Australia and the US are close to those of natives; ratios vary within the 0.5 to 1.5 range for all
genders and cohorts (apart from teenagers and young adults in the US who show ratios closer to 2
or more). In contrast, children of British immigrants in South Africa smoke more and longer than
South African natives. Again, this pattern is particularly striking for women, especially young
cohorts (notice the scale of the y-axis).



4     Results

4.1    Measuring smoking culture of British immigrants

Our smoking data provide a clear demonstration of the bias that can arise when one measures
immigrant culture with a lagged value of the outcome of interest. Table 3 reports correlation
coefficients between smoking participation of immigrants and natives in the host countries (at the
individual level) and smoking prevalence rates of the parent generation living in Britain twenty five
years earlier. The coefficients are positive, sizable and statistically significant for all sub-samples.
    This positive correlation derives from four potential sources. First, a common process may
have caused the economies in home and host countries to develop in similar ways. Second, infor-
mation about health risks of smoking flows freely and (probably) simultaneously to people in all
countries; especially when they all speak English. Third, there are good reasons to suspect that
countries may have adopted similar tobacco control policies at similar times. For example, for
many years the World Health Organization has lobbied countries to adopt a standard set of tobacco
control policies to reduce smoking prevalence worldwide. Even independent of that effort, tobacco
control policies of the UK, US, and Australia follow similar trends (though states in the US tend to
have adopted regulations earlier). Both processes (economic and regulatory) could cause cohort-
specific contextual factors to be correlated across countries. Further, to the extent that contextual
factors decay slowly over time, this correlation across countries for the parents’ cohort will per-

                                                  17
sist and be correlated with contextual factors in the childrens’ generation in destination countries.
Finally, the smoking participation rate might be correlated across cultures and generations due to
factors that are neither contextual nor cultural. The correlation may arise because there is a strong
biological force that gives rise to similar patterns of smoking across individuals, such as a genetic
predisposition to nicotine addiction (Ding et al 2006).
   As section 3 describes, we exploit the time dimension of our data to purge contextual factors
and persistence effects from smoking prevalence rates in the UK. Specifically, we estimate dynamic
models of smoking participation in the UK (at the individual/age level) on smoking prevalence
rates of natives in each host country (at the cohort/age level). In doing so, we treat smoking
prevalence of natives in the host countries as endogenous and, thus, we instrument these variables
using lagged values, just like we do for the lagged dependent variable. We average the resulting
residuals at the cohort level and treat them as the respective cultural proxy for each host country.
Essentially, the residuals represent differences in smoking behavior of natives in the host countries
and in the UK, which are either due to cultural differences or uncorrelated contextual differences.
   We present the results of this exercise in Table 4. In all models the coefficient on the lagged
dependent variable is high and for South African males it even exceeds 0.98. These results suggest
a significant persistence in the smoking habit of British natives. The smoking prevalence rates
in the host countries are also significant predictors. The estimated coefficient on this variable is
positive for Australia and the US and negative for South Africa. This result is consistent with the
fact that smoking diffused more or less simultaneously in Australia, the UK and the US, whereas
the majority of the South African population, whose incomes rose more slowly, took up smoking
in later years when UK smoking prevalence rates were declining. Thus, while smoking prevalence
in Australia, the UK and the US generally decreases across the generations in our sample, smoking
prevalence in South Africa increases across generations.
   The residuals vary substantially across host countries, genders, cohorts, and years of age. To
demonstrate this variation, we plot them in Figure 3. Compared to the values of the dependent vari-
able (i.e. the prevalence rates of natives in the UK presented in Figure 1), the estimated residuals


                                                 18
are very low in value and often negative. Negative values indicate that natives in the host country
smoke more than natives in the UK, while positive values indicate that natives in the host countries
smoke less than natives in the UK. Further, the distribution of the residuals across calendar years is
less skewed than that of the gross smoking prevalence rates in Figure 1. This pattern is no surprise
considering that the residuals are purged of addiction effects. The most impressive difference is
in the year-by-year variation, which is admittedly high in the residual values. A priori, we are
agnostic as to what degree this variation represents noise or actual year-specific events that shaped
British smoking culture (e.g. the release of influential movies, TV series, or advertisements that
promoted smoker role-models). This is the empirical question which we test in section 4.2.
   To further assess the variation in our measure of culture, we report the correlation matrix of the
estimated residuals across genders and host countries in Table 5. The residuals are significantly
correlated in all cases (as they should be - after all each one measures the same smoking culture).
They differ to the extent that each one has been purged of its common correlation with smoking
behavior in a different country. In contrast to the coefficients in Table 3, the new correlation coef-
ficients are more heterogeneous across groups and in ways that appeal to intuition. For example,
the highest correlation is between Australian and American females. This result implies that the
smoking behavior of native females in Australia differs from smoking behavior of native UK fe-
males in much the same way that smoking behavior of native US females differs from the smoking
behavior of native females in the UK. Given the overall similarity of smoking patterns in the two
countries, this finding is unsurprising. Also, the lowest correlation in smoking culture is between
UK and South African females and between UK and American males. This result implies that
the deviation of smoking behavior of native females in South Africa and the UK is substantially
different from the deviation in smoking behavior of native males in the US and the UK. This result
also fits our expectations.
   In general, our prior is that British migrants and natives are ethnically very different in South
Africa, and less different in the US and Australia where more of the population originates from
Europe. For Australia in particular, the group that we call natives (those who are native-born with


                                                 19
two native-born parents) likely includes a big share of British immigrants of third or higher gen-
eration. We estimate that the grandparents of the ‘native’ group (or a large share of them) arrived
in Australia over the period 1920-1970. This period overlaps with the ‘Big Brother Movement’
founded in the Australia in early 1920s (Gill, 2005) and the formalization of this movement via the
‘Populate or Perish’ policy over 1945-1980 (Jupp, 2004; Hamerton and Thomson, 2005), both of
which essentially constitute schemes for preferential migration from the UK. The correlation coef-
ficients in Table 5 are consistent with this evidence; they suggest that the British smoking culture
deviates most from the local culture in South Africa, less in the US, and least in Australia.


4.2        Testing the explanatory power of the culture proxy in the host countries

In Table 6, we report results from regressions of smoking participation that include our culture
proxies.10 As in Table 4, the lagged dependent variable absorbs a lot of the variation in smoking
participation. In most cases, coefficient differences between immigrants and natives are statisti-
cally insignificant, suggesting that the persistence of the smoking habit is independent of immigrant
status. Australian males are an exception; the estimated persistence effects are significantly lower
for immigrant men from Britain than for native men and immigrant men from other countries.
    Our cultural proxy significantly predicts smoking participation of sons and daughters of British
immigrants in Australia and the US, and of daughters of British immigrants in South Africa. The
result implies that these groups have not fully assimilated their host country’s culture - at least with
regards to that part of UK culture that predicts smoking habits. Instead, their choices are influenced
by smoking preferences that they inherited from a parent born in the UK.
    Contrary to our expectations, the cultural proxy does not significantly predict smoking partic-
ipation of sons of British immigrants in South Africa. This could be due to several reasons. First,
health may play a bigger role in the decision of men to migrate to South Africa than to the other
  10 Forour Australian and US samples, we assign sex-specific residuls if a person has only one UK-born parent. For
example, we assign children of UK-born fathers the residual of UK men. If both parents are UK-born, we assign the
average of the UK residuals of the two sexes. In all other cases, we assign men the residuals of UK-born males and
women the residuals of UK-born females.




                                                        20
two countries (e.g. because of country-differences in living standards and health care quality), and
this selection effect may transmit to second-generation immigrants. Second, the diversity in smok-
ing culture among the native and the immigrant population may cause the cultural assimilation of
immigrants to accelerate, whereas the relatively higher homogeneity between British immigrants
and natives in Australia and the US may facilitate the preservation of British cultural habits. Third,
the effect of ethnic diversity in South Africa may be inflated by its geographical remoteness from
the UK. The more culturally different British immigrants are in the host country, and the more
remote that country is from Britain, the more difficult it should be for those immigrants to sustain
their cultural habits and their ties with Britain. This should be especially true for periods when
means of communications were scarce and underdeveloped, which is the case for many years that
our sample covers for South Africa.
   Part of the above interpretation is also consistent with the fact that our proxy of British smok-
ing culture predicts the smoking behavior of women but not the smoking behavior of men whose
parents migrated to South Africa. Women are typically not the bread-earners of the family, and less
often compete for physically demanding jobs in the host countries in comparison to men. There-
fore, health plays less of a role in migration decisions of women than it does for men. However,
a potentially more important reason is that womens’ smoking habits are driven by changes in so-
cial norms and attitudes brought about by the feminist movement. An extensive womens’ studies
literature supports this hypothesis (Graham, 1994; Tinkler, 2006; Elliot, 2008). It is plausible that,
because of feminist influences, women who migrated from the UK had an additional incentive to
preserve their smoking culture after arrival (which men did not have), and they also had an incen-
tive to transmit that culture to their daughters. Finally, patterns of migration between the UK and
South Africa may differ by sex in ways that weaken our assumption that the average child was
born when the average father was 25 years old. We explore this possibility in Section 4.3.
   Our assertion that we capture a true culture effect finds further support when we fit the model
on data from the people whose parents migrated to Australia and the US from a country other
than the UK. For those groups, in both countries, the culture proxy is uncorrelated with smoking


                                                 21
participation. This result is in line with the higher ethnic diversity between these groups and British
immigrants.
    Finally, our proxy does not significantly predict smoking participation of people whose parents
were native-born in each of the host countries. Encouragingly, this result suggests that there is
no link between the smoking behavior of the previous generation who lived in Britain and of the
current generation of natives in the host countries, other than through the common context shared
by the previous generations in the host countries and the UK.11
    As an additional exercise, and to further explore the significant culture effect for British immi-
grants, we test whether the culture effect is significant and similar for people with only a UK-born
mother, only a UK-born father, or with both. We limit this exercise to the US sample because
only the TUS-CPS has the data and a large enough sample to test whether smoking culture travels
through gender-specific channels.12
    Table 7 reports results for different model specifications estimated on these samples. In the first
three columns we report results for three different specifications, each of which is estimated on the
sample of individuals whose parents were both born in the UK. The underlying model for column
1 measures smoking culture as the average culture of UK men and UK women (in the appropriate
cohorts). The underlying model for column 2 includes the smoking culture of UK men only. The
underlying model for column 3 includes the smoking culture of UK women only. Columns 4 and
5 present results for the samples with a UK-born father only and a UK-born mother only. Their
underlying models use the sex-specific measures of smoking culture in the UK.
    We find that all measures of culture have significant and equal predictive power for British
  11 By construction, the culture proxy is orthogonal to the smoking behavior of average native-born parent in the host
countries. From this, it does not immediately follow that for children of native-born parents: SeUK               HOST ,
                                                                                                    c−5,t−25 ⊥ Sict
since British smoking culure may independently affect whether children of native-born parents smoke (e.g. it
                                                               HOST = α SHOST + α X HOST + α         1
transmits through vintage British movies). We estimate: Sict            1 ic,t−1    2 t         3 NUK     (SUK
                                                                                                            ic−5,t−25 −
                                                                                                    c−5,t−25
β1 SUK                HOST                    HOST and find that, for children of native-born parents, α = 0.
    ic−5,t−25−1 + β2 Sc−5,t−25 − βi ) + αi + εit                                                        3
   12 A related empirical literature examines whether children are more likely to smoke if their parent smokes or ever

smoked. This literature is rife with statistical weaknesses and even the better studies have produced mixed evidence.
Loureiro et al. (2010) find correlations consistent with sex-specific transmission using a UK sample. Göhlmann et al.
(2010) find no sex differences using German data. Using the same data but a different identification strategy Lillard
(2011) finds that parental smoking behavior does not influence whether children start smoking.




                                                          22
immigrant men. Differences in the estimated culture effects between columns (2) and (3) and
columns (4) and (5) are statistically insignificant. The implication is that the smoking culture
of mothers’ and fathers’ cohorts equally affect the smoking participation of sons. For British
immigrant women, however, the results are different. The mean culture of males and females
significantly predicts the smoking participation of daughters of immigrants when both parents
were born in the UK. However, when we control for female and male smoking culture separately,
only the female culture appears significant. Consistently, female culture predicts the smoking
participation of daughters of immigrants whose mothers were born in the UK and fathers were
born elsewhere, but male culture does not predict the smoking participation of women whose
fathers were born in the UK if their mothers were born elsewhere. These results suggest that
daughters inherit the smoking culture of their mothers’ cohort but not the culture of their fathers’
cohort. Again, one can read this result to reflect the role of the feminist movement as a shaping
and transmission mechanism of female smoking culture.


4.3    Testing robustness to an alternative definition of generation gap

To this point, all the results we have reported are based on the assumption that parent and children
generations are 25 years apart. Other studies in the literature have used a more conservative gener-
ation gap of 20 years (e.g. Fernandez and Fogli 2009). We chose the 25 year gap for two reasons.
First, our data do not allow us to observe each individual’s birth order, whether she has siblings, or
her parents’ ages. Second, our data contain significant heterogeneity by gender and birth-cohort.
Our aim was to define a gap that better approximates the temporal distance between the average
child and the average parent in the average cohort represented in our data.
   The cohort gap changes over time and across genders for several reasons. Generally, older
cohorts of parents gave birth at younger ages than did more recent cohorts. Older cohorts of parents
also had more children. Finally, within a given cohort, men tend to have children at older ages than
women. Because men and women may have migrated to each country at different rates over time,
these sorts of differences might lead to a generational gap that varies across host countries and


                                                 23
over time. If early cohorts of British immigrants to a given country were predominantly men, then
the average British immigrant man in our samples may have more children and have had them at
younger ages than the average British immigrant woman. Although we recognize the significant
variation in the generation gap, we lack the data to precisely calculate it for each gender and birth
cohort.
   As a robustness check and to produce partial evidence on whether results vary with the assumed
gap, we reestimated the models in Table 6 but assume a generational gap of 20 years. Note, that this
assumption significantly increases our sample size, as we can now match 9 cohorts of children and
parents, as opposed to 8 cohorts that we could match before. The new results, which we present
in Table 8, are very robust to this change. Qualitatively, the estimated culture effects are exactly
the same for all coutries and sub-groups. Our culture proxy significantly predicts the smoking
behavior of Australian and the US people whose parents are British immigrants, and the smoking
behavior of daughters of British immigrants in South Africa. In all other cases, the culture effects
are statistically insignificant. Quantitatively, the results for Australia and the US are also robust;
the differences in the culture coefficients reported in Tables 6 and 8 are statistically insignificant
for these countries.
   There are, however, some interesting quantitative changes in the South African results. When
we allow parent cohorts to be 20 instead of 25 years older than children cohorts, the culture coef-
ficient for British immigrant women falls from .5 to .14, and the respective coefficient for British
immigrant men increases from -.1 to .24 (with a p-value of 0.122). The implication is that the
smoking habits of British immigrant women are closer to the smoking habits of UK cohorts that
are 25 years older, while the habits of British immigrant men are closer to those of UK cohorts that
are 20 years older. Assuming (given the evidence in Table 7) that culture travels via sex-specific
channels, we interpret this result to reflect the fact that early waves of British immigrants in South
Africa consisted of more men than women. Historical accounts report that UK women were willing
to emigrate to the Commonwealth since the early 1900s. The UK government officially promoted
female emigration to address an increasing gender imbalance in the home population resulting


                                                 24
from male migration and WWI losses and also to facilitate endogamy in the population abroad.
However, these efforts had very limited success in the 1920s and were eventually terminated by
the 1930s depression (Blakeley 1988). To provide evidence specific to South Africa, we combined
data from the 1996 and 2001 South African census (available at the IPUMS international online
database). Using those data, we find that, in 2002, the fraction of men age 45-69 who were born
in the UK was 11.5 percentage points higher than was the fraction of similarly aged women who
were born in the UK. All together, this evidence suggests that, in South Africa, the culture effect
for men is driven by older cohorts, who had children at younger ages (either with British immigrant
women or with native women). In contrast, the culture effect for women is driven by the younger
cohorts, who had children at relatively older ages.



5    Conclusion

A growing economic literature argues that culture predicts important economic and social out-
comes. In this paper, we show that culture also predicts health outcomes like smoking partici-
pation. We find that culture matters for the smoking behavior of sons and daughters of British
immigrants in Australia and the US, and daughters of British immigrants in South Africa. We find
this result even though we employ a very conservative estimation technique and despite some data
limitations. With US data, we also find that the smoking culture of women is gendered; while
sons of British immigrants adopt the smoking culture of both parents’ cohorts, daughters of British
immigrants adopt the smoking culture from their mothers’ cohort only. Our culture proxy does
not significantly predict the smoking behavior of sons of British immigrants in South Africa, who
thus appear to have culturally assimilated in their host countries. Although we acknowledge that
the South African results are susceptible to noise, we argue that culture may matter less in this
country because the native population is much more heterogenous and ethnically different from
the population of Great Britain. The greater ethnic mix likely accelerates the rate of immigrant
assimilation. We attribute differences in the estimated culture effects between sons and daughters



                                                25
of British immigrants in South Africa to the spread of feminist smoking-related attitudes and to
differential degrees of health-based selective migration by gender. Finally, we find that our cultural
proxy does not significantly predict the smoking behavior of natives in the host countries, and more
encouragingly, that of children of immigrants from countries other than Britain.
   Our results have policy relevance. Worldwide, governments are devoting resources to try to in-
fluence individual decisions to smoke. These efforts reflect concerns about the annual (premature)
deaths of more than 5 million people that are linked to tobacco consumption and projections that
the number of deaths will grow in the near term. Already, governments spend a total of 965 million
US dollars on anti-smoking policies per year, while annual tobacco tax revenues amount to more
than 167 billion US dollars (WHO 2009). Our results suggest that the gains from these policies
stretch beyond current generations and across national borders. Efforts to reduce smoking preva-
lence spill over from one generation to the next, even across geographic distances. Specifically,
our results imply that, every 1 percentage point reduction in smoking prevalence in the parent gen-
eration in the UK decreases the probability of smoking participation among the children of British
immigrants by between .1 to .5 percentage points.
   Further, our results suggest that anti-smoking policies should consider culture-specific patterns.
To limit smoking, the World Health Organization (WHO) actively recommends that governments
further monitor behavior, establish smoke-free environments, fund and promote smoking cessation
programs, issue health warnings, ban tobacco advertising, and tax the sale of tobacco. These
recommendations are collected under the acronym MPOWER. WHO staff suggest that “these six
policies, if implemented in each country as a comprehensive package, would transform public
health” (WHO 2008, p. 41). We show here that it may not make sense to advocate an one-size-
fits-all guideline. Our evidence informs policy makers about the potential efficiency (in terms of
effects) that might be available if policies, such as taxation or anti-smoking campaigns, account
for or use information about culture-specific smoking habits in their designs. After all, culture
informs product promotion practices of tobacco companies, that target cigarette advertising to
specific ethnic groups (Landrine et al. 2005, Primack et al. 2007).


                                                 26
   Finally, this paper highlights the fact that there are a class of economically important behaviors
that are plausibly influenced by cultural factors that are not time-invariant. Social scientists are
keenly interested in understanding how cultural attitudes develop with respect to women, labor
markets, and health. We propose a technique that exploits time-variation, made available by ret-
rospective or longitudinal data, to measure a changing culture. This technique can be applied and
extended to utilize similar data, as these are becoming increasingly available and as they increas-
ingly measure a larger variety of behaviors.



References

 [1] Agyemang, Charles, Karien Stronks, Neelke Tromp, Raj Bhopal, Paola Zaninotto, Nigel
     Unwin, James Nazroo, and Anton E. Kunst. 2010. “A Cross-National Comparative Study
     of Smoking Prevalence and Cessation between English and Dutch South Asian and African
     Origin Population: the Role of National Context.” Nicotine and Tobacco Research, 12(6):
     557-566.

 [2] Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc. 2010. “Inherited Trust and Growth.” American Economic
     Review, 100(5): 2060-92.

 [3] Arellano, Manuel, and Olympia Bover. 1995. “Another Look at the Instrumental Variable
     Estimation of Error-Components Models”. Journal of Econometrics, 68: 29-51.

 [4] Barro, Robert J., and Josè Ursua. 2008. “Macroeconomic Crises since 1870.” NBER Working
     Paper 13940.

 [5] Berney, L.R., & Blane, D.B. (1997). Collecting Retrospective Data: Accuracy of Recall After
     50 Years Judged Against Historical Records. Social Science & Medicine, 45, 1519-1525.

 [6] Bhalotra, S., Valente, C. and van Soest, A. 2010. “The puzzle of Muslim advantage in child
     survival in India” Journal of Health Economics 29: 191–204


                                                27
 [7] Blakeley, Brian L. 1988. “The Society for the Oversea Settlement of British Women and the
     Problems of Empire Settlement, 1917-1936.” Albion: A Quarterly Journal Concerned with
     British Studies, 20(3): 421-444.

 [8] Blundell, Richard, and Stephen Bond. 1998. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in
     Dynamic Panel-Data Models.” Journal of Econometrics, 87: 115-143.

 [9] Brigham, J., Lessov-Schlaggar, C.N., Javitz, H.S., Krasnow, R.E., Tildesley, E., Andrews,
     J., et al. (2010). Validity of Recall of Tobacco Use in Two Prospective Cohorts. American
     Journal of Epidemiology, 172, 828-835.

[10] Christopoulou, Rebekka, and Dean R. Lillard. 2011. “Does Migration to the US Cause People
     to Smoke? Evidence Corrected for Selection Bias.” Mimeo, Cornell University.

[11] Christopoulou, Rebekka, Jeffrey Han, Ahmed Jaber, and Dear R. Lillard. 2011. “Dying for
     a Smoke: How Much Does Differential Mortality of Smokers Affect Estimated Life-Course
     Smoking Prevalence?” Preventive Medicine, 52(1): 66–70.

[12] Douglas, S., 1998. The duration of the smoking habit. Econ. Inq. 36, 49–64.

[13] Douglas, S., Hariharan, G., 1994. The hazard of starting smoking: estimates from a split
     population duration model. J. Health Econ. 13, 213–230.

[14] Elliot, Rosemary. 2008. Women and Smoking since 1890. London: Routledge.

[15] Fernandez, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of
     Beliefs, Work, and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1(1): 146–77.

[16] Fernandez, Raquel. 2010. “Does Culture Matter?” IZA Discussion Paper No. 5122

[17] Fisman, Raymond, and Edward Miguel. 2007. “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement:
     Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(6): 1020-
     1048.


                                              28
[18] Forster, M., Jones, A., 2001. The role of tobacco taxes in starting and quitting smoking:
     duration analysis of British data. J. R. Stat. Soc. A. 164, 517–547.

[19] Gill, Alan. 2005. Likely Lads and Lasses: youth migration to Australia, 1911-1983. Sydney:
     BBM Ldt.

[20] Göhlmann, Silja, Christoph M. Schmidt, and Harald Tauchmann. 2010. “Smoking Initiation
     in Germany: The Role of Intergenerational Transmission.” Health Economics, 19(2): 227-
     242.

[21] Graham, Hilary. 1994. “Surviving by smoking” In Women and Health: Feminist Perspectives,
     ed. Sue Wilkinson and Celia Kitzinger, 102-123. London: Taylor & Francis.

[22] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, Luigi Zingales. 2006. “Does Culture Affect Economic Out-
     comes?” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23-48.

[23] Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, Luigi Zingales. 2009. Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?”
     The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124 (3): 1095-1131.

[24] Hammerton, James A., and Alistair Thomson. 2005. Ten Pound Poms: Australia’s Invisible
     Migrants. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

[25] Heckman, James J. 1981. “The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Initial
     Conditions in Estimating a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process.” In Structural
     analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, ed. Charles F. Manski and Daniel
     McFadden, 179-195. Cambridge: MIT Press.

[26] Inglehart, Ronald, and Christian Welzel. 2005. Modernization, Cultural Change and Democ-
     racy. New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[27] Jupp, James. 2004. The English in Australia. Port Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.




                                                29
[28] Kapoor, M. and Ravi, S. 2012 “Determinants of Corruption: Government Effectiveness vs.
     Cultural Norms,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy: Vol. 12: Iss. 1 (Topics),
     Article 34.

[29] Kenkel, D., Lillard, D.R., & Mathios, A. (2003). Smoke or fog? The usefulness of retrospec-
     tively reported information about smoking. Addiction, 98, 1307–1313.

[30] Kenkel, D., Lillard, D.R., Liu, F., 2009. An analysis of life-course smoking behavior in China.
     Health Econ. 18, S147–S156.

[31] Koenig, L., Jacob, T., & Haber, J. (2009). Validity of the Lifetime Drinking History: A Com-
     parison of Retrospective and Prospective Quantity-Frequency Measures. Journal of Studies
     on Alcohol and Drugs, 70, 296–303.

[32] Landrine, Hope, Elizabeth A. Klonoff, Senaida Fernandez, Norval Hickman, Kennon
     Kashima, Bina Parekh, KaMala Thomas, Catherine R. Brouillard, Michelle Zolezzi, Jennifer
     A. Jensen, and Zorahna Weslowski. 2005. “Cigarette Advertising in Black, Latino, and White
     Magazines, 1998-2002: An Exploratory Investigation.” Ethnicity and Disease, 15: 63-67.

[33] Lazuras, L., Rodafinos, A., Panagiotakos,D. B., Thyrian, J. R., John, U. and Polychronopou-
     los, E. 2009. “Support for smoke-free policies in a pro-smoking culture: findings from the
     European survey on tobacco control attitudes and knowledge.” International Journal of Public
     Health Vol. 54:403–408

[34] Levy, A.. 2002. “Rational eating: can it lead to overweightness or underweightness?” Journal
     of Health Economics 21: 887-899.

[35] Lillard, D.R., Molloy, E., and Sfekas, A. 2013. “Smoking Initiation and the Iron Law of
     Demand”, Journal of Health Economics, forthcoming.

[36] Lillard, Dean. 2011. "Keeping it in the Family? If Parents Smoke Do Children Follow?"
     Journal of Applied Social Science Studies. 131: 277-286


                                                30
[37] Luttmer, Erzo F.P., and Monica Singhal. 2011. “Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistri-
     bution.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(1): 157–79.

[38] Loureiro, Maria L., Anna Sanz-de-Galdeano, and Daniela Vuri. 2010. “Smoking Habits: Like
     Father, Like Son, Like Mother, Like Daughter?” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
     72(6): 717-743.

[39] McDonald J.T. and S. Kennedy. (2004) “Insights into the ‘Healthy Immigrant Effect’: Health
     Status and Health Service Use of Immigrants to Canada”, Social Science and Medicine, 59:
     1613-1627.

[40] Newbold, K.B. (2005) “Self-rated health within the Canadian immigrant population: risk and
     the healthy immigrant effect,” Social Science & Medicine, 60(6): 1359-1370.

[41] Nichter, Mark. 2003. “Smoking: What Does Culture Have to Do with It?” Addiction, 98:
     139-145.

[42] Nicolas, A.L., 2002. How important are tobacco prices in the propensity to start and quit
     smoking? An analysis of smoking histories from the Spanish National Health Survey. Health
     Econ. 11, 521–535.

[43] Niederdeppe, Jeff, Xiaodong Kuang, Brittney Crock, and Ashley Skelton. 2008. “Media
     Campaigns to Promote Smoking Cessation among Socioeconomically Disadvantaged Pop-
     ulations: What Do We Know, What Do We Need to Learn, and What Should We Know?”
     Social Science and Medicine, 67: 1343-1355.

[44] Primack, Brian A., James E. Bost, Stephanie R. Land, and Michael J. Fine. 2007. “Volume of
     Tobacco Advertising in African American Markets: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
     Public Health Reports, 122: 607-615.

[45] Roodman, David. 2006. “How to Do xtabond2: an Introduction to “Difference” and “System”
     GMM in Stata.” Center for Global Development Working Paper Number 103.


                                               31
[46] Roodman, David. 2009. “A Note on the Theme of Too Many Instruments.” Oxford Bulletin
     of Economics and Statistics, 71(1): 135-158.

[47] Tinkler, Penny. 2006. Smoke Signals: Women, Smoking and Visual Culture in Britain. Oxford
     and New York: Berg.

[48] van Walbeek, Corn. 2005. “The Economics of Tobacco Control in South Africa”, PhD diss.
     University of Cape Town.

[49] WHO. 2008. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2008 - The MPOWER package.
     Geneva, Switcherland: World Health Organization.

[50] WHO. 2009. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic: Implementing smoke-free envi-
     ronments. Geneva, Switcherland: World Health Organization.

[51] Anna V, Wilkinson, Margaret R. Spitz, Sara S, Strom, Alexander V, Prokhorov, Carlos H.
     Barcenas, Yumei Cao, Katherine C, Saunders, and Melissa L, Bondy. 2005. “Effects of Na-
     tivity, Age at Migration, and Acculturation on Smoking Among Adult Houston Residents of
     Mexican Descent” American Journal of Public Health Vol. 95(6): 1043-1049.




                                              32
Tables and Figures

                                                    Table 1: Sample means
                                      Smoking prevalence          Age at interview         Real tax per pack          Real GDP per
                                      Males    Females            Males Females            (local currency)         capita (2006=100)
Australia          All                 25.2      21.5             38.0       37.6                 2.34                      73.7
                   British             24.4      21.9             35.2       35.6
                   Native              25.8      21.9             38.6       38.2
                   Other               21.6      18.2             36.8       35.5
South Africa       All                 17.8       4.7             36.3       37.4                  2.08                       87.2
                   British             28.8      18.4             40.1       39.7
                   Native/Other        15.8       2.5             35.6       37.0
UK                 All                 31.8      27.7             48.5       48.6
                   British             30.4      26.8             49.0       49.1
USA                All                 18.8      16.1             33.7       34.1                  0.77                       67.9
                   British             22.6      20.8             36.1       36.2
                   Native              21.3      18.3             35.1       35.4
                   Other               12.4       9.3             29.8       30.4
Notes: Sampling weights applied in all cases. Sources: Smoking data: Australia - HILDA (2007), South Africa - NIDS(2009), UK - BHPS
(1999, 2002), US - TUS-CPS (1995, 1996, 1998-2003, 2006, 2007); Tax data: Australia - Commonwealth of Australia Gazette (2005), South
Africa - van Walbeek (2005), US - Tax Burden on Tobacco (2008) and state statutes; GDP per capita - Barro and Ursua (2008).




Table 2: Summary indicators of smoking trajectories of natives in the UK by sex and birth-cohort
Cohort                                  Males                                                            Females
(Age in             Peak             Age at    Years               Obs.               Peak             Age at     Years              Obs.
2002)            prevalence           peak    smoking                              prevalence           peak     smoking
10-19               0.15               16        1                 191                0.19               17         1                208
20-24               0.42               18        3                 135                0.45               18         4                185
25-29               0.51               20        7                 179                0.42               21         5                205
30-34               0.41               26        7                 193                0.48               20         8                235
35-39               0.45               20        9                 213                0.44               23         9                293
40-44               0.47               21       11                 220                0.47               25        11                278
45-49               0.48               22       12                 186                0.42               22        11                201
50-54               0.60               23       18                 162                0.47               23        15                216
55-59               0.59               25       17                 196                0.56               22        18                216
60-64               0.65               28       22                 146                0.39               32        14                160
65-69               0.73               29       29                 112                0.37               28        14                137
70-74               0.74               24       25                 111                0.53               25        22                143




                                                                   33
Table 3: Correlation coefficients among cohort-specific smoking prevalence in the UK and smok-
ing participation in each host country by sex and immigrant status
                                 Australia                                    South Africa                            USA
                            Males        Females                           Males       Females               Males          Females
 British                   0.4627*       0.4358*                          0.1876*      0.3982*              0.4103*         0.3468*
 Native                    0.4543*       0.4018*                          0.4636*      0.5118*              0.4100*         0.3572*
 Other                     0.4542*       0.3931*                                                            0.3348*         0.2878*
 Notes: * significantly differs from zero with a probability value<0.05




Table 4: Difference GMM estimation of smoking participation of British in the UK on cohort-
specific smoking prevalence of natives in the host countries
                                                 Australia                           South Africa                      USA
                                            Males     Females                    Males      Females            Males     Females
 Lagged dependent variable                  0.745     0.830                      0.981      0.902              0.826     0.858
                                            [0.025]* [0.020]*                    [0.008]* [0.024]*             [0.023]* [0.015]*
 Sm. prevalence in host country             0.208     0.136                      -0.161     -0.890             0.234     0.169
                                            [0.039]* [0.019]*                    [0.060]* [0.426]*             [0.033]* [0.022]*
 Person-year observations                   93624     112207                     87559      105985             88674     107322
 Number of persons                          2380      2874                       2380       2874               2380      2874
 Instruments                                704       1415                       1274       624                1036      1461
 Hansen test                                722.8     1465.4                     1305.4     640.8              1060.6    1464.7
                                            (0.285)   (0.162)                    (0.251)    (0.292)            (0.276)   (0.453)
 Notes: Windmeijer-corrected standard errors are in brackets. Probability values are in parentheses.
 * significantly differs from zero with a probability value<0.05




                Table 5: Correlation matrix of estimated residuals by host country and sex
                                                        Males                                               Females
                                    Australia        South Africa              USA            Australia   South Africa      USA
 Males         Australia              1.000
               South Africa          0.5833              1.000
               USA                   0.6241             0.3228               1.000
 Females       Australia             0.7253             0.5491              0.5112               1.000
               South Africa          0.2552             0.8178              -0.1213             0.4986      1.000
               USA                   0.5596             0.4077              0.7715              0.8581      0.2513          1.000




                                                                          34
                          Table 6: Difference GMM estimation of smoking participation by host country, sex, and immigrant status
                                                                     Australia                                           South Africa                                             USA
                                                    British          Native            Other                   British        Native/Other                   British           Native            Other
     Males
       Culture                                      0.233            0.035             -0.009                  -0.097            -0.041                      0.144             0.082             0.020
                                                    [0.104]*         [0.022]           [0.090]                 [0.220]           [0.070]                     [0.030]*          [0.042]           [0.056]
        Lagged sm. participation                    0.356            0.592             0.717                   0.764             0.931                       0.877             0.793             0.801
                                                    [0.023]*         [0.098]*          [0.209]*                [0.087]*          [0.052]*                    [0.031]*          [0.047]*          [0.064]*
        Person-year observations                    10237            70281             8281                    12002             91516                       56792             84070             54468
        No. of persons/Instruments                  367/33           2378/199          275/29                  462/94            3964/257                    1874/180          2906/209          2304/103
        Hansen test                                 22.7             202.8             20.1                    76.0              260.5                       170.1             151.7             85.7
        (for lagged instruments)                    (0.703)          (0.300)           (0.634)                 (0.816)           (0.328)                     (0.570)           (0.997)           (0.787)
        Difference-in-Hansen test                   5.5              7.0               4.6                     8.9               2.7                         6.6               7.5               6.7
        (for independent variables)                 (0.356)          (0.222)           (0.461)                 (0.112)           (0.751)                     (0.251)           (0.186)           (0.240)

     Females




35
       Culture                                      0.395            0.069             -0.046                  0.495             0.015                       0.093             -0.015            -0.014
                                                    [0.113]*         [0.062]           [0.131]                 [0.184]*          [0.013]                     [0.037]*          [0.018]           [0.033]
        Lagged sm. participation                    0.515            0.857             0.618                   0.812             0.843                       0.966             0.883             0.950
                                                    [0.177]*         [0.029]*          [0.125]*                [0.029]*          [0.032]*                    [0.019]*          [0.034]*          [0.054]*
        Person-year observations                    10717            79807             8014                    17217             145946                      59017             93556             59956
        No. of persons/Instruments                  380/48           2710/291          272/29                  645/34            5897/184                    1926/251          3160/253          2437/105
        Hansen test                                 46.2             287.4             20.0                    36.9              174.9                       234.1             229.3             91.9
        (for lagged instruments)                    (0.302)          (0.450)           (0.640)                 (0.121)           (0.551)                     (0.681)           (0.785)           (0.682)
        Difference-in-Hansen test                   4.5              3.6               9.2                     8.6               5.4                         0.5               5.3               2.1
        (for independent variables)                 (0.484)          (0.608)           (0.102)                 (0.127)           (0.367)                     (0.993)           (0.378)           (0.833)
     Notes: Regressions control for log taxes, log GDP per capita, age and age squared. Windmeijer-corrected standard errors are in brackets. Probability values are in parentheses. * significantly differs
     from zero with a probability value<0.05. In all specifications estimated for Natives and Others, and for British in South Africa, culture is sex-specific. For British in Australia and the US culture
     corresponds to the gender of each individual’s British parent when only one parent was born in the UK, and is the mean of male and female cohorts for individulas with both parents born in the UK.
Table 7: Difference GMM estimations of sm. participation of British sub-groups in the US by sex
                                                                                                        Only father               Only mother
                                                    Both parents born in UK                             born in UK                born in UK
                                                (1)           (2)          (3)                          (4)                       (5)
 Males
   Culture                                      0.542            0.335             0.552                0.202                     0.097
                                                [0.213]*         [0.167]*          [0.204]*             [0.092]*                  [0.049]*
    Lagged sm. participation                    0.869            0.892             0.900                0.969                     0.934
                                                [0.416]*         [0.349]*          [0.307]*             [0.025]*                  [0.020]*
    Person-year observations                    10019            10019             10059                15608                     31165
    No. of persons/Instruments                  314/16           314/14            314/15               545/72                    1015/152
    Hansen test                                 8.2              8.8               6.9                  72.0                      129.1
    (for lagged instruments)                    (0.613)          (0.361)           (0.643)              (0.287)                   (0.840)
    Difference-in-Hansen test                   5.1              4.8               3.0                  5.1                       5.1
    (for independent variables)                 (0.403)          (0.437)           (0.701)              (0.404)                   (0.410)

 Females
   Culture                                      0.376            0.168             0.442                0.0012                    0.173
                                                [0.188]*         [0.163]           [0.174]*             [0.054]                   [0.087]*
    Lagged sm. participation                    0.9013           0.931             0.9433               0.976                     0.918
                                                [0.120]*         [0.098]*          [0.433]*             [0.072]*                  [0.026]*
    Person-year observations                    11267            11267             11340                15983                     31767
    No. of persons/Instruments                  359/14           359/18            359/17               542/74                    1025/122
    Hansen test                                 10.7             14.6              11.0                 79.0                      122.3
    (for lagged instruments)                    (0.222)          (0.264)           (0.444)              (0.169)                   (0.327)
    Difference-in-Hansen test                   7.4              8.6               6.0                  5.0                       9.1
    (for independent variables)                 (0.190)          (0.125)           (0.309)              (0.417)                   (0.107)
 Notes: In specification (1) culture is calculated as a mean of male and female cohorts; in (2) and (4) it corresponds to that of male cohorts; and
 in (3) and (5) it corresponds to that of female cohorts. Because for British with both parents born in the UK the sample size is relatively small,
 we have collapsed the instruments to avoid over-fitting (i.e. we have allowed one instrument per lag distance, rather than one instrument per
 time period and lag distance). All other information, as for Table 6.




            Table 8: Estimates of the culture effect when assuming a 20 year generation gap
                                   Australia                                 South Africa                                  USA
                            British Native Other                         British Nat./Other                 British      Native         Other
 Males                      0.335* 0.086 0.126                           0.236       0.053                  0.129*       0.061          0.086
 Females                    0.323* 0.096 0.060                           0.142*      0.022                  0.135*       0.093          0.019
 Notes: Estimation method is the difference GMM. All regressions pass the Hansen test that instruments are valid and the difference-in-Hansen
 test for the exogeneity of the independent variables. All other information as for Table 6.




                                                                         36
  Figure 1: Life-course smoking prevalence of natives in the UK by birth cohort (age in 2002)
                                                                         .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Males
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15-19

                                                                         .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20-24


                                                                         .4
                                                                     m
                                                                 n ) s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25-29
                                                            (m e a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30-34
                                                                         .2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      35-39
                                                                            0
                                                                            1940                                                   1950                                    1960                             1970             e a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980                         1990                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      40-44
                                                                         .8
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Females
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45-49

                                                                         .6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      50-54


                                                                         .4
                                                                     m
                                                                 n ) s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55-59
                                                            (m e a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      60-64
                                                                         .2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69
                                                                            0
                                                                            1940                                                   1950                                    1960                             1970             e a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980                         1990                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70-75
                                             G ra p
                                                  h s b
                                                      y s




Figure 2: Summary indicators of smoking trajectories in relative terms between British immigrants
and natives
                                         3                                       AU, Peak prevalence                                                                         3            AU, Age at peak prevalence                                                                                  3                     AU, Number of years

                                         2                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                                        2


                                         1                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                        1


                                         0                                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                        0
                                              15-19

                                                                         20-24

                                                                                 25-29

                                                                                         30-34

                                                                                                 35-39

                                                                                                         40-44

                                                                                                                           45-49

                                                                                                                                   50-54

                                                                                                                                           55-59

                                                                                                                                                   60-64

                                                                                                                                                           65-69

                                                                                                                                                                   70-75




                                                                                                                                                                                  15-19

                                                                                                                                                                                           20-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                    25-29

                                                                                                                                                                                                            30-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35-39

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40-44

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     45-49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50-54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     55-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60-64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70-75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15-19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25-29

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35-39

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40-44

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45-49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50-54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60-64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70-75




                                                                                                                 c o
                                                                                                                 b h o
                                                                                                                     r t                                                                                                                   c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r t                                                                                                          c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r t




                                         8                                       SA, Peak prevalence                                                                         8            SA, Age at peak prevalence                                                                                                        SA, Number of years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                         6                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6

                                         4                                                                                                                                   4                                                                                                                        4

                                         2                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                                        2

                                         0                                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                        0
                                              15-19

                                                                         20-24

                                                                                 25-29

                                                                                         30-34

                                                                                                 35-39

                                                                                                         40-44

                                                                                                                           45-49

                                                                                                                                   50-54

                                                                                                                                           55-59

                                                                                                                                                   60-64

                                                                                                                                                           65-69

                                                                                                                                                                   70-75




                                                                                                                                                                                  15-19

                                                                                                                                                                                           20-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                    25-29

                                                                                                                                                                                                            30-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35-39

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40-44

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     45-49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50-54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     55-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60-64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70-75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15-19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25-29

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35-39

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40-44

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45-49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50-54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60-64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70-75




                                                                                                                 c o
                                                                                                                 b h o
                                                                                                                     r t                                                                                                                   c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r t                                                                                                          c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r t




                                         3                                       US, Peak prevalence                                                                         3            US, Age at peak prevalence                                                                                  3                     US, Number of years

                                         2                                                                                                                                   2                                                                                                                        2


                                         1                                                                                                                                   1                                                                                                                        1


                                         0                                                                                                                                   0                                                                                                                        0
                                              15-19

                                                                         20-24

                                                                                 25-29

                                                                                         30-34

                                                                                                 35-39

                                                                                                         40-44

                                                                                                                           45-49

                                                                                                                                   50-54

                                                                                                                                           55-59

                                                                                                                                                   60-64

                                                                                                                                                           65-69

                                                                                                                                                                   70-75




                                                                                                                                                                                  15-19

                                                                                                                                                                                           20-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                    25-29

                                                                                                                                                                                                            30-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     35-39

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   40-44

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     45-49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50-54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     55-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60-64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70-75




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15-19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20-24

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            25-29

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30-34

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            35-39

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40-44

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      45-49

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50-54

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      55-59

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              60-64

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      65-69

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              70-75




                                                                                                                 c o
                                                                                                                 b h o
                                                                                                                     r t                                                                                                                   c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           b h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r t                                                                                                          c o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b h o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r t




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Males                                                                                      Females
           G ra p
                h s b
                    y c o
                        u n
                          t ry a n
                                 d v a
                                     r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       37
                                                   Figure 3: Residuals by host country, sex, and birth cohort

                                 .15                                                                           .15
                                                   AU, Males                                                                     AU, Females
                                                                        35-40                                                                           35-40
                                   .1                                                                            .1
                                                                        40-45                                                                           40-45

                                                                        45-50                                                                           45-50
                                 .05                                                                           .05
                                                                        50-55                                                                           50-55
                           2 5
                        la g




                                                                                                         g 2
                                                                                                           5
                      t _




                                                                                                   n t_ la
                 a re n




                                                                                                 r e
               _ p




                                                                                               p a
             AU




                                                                                             U_
                                                                                           _ A
     d if_ M _




                                                                                     d if_ F
   2 _




                                                                                   2 _
re s




                                                                                re s
                                   0                                    55-60                                    0                                      55-60

                                                                        60-65                                                                           60-65
                                 -.05                                                                          -.05
                                                                        65-70                                                                           65-70

                                                                        70-75                                                                           70-75
                                  -.1                  e a
                                                       y r
                                                                                                                -.1                   e a
                                                                                                                                      y r




                                     1965   1975     1985      1995   2005                                         1965   1975      1985       1995   2005

                                 .15                                                                           .15
                                                   SA, Males                                                                     SA, Females
                                                                        35-40                                                                           35-40
                                   .1                                                                            .1
                                                                        40-45                                                                           40-45

                                                                        45-50                                                                           45-50
                                 .05                                                                           .05
                                                                        50-55                                                                           50-55
                           2 5
                        la g




                                                                                                         g 2
                                                                                                           5
                      t _




                                                                                                   n t_ la
                 a re n




                                                                                                 r e
               _ p




                                                                                               p a
             SA




                                                                                             A_
                                                                                           _ S
     d if_ M _




                                                                                     d if_ F
   2 _




                                                                                   2 _
re s




                                                                                re s




                                   0                                    55-60                                    0                                      55-60

                                                                        60-65                                                                           60-65
                                 -.05                                                                          -.05
                                                                        65-70                                                                           65-70

                                                                        70-75                                                                           70-75
                                  -.1                  e a
                                                       y r
                                                                                                                -.1                   e a
                                                                                                                                      y r




                                     1965   1975     1985      1995   2005                                         1965   1975      1985       1995   2005

                                 .15                                                                           .15
                                                   US, Males                                                                     US, Females
                                                                        35-40                                                                           35-40
                                   .1                                                                            .1
                                                                        40-45                                                                           40-45

                                                                        45-50                                                                           45-50
                                 .05                                                                           .05
                                                                        50-55                                                                           50-55
                           2 5
                        la g




                                                                                                         g 2
                                                                                                           5
                      t _




                                                                                                   n t_ la
                 a re n




                                                                                                 r e
               _ p




                                                                                               p a
             US




                                                                                             S_
                                                                                           _ U
     d if_ M _




                                                                                     d if_ F
   2 _




                                                                                   2 _
re s




                                                                                re s




                                   0                                    55-60                                    0                                      55-60

                                                                        60-65                                                                           60-65
                                 -.05                                                                          -.05
                                                                        65-70                                                                           65-70

                                                                        70-75                                                                           70-75
                                  -.1                  e a
                                                       y r
                                                                                                                -.1                   e a
                                                                                                                                      y r




                                    1965    1975     1985      1995   2005                                        1965    1975      1985       1995   2005




                                                                                38
