                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




USING PERFORMANCE INCENTIVES TO IMPROVE MEDICAL CARE PRODUCTIVITY
                      AND HEALTH OUTCOMES

                                            Paul Gertler
                                        Christel Vermeersch

                                       Working Paper 19046
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19046


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We gratefully acknowledge funding from the World Bank’s Bank-Netherlands Partnership Program,
the British Economic and Social Research Council, the Government of Rwanda through a Japanese
PHRD grant, and the World Bank’s Spanish Impact Evaluation Fund. The authors have no other financial
or material interests in the content of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Paul Gertler and Christel Vermeersch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Using Performance Incentives to Improve Medical Care Productivity and Health Outcomes
Paul Gertler and Christel Vermeersch
NBER Working Paper No. 19046
May 2013
JEL No. I11,J33,O12

                                             ABSTRACT

We nested a large-scale field experiment into the national rollout of the introduction of performance
pay for medical care providers in Rwanda to study the effect of incentives for health care providers.
In order to identify the effect of incentives separately from higher compensation, we held constant
compensation across treatment and comparison groups – a portion of the treatment group’s compensation
was based on performance whereas the compensation of the comparison group was fixed. The incentives
led to a 20% increase in productivity, and significant improvements in child health. We also find evidence
of a strong complementarity between performance incentives and baseline provider skill.


Paul Gertler
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu

Christel Vermeersch
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington DC
cvermeersch@worldbank.org
1. INTRODUCTION

           Long-standing concerns about both the cost and effectiveness of health care have led to
the relatively recent introduction of performance incentives for medical care providers.1 These
pay for performance (P4P) schemes typically pay bonuses to providers that give higher quality of
care to more patients. While performance incentives have long been part of labor contracts, they
have only relatively recently become widespread in health care worldwide. While there is some
evidence on the effect of P4P on quality and access to services mostly from the US and the UK,
there is little rigorous evidence on the impact on health outcomes and provider productivity
especially in low and middle-income countries.

           In this paper we provide evidence on the effect of incentives on provider productivity and
on health outcomes in Rwanda, where we nested a prospective field experiment into the national
rollout of a P4P incentive scheme. P4P affects health care provision in two ways; first, through
incentives for providers to expend more effort in specific activities and second through an
increase in the amount of available financial resources. In order to identify the incentive effect
separately from the increase in resources, the traditional input-based budgets of the comparison
group were increased by the average amount of incentive payments to treatment facilities. As a
result, while treatment and comparison facilities had the same budget, a portion of the treatment
facilities’ budgets was determined based on their performance whereas the comparison facilities’
resources were not. This is important because if P4P achieves its results just from increased
financial resources, then the same results could be achieved from a simple increase in budget
without incurring the administrative costs associated with implementing the incentive scheme.

           We find that the performance incentives translated into large and significant
improvements in child health outcomes. Specifically, we find that incentives led to an increase of
0.53 standard deviations in the weight-for-age of children 0-11 months and 0.25 standard
deviations in the height-for-age of children 24-49 months. We previously documented the
pathways through which the incentives likely affected health outcomes in Rwanda, i.e. increased
preventative care utilization and improved clinical quality of care (Basinga et at. 2011).

           We also found that the incentives were associated with a substantial improvement in
provider productivity. We measured productivity as the gap between provider knowledge and

1
    See Van Herck et al. (2010) and Ashaman et al (2010) for reviews of performance incentives in medical care.


                                                          1
actual practice of appropriate prenatal care clinical procedures, holding the provider’s budget
constant. Knowledge can be thought of as the provider’s production possibilities frontier. Under
this definition, the difference between knowledge and practice is a measure of efficiency
conditional on holding the provider’s budget constant.

        In our survey, while providers knew 63 percent of the appropriate clinical protocols for
prenatal care, they only delivered about 45 percent of the appropriate protocols. This implies a
gap of 18 percentage points between knowledge and practice. It implies that there is substantial
distance from the provider practice to their production possibility frontier. The performance
incentives reduced the gap by 4 percentage points on average.

        Finally, we found large complementarities between provider skill (knowledge of
appropriate clinical procedures) and performance incentives in the production of quality.
Specifically, we found that higher skilled providers increased quality more than lower skilled
providers in response to the same incentives. This means that incentives are more effective in a
context where providers have higher skills and suggests that traditional training interventions
may yield higher results with incentives than without.

        Our results are especially important for low income countries who, despite dramatic
increases in public spending on health in the last decade, have made little progress towards the
2015 Millennium Development Goal health targets (United Nations 2010 and 2011).2 One reason
is the poor performance of these medical care systems where absenteeism among providers is
widespread (Chaudhury et al. 2006), provider knowledge of proper clinical procedures for basic
care is low (Das and Hammer 2004), and providers give a standard of care that is well below
their clinical knowledge3. In this context, incentive payment is a mechanism that can increase
health provider productivity in terms of supplying higher quality care to more patients.

        Our work contributes to the general literature on P4P in medical care, as it is the first to
separately identify the impact of P4P incentives from the associated increase in resources.4 Our
work also contributes to the relatively small literature on the effects of paying medical care

2
  Among the 67 countries with highest child mortality rates, only 10 are on track to reduce mortality by two thirds.
And the rate of decline in maternal mortality for all is well short of the 5.5 % needed to achieve 2015 MDG target.
3
  See Das and Gertler (2007); Das, Hammer and Leonard (2008); and Leonard and Masatu (2010a) and (2010b).
4
   See Witter et al., (2012) for a recent systematic review of health care performance incentives in low and middle
income countries. Most of the literature that they cite do not have control groups and estimate the impact of P4P as
jumps in time trends of the amount of services providers by treatment facilities.


                                                         2
providers for performance in developing countries;5,6 to our knowledge, ours is the first rigorous
evaluation of the impact on health outcomes and productivity in a low-income country.

        There are three well-identified related evaluations in other low and middle-income
countries. Hospital-based physicians in the Philippines who received extra bonus pay based in
part on knowledge of clinical appropriate clinical procedures, reported increases in clinical
knowledge (Peabody et al, 2011). In Indonesia, performance incentives to villages for
improvements health and education outcomes led to an increase in labor supply from health
providers (Olken et al. 2011). Finally, Miller et al (2012) found that bonus payments to schools
significantly reduced anemia among students in China.

        This paper is organized as follows. We first describe the P4P scheme introduced in
Rwanda. We then use a simple model to layout the behavioral pathways through which the
incentives plausibly could lead to improved health outcomes and show that there is evidence to
support the model’s predictions. We then describe our identification strategy and data. We
follow with the results for health outcomes and then productivity, and end with a conclusion.

2. INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXT

        Rwanda is one of the poorest countries in the world with a GDP of US$340 per capita in
2007 (World Bank, 2008). Since the end of the 1994 genocide, Rwanda has made remarkable
progress in improving maternal and child health. Between 2000 and 2005, infant mortality fell
from 107 to 86 deaths per 1,000 live births, while maternal mortality fell from 1,071 to 750 per
100,000 live births (Institut National de la Statistique du Rwanda and ORC Macro 2006).
Despite this progress, the health system continues to grapple with serious shortages of qualified
personnel and low levels of service delivery, especially in rural areas (World Bank 2010b).

        a. P4P

        In 2005, the Rwandan Ministry of Health (MoH) used the opportunity of an increase in
the health sector budget to scale up nationally a P4P scheme for maternal and child health care
services (Logie et al 2008; World Bank 2010a). The decision was based on positive reports of

5
  There is, however, a growing literature on P4P for medical care in the U.S. and other high-income countries with
mixed results. See Van Herck et al. (2010), Ashaman et al (2010) and Scott et al. (2011) for reviews.
6
  There is a related literature on performance pay for teachers in low-income countries. For example see Glewwe et
al. (2010), Muralidharan and Sundararaman (2011), and Muralidharan (2012).


                                                        3
P4P schemes in two Provinces that had been developed by a number of NGO’s (Kalk et al. 2005;
Soeters et al. 2005 and 2006). The P4P scheme provides bonus payments to primary care
facilities based on the provision of various types of services and the quality of those services.
P4P payments go directly to facilities and are used at each facility’s discretion. The overall
amount of P4P payments is large in comparison to facilities’ budgets: a study of 68 facilities
receiving P4P payments shows that P4P payments represent an increase in funding of 24.6%
above the base budget. On average, 77 percent of P4P funds were used to compensate personnel
resulting in an increase of 38 percent in staff compensation (Basinga et al 2011).

        b. The Payment Formula

        The scheme pays for 14 maternal and child healthcare services conditioned on an overall
facility quality assessment score. The formula used for payment to facility i in month t is:

                                         ⎛          ⎞
                             Paymentit = ⎜ ∑ PU
                                               j jit ⎟ × Qit with 0 ≤ Qit ≤ 1,
                                         ⎝ j        ⎠
where Pj is the payment per service unit j (e.g. institutional delivery or child preventive care
visit), Uijt is the number of patients using service j in facility i in period t, and Qit is the overall
quality index of facility i in period t.

        The 14 service indicators (Ujit) and associated payment rates (Pj) are listed in Table 1.
The Rwanda Ministry of Health (MoH) defined these indicators and payments based on national
health priorities, available budget and previous NGO experience with P4P (Ministère de la Santé
du Rwanda 2006 and 2008). The first 7 indicators consist of the number of visits to the facility
for various types of service such as prenatal care and institutional delivery, while the second set
of 7 indicators refers to the content of care provided during those visits. This second set includes
the number of children who were fully vaccinated, the number of pregnant women who received
tetanus vaccines and malaria prophylaxis during prenatal care, the number of at-risk pregnancies
that were referred to hospitals for delivery during prenatal care, the number of severely
malnourished children who were referred to treatment facilities, and the number of general
emergencies that were referred to the appropriate facility for care. The health literature considers
these to be measures of aspects of the process or clinical quality of care (Donabedian, 1988).




                                                     4
        The actual amount paid to the facility is adjusted based on the overall facility quality, Qit.
The facility’s overall quality enters the payment formula as a multiplicative factor that
proportionately raises or lowers the payment for the 14 output indicators. The quality index is
bounded between zero and one. If the facility meets all of the quality criteria, then the index
equals one and the facility receives the full P4P payment. However, if the facility is deficient in
some of the quality criteria, then all of the payments are discounted. For example, if the facility
only scores 0.80 on the quality index, then it only receives 80 percent of the payment for the 14
output indicators. In this way, the P4P scheme pays for both facility output and facility quality.

        The quality index Qit is a function of structural and process measures of quality specified
in the Rwandan preventive and clinical practice guidelines (Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda
1993, 1997, and 2003). Structural measures are the extent to which the facility has the
equipment, drugs, medical supplies and personnel necessary to be able to deliver a specific
medical service. Process measures are the clinical content of care provided for specific services. 7

        The formula for the quality index is:

                                       Qit = ∑ ωk Skit    with   ∑ω    k   = 1,
                                              k                   k


where Sikt is the share of indicators for service k that are met by facility i in period t, and ωk is the
weight for service k. If a facility has perfect structural and process quality, then all the Sikt take on
value one and the overall quality index is equal to one; in this case, the facility is paid the
maximum possible bonus for the services provided. By contrast, if the quality index is less than
one, P4P payments are discounted for all services provided at the facility. Table 2 details the
services that are included in the quality index, their weights and the relative importance of
structural and process indicators in the computation of the score for each service k.

        c. Full Prices

        There is a large range of payment rates (Pj) for the Uijt’s (Table 1). The largest are for
institutional deliveries and emergency referrals to hospitals for obstetric services; both services
pay $4.59 per case. The next largest, at $1.83, is for new contraceptive user visits, referral of at-
risk pregnancies to hospitals for delivery and referral of malnourished children to higher-level

7
 Clinical practice guidelines are “systematically developed statements to assist practitioners and patient decisions
about appropriate health care for specific circumstances.” (Field and Lohr, 1990)


                                                         5
facilities for treatment. Facilities are paid about half as much for a child who is fully vaccinated
on time and about half as much again for pregnant women who receive the tetanus vaccine and
the same for malaria prophylaxis. Curative and contraceptive re-supply visits are paid the small
sum of $0.18 per visit. Finally, prenatal care visits are paid only $0.09 per visit with a bonus of
$0.37 for every woman who completes 4 visits.

       The incentives implicit in the payment scheme are more complicated than they appear.
The incentive structure focuses not just on treating more patients, but also on providing more
patients with higher quality of care. This happens not only through the multiplicative scaling
factor Q discussed above, but also because direct payment for content of care services in the
Ui’s. The full payment for seeing a patient depends on the services provided during that visit. In
fact, payment rates for visits are much higher if the provider supplies better content of care.

       Consider for example, the payment for prenatal care. Providers receive $0.18 for every
pregnant women who starts prenatal care, an additional $0.37 if the women completes at least 4
visits, an additional $0.92 if they give the patient a tetanus shot and malaria prophylaxis during a
prenatal care visit, and an additional $1.83 if they assess the delivery to likely be risky and refer
the mother to deliver at the district hospital. Hence, a provider will receive $0.55 for four
prenatal care visits of low quality versus $1.47 for providing high quality.

       The same is true for institutional delivery and child growth monitoring. If the provider
detects a high-risk pregnancy and refers the woman to the hospital for delivery, payments for this
high-quality care increase to $3.30. In the case of growth monitoring, the payment to the
provider is $0.18 per visit plus an additional $1.83 if the child is malnourished and she refers her
to the hospital for treatment.

       d. Administration and Auditing of Payments

       P4P payments are administered by district steering committees comprised of members of
the Government, Providers and civil society (Ministry of Health Republic of Rwanda, 2006;
Fritsche et al 2010). Facilities submit monthly activity reports (Ujit) and quarterly requests for
payment to the steering committee, which is responsible for verifying the data and authorizing
payment. For the referral indicators, the facility must also submit verification from the hospital
that the referral was appropriate and the referred patient was treated. The committee verifies the



                                                 6
reports by sending auditors to facilities on a quarterly basis on an unannounced randomly chosen
day. The auditors review the utilization registry and facility records to verify the data reported is
the same as the data recorded in facility records. During the 2006-2008 period, MoH conducted a
survey of face-to-face interviews with approximately 1000 patients to verify the accuracy of the
records. False reporting on patients or services was less than 5 percent (HDP 2008).

        Information used to compute each facility’s overall quality score is collected under the
existing national monitoring system that requires all district hospitals to monitor and supervise
the quality of health centers in their districts. Every quarter, a district hospital team from
different services (e.g. prenatal, curative care, preventive care) visits each facility on an
unannounced randomly chosen day to assess the facility’s quality through direct observation and
review of patient records using a standardized tool. At the end of the visit, the team discusses
their findings with the facility’s personnel and provides recommendations to improve quality. In
P4P districts, the data are used to construct the overall quality score for the facility each quarter.

3. PATHWAYS

        Here we discuss how the introduction of incentives induces providers to supply more
effort in ways that increase utilization and quality of care. We argue that these are the pathways
through which incentives would lead to improved health outcomes and increased productivity.

        Without incentives a provider is paid a fixed amount and her income is not affected by
seeing more patients or providing them with better care. Hence, the provider treats all patients
who show up and provides them with a minimum level of care defined by her ethical standards.8

        The P4P scheme introduces a new dimension by linking part of provider income to the
provision of certain services and to quality of care. Taking into account the basic structure of the
P4P formula, the profit function is:

                                𝑉=𝐼+         ! 𝑃! 𝑈!   𝜀! 𝑄 𝜖! − 𝐶 𝜀                                                 (3)

where I is the fixed salary, Pi is the P4P payment for service i, Ui is the total quantity of service i
provided to patients, Q is the overall quality of care, ε is total effort (i.e. ε =          ! 𝑃! 𝑈!   𝜀!   + εq),   and


8
  Some argue that medical providers care about their patients’ health and are not just motivated by money. We
incorporate this into our framework through minimum effort constraints as defined by the provider’s ethics. See
Reinikka and Svensson (2010) for an investigation of objective functions of clinics in a rural African setting.


                                                         7
C(∗) is the cost of effort. The service production functions Ui(•) and the quality production
function Q(•) are concave in effort, and C(•) is a convex function of total effort.

        The provider chooses effort levels to maximize income subject to effort levels being no
less than the ethical minimum levels. In the case of an interior solution, effort is allocated in such
a way that marginal revenue of effort is equalized across the three types of effort and that it is
equal to the marginal cost of effort:

                     𝑃! 𝑈!! 𝜖! = 𝑃! 𝑈!! 𝜖! = ⋯ =        ! 𝑃! 𝑈!   𝜀! 𝑄! 𝜖! = 𝐶 ! 𝜀                 (4)

Note that the marginal return to effort supplied to quality depends on all prices. Hence, an
increase in either price always raises the return to effort supplied to quality. Marginal return to
effort supply to service i depends not only on the price but also on the extent to which more
effort increases quantity. Effort supplied to anything raises the marginal cost of effort because
the cost of effort is a function of total effort.

        The introduction of P4P raises all prices simultaneously. This increases the allocation of
effort to quality because increases in any price raise the marginal return to supplying effort to
quality. The largest allocations of effort to specific services are to those services for which the
relative price increases are the largest and the marginal productivity of effort is the highest.

        The effect of the introduction of the P4P payments depends not only on the relative
payment rates, but also on how hard it is to increase the levels of services. In general, it takes
more work to increase services that depend on patient choices than services that are completely
in the provider’s control. For example, it takes more work to convince a pregnant woman to
come to the clinic for prenatal care than to give the woman a tetanus shot once she is there.
Hence, even if payments were equal for an additional patient visit as for a tetanus shot, one
would expect to see larger increases in the number of tetanus shots than in the number of visits to
the facility. Moreover, initiation of care takes more effort than its continuation. For example, it
will take a provider substantial amounts of effort to go out to the community to find pregnant
women to bring them in for prenatal care. By contrast, it is a relatively easier task to use an
existing prenatal care visit to lobby women already in prenatal care to deliver in the facility.

        We may see no increases in effort at all for some services. If for a particular service the
relative price increase is small or the relative marginal productivity of effort low, then there



                                                    8
maybe no incentive for the provider to supply more effort to that service despite the absolute
increase in price. In this case, effort for that service will remain at the minimum ethical bound.

        Evidence reported in Basinga et al. (2011) is consistent with the empirical predictions from
this framework (Appendix Table A).9 First, there are significant effects of incentives on the quality
of prenatal care. Increasing quality is completely in the control of providers and the incentives are
high-powered, as the quality index is a scaling factor that is applied to all payments for all services.
Second, there was a large significant effect of P4P on institutional delivery, which had by far the
highest payment rate of $4.59 (Table 1). The payment was so much larger for institutional
delivery, compared to other services, that providers reported paying community health workers to
find women about to deliver and bring them to the facility. Well-child care also responded strongly
to the P4P scheme, even though its unit payment is relatively low at $0.18 per visit. However, the
payment rate jumps substantially to $2.03 if the provider identifies a malnourished child and gets
them into treatment. Since 64 percent of Rwandan children under age five are malnourished,10 the
expected payment for a high quality growth-monitoring visit is quite high.

        On the other hand, P4P did not increase the initiation of prenatal care, the number of
women who completed four prenatal care visits or contraceptive resupply visits. These services
have a high marginal cost of effort since utilization depends on maternal decisions to seek care and
have low monetary payoffs for providers. For example, the payment for prenatal care is $0.09 for
women who initiate care. At baseline 95 percent of women had at least one prenatal visit. It would
be very costly for providers to find the remaining 5% of women and convince them to get care.

4. HEALTH OUTCOMES

        We now ask whether the increased utilization of higher quality of care induced by the
P4P incentives resulted in better child health outcomes. This section is organized as follows. We
first describe the field experiment that generated the variation in the data that we used for
identification. We then present our empirical specification and statistical inference. Next, we
describe data collection and measurement. Finally we present and discuss results.




9
  The results from Basinga et al. (2011) can be found in Appendix Table A with a new correction for the standard
errors to account for a small number of clusters.
10
   Institut National de la Statistique du Rwanda and ORC Macro (2006).


                                                         9
           a. Evaluation Design

           The evaluation design took advantage of the phased implementation of the program at the
district level over a 23-month period. Rwanda manages its health care system at the district level
and P4P is no exception. As a result the government mandated that all facilities in a district must
be incorporated into the P4P scheme at the same time. Hence, the evaluation employed a
stratified cluster randomized designed where districts were first grouped into pairs with common
characteristics and then randomly assigned to treatment comparison groups11. Administrative
districts with pre-existing P4P schemes were excluded from the experimental design. The
remaining districts were grouped into blocks based on similar characteristics for relief, rainfall,
and predominant livelihoods as per the 2002 Census.

           However, just before implementation, administrative district boundaries were redrawn in
the context of a government-wide decentralization effort (MINALOC 2004). The objective of the
decentralization was to enhance institutional development and capacity building for responsive
local governance., to develop an efficient transparent and accountable fiscal and financial
management system at local government and grassroots level.

           As a result, some of the experimental areas were combined into new districts with areas
that already had the pilot P4P schemes. Because P4P could not be “removed” from health
facilities that were already implementing the schemes, and because P4P is managed at the district
level, the MoH required that all facilities within those new districts be in the treatment group.
This led the evaluation team to switch the assignment of treatment and comparison for eight
districts. In the end, the study included 10 districts in the treatment group and 9 in the
comparison group. In the analysis, we will address this by treating the evaluation as a quasi-
experimental design and estimating difference-in-difference models.

           The sample included 166 of Rwanda’s 401 primary care facilities, 80 in treatment
districts and 86 in comparison districts. The facilities in the treatment group started receiving
P4P in 2006, while the facilities in the comparison group continued with traditional input-based
financing for an additional 23 months. P4P was introduced in treatment districts over a 5-month
period, yielding a minimum program exposure of at least 18 months.


11
     A couple of small districts were grouped together in order to achieve balance in sample size.


                                                            10
       Since a primary objective of the evaluation was to isolate the impact of the P4P
incentives separately from the effect of increased resources, it was necessary to hold the level of
resources constant across treatment and comparison facilities. To accomplish this, comparison
facilities’ traditional input based budgets were increased by the average amount of P4P payments
to treatment facilities on a quarterly basis during the entire 23-month treatment window on a
quarterly basis. As a result, treatment and comparison facilities had the same levels of financial
resources on average throughout the study. In this design, the differences in outcomes between
the two groups at follow-up are attributed to the difference in incentives and not to a difference
in available financial resources.

       b. Data Collection and Control-Treatment Group Balance

       We surveyed all 166 facilities plus a random sample of households in the catchment area
of each facility. The surveys were conducted at baseline in 2006 prior to the implementation of
P4P in treatment facilities and again approximately 23 months later, before the comparison
facilities were incorporated in the program. The surveys were conducted independently from the
operation of the P4P program. Payment to facilities was based on administrative records and
reports from the facilities and never on the evaluation surveys.

       The facility survey collected information on staffing, expenditures, medical equipment,
drug availability from the facility administrator, and provider knowledge about the appropriate
clinical procedures for quality prenatal care. As part of survey, enumerators also conducted exit
interviews with approximately 10 women who visited the facility to collect information on the
actual clinical services (quality) provided during their prenatal care visit. The sample of facilities
was well balanced at baseline. There were no differences in the baseline means between the
treatment and control groups for the 17 baseline characteristics presented in Table 3.

       In addition, we specifically note that there is no difference in mean log expenditures at
endline in 2008 between treatment and comparison groups. This implies that the identification
strategy of compensating the control facilities for incentive payment to treatment facilities did
indeed hold facility budgets constant on average across treatment and control groups. This result
supports our interpretation that any differences in outcomes are caused by the P4P performance
incentives as opposed to resource differences.




                                                 11
       The household survey consists of a random sample of 13 households living in each
facility’s catchment area, for a total sample of 2,158 households. To build the sample, we first
sampled 13 census zones from each facility’s official list of zones in their catchment area. We
then physically listed all households in the sampled zones and randomly selected one household
with at least one child under 5 years old from each zone.

       Response rates were high as only 2 percent of sampled households refused to participate
in the interview. In the follow-up survey, 88 percent of the baseline households were re-
interviewed. The rate of attrition from the baseline sample was not statistically different between
the treatment and comparison groups (12 percent each). In addition, the household data were
well balanced between treatment and comparison groups at baseline. Only 1 of the 30
characteristics reported in Table 4 were significantly different at the 5% level between treatment
and control groups at baseline.

       c. Child Health Measurement

       We measure child health outcomes for two age groups: children 0-11 months and 24-47
months. Children in the 0-11 months range in the treatment group in the 2008 survey would have
been exposed to P4P during the full prenatal period and during the full time after birth. Children
between 24 and 47 months in the treatment group in the 2008 survey would have been exposed
to P4P for 18-23 months during the early stages of life, but not during the prenatal period.

       We consider two measures of health: (i) height-for-age z-score and (ii) weight-for-age z-
score. A child’s height results from her genetic potential, adjusted for insufficient nutrient intake
and inability to absorb nutrition because of illness. Therefore, height is a summary measure of
health and nutrition since conception. By contrast, weight is an indicator of current nutrition and
illness status and does not represent factors that accumulate over the lifetime. Better prenatal
care, which includes nutritional advice to mothers and the diagnosis and treatment of maternal
illness, could in principle increase both infant height and weight. Better child preventive care,
which includes vaccination and growth monitoring, and child curative care, limits the duration
and severity of illness and thereby has the potential to affect height and weight.

       We measured child height and weight using standard international procedures and
portable scales and stadiometers, which were recalibrated on a twice-weekly basis in the field.
As part of the quality control procedures, all children were measured twice during the visit. We


                                                 12
first report height and weight in centimeters and kilograms respectively. Then, we standardize
these measurements into height-for-age and weight-for-age z-scores in accordance with World
Health Organization guidelines. The z-scores measure the number of standard deviations from
age-sex standardized height of a healthy reference population.

         d. Estimation

         Given the reassignment of districts between the treatment and comparison groups before
the start of the study, and the limited number of districts that could be assigned to the treatment
and comparison groups, we view our study as quasi-experimental. While the sample is balanced
at baseline on outcomes and characteristics, it is possible that the reassignment of districts was
correlated with something unobservable to us and related to health outcomes. However,
redistricting took place within the context of a decentralization agenda that was led by the
Ministry of Local Government, and we find no evidence that it was driven by or related to health
outcomes (MINALOC 2004). Therefore, we think it is likely that any relevant unobservable
factors were likely to be invariant over the time period of the intervention.

         We used difference-in-differences (DiD) methods to estimate the impacts of P4P on
outcomes. DiD compare the change in outcomes in the treatment group to the change in
outcomes in the comparison group.12 The method controls for observed and unobserved time-
invariant characteristics as well as for time-varying factors that are common to the treatment and
comparison groups. As we discussed above in section 4.b, the final assignment to the treatment
and comparison groups was orthogonal to pre-intervention observable variables, leading us to
believe that there is likely no correlation between this assignment and unobservables that drive
program effects.

         All of the individual outcomes relate to pregnancies, however many women do not give
birth in both waves of the survey. Hence, we treat the 2006 and 2008 household surveys,


12
  An alternative, sometimes used in the literature, is the intent to treat estimator that compares the originally
assigned treatments to controls. In this case, however, we would have misassigned 40% of the observations and
would be grossly underpowered. Also, all of the examples we could find use the ITT in cases where the study
entered the field intending to implement the original design and where behavioral choices by the study participants
compromised the study design. In our case, the design was changed before we entered the field and was not
compromised by the study participants. Hence, while our difference in difference estimator requires stronger
assumptions, we believe that it is appropriate in terms of identification and is valid based on the balance tests and
knowledge of the institutional designs that drove the change in design. In our view, the difference in difference
choice maximizes potential power without sacrificing internal validity.


                                                          13
described below, as repeated cross-sections and estimate the following regression specification
of the difference-in-difference model for individual outcomes:

                            Yijt = α j + γ 2008 + β ⋅ P 4Pj ⋅ I 2008 + ∑ λk X kijt + ε ijt         (6)
                                                                        k


where Yijt is the health of child i living in facility j’s catchment area in year t; P4Pj is a dummy
variable that takes value 1 if facility j belongs to Phase I (i.e. started receiving P4P in 2006) and
0 otherwise; αj is a facility fixed effect; γ2008 is a fixed effect for 2008; I2008 is a dummy variable
that takes value 1 if the year of observation is 2008 and 0 otherwise; the Xkijt are individual
characteristics; and εijt is a zero mean error term. We estimate each regression both with and
without individual characteristics.

       A limitation of our design is the small number of districts for assignment. Since the unit
of assignment to treatment and comparison was the district and not the facility, there may be
inter-cluster correlation in the error terms. The asymptotic justification for inference with cluster-
robust standard errors assumes that the number of clusters goes to infinity. Yet in our application
there are too few clusters for this assumption to hold. Therefore we base our statistical inference
on randomization inference hypothesis tests that use WILD bootstrapping Monte Carlo methods
allowing for intercluster correlation as recommended in Cameron et al (2008). These tests return
a p-value for the hypothesis rather than a standard error. Hence we report the estimated
coefficient and the p-value for the test of significance.

       e. Results

       We consider two age groups: (1) children 0-11 months at endline, and (2) children 24-47
months at endline. We estimated 2 versions of equation (6): one without controls and a second
with controls. The controls include the child’s age and sex, maternal height, mother’s age,
whether the mother has completed primary school, whether the father lives in the household,
whether the family is a member of a Mutuelle (health insurance fund), the total number of
household members, the number of household members under the age of 6, whether the




                                                       14
household owns land, and dummy variables for quartiles of the household asset value.13 The
child’s age was entered as a series of dummy variables that represent one-month increments.

        The estimated effects of P4P on child health outcomes are reported in Table 5. Among
the 0-11 month old children who benefited from P4P since conception, we find large and
significant positive effects on weight-for-age z-score. Infants in the treatment areas gained 0.53
of a standard deviation in weight as a result of P4P. Among 24-47 months old, who benefited
from the program for 23 months starting between age 1 and 24 months after birth, the program
led to a gain of over 0.25 of a standard deviation in height for age. Note that the size of the effect
on height for age of the younger group is 0.22 without controls and 0.16 with controls. However,
the sample size for the younger group is less than half of the sample size for the older group.

        While effects on health outcomes are large for both age groups, we see effects on weight
for the younger group and on height for the older group. This difference can be explained by the
role of breast-feeding on weight gain and height growth. Micronutrients that are not present in
large amounts in breast milk are critical for improvements in height (Dewey and Adu-Afarwuah,
2008). Hence, during the period of exclusive breast-feeding children tend to gain weight rather
than height. Reductions in illnesses that impede a child’s absorption of the nutrition in breast
milk tend to lead to gains in weight. Once supplemental foods that contain more micronutrients
are introduced into the child’s diet, reductions in illnesses that improve a child’s ability to absorb
nutrition are manifest in height. According to the 2005 Demographic and Health Survey, 88% of
children less than 6 months old are exclusively breastfed. And 31 percent of children age 6 to 9
months did not receive supplementary foods (Institut National de la Statistique du Rwanda and
ORC Macro 2006).




13
  The household asset value was constructed on the basis of the value of household assets including owned houses,
household durable goods, farm animals, farm equipment and micro-enterprise equipment.


                                                       15
5. PRODUCTIVITY

         We now turn to a deeper investigation of how the performance incentives affected
provider productivity in terms of quality of prenatal care. We ask 3 questions: (1) how much of
the observed effect of incentives on quality was driven by increased provider effort versus
improved provider knowledge of the appropriate clinical procedures, (2) did better skilled
providers take more advantage of the incentives and increase quality more than lower skilled
providers, and (3) how much did the incentives improve efficiency as measured by the difference
between knowledge and practice of the appropriate clinical guidelines.

         a. Measurement

         In rural Rwanda, nurses are the primary care givers and they work in clinics that are fully
equipped to be able to provide care based on the standards dictated by Rwandan clinical practice
guidelines. Specifically, clinics are staffed with about 6 nurses and 4 medical technicians or
midwives (Table 3 Panel A). The availability of equipment and drugs needed to provide quality
care is reasonable (Table 3 Panel B). The structural quality indices are the share of drugs and
equipment available at the facility among those that the Ministry of Health guidelines define as
necessary in order to deliver each type of care (Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda 1993, 1997,
2003 and 2009). At baseline clinics had on average 96 percent of the drugs and equipment
necessary to provide prenatal care services. Hence, improvements in prenatal care quality could
not have come through more drugs, supplies and equipment, but rather through better applying
their knowledge of appropriate clinical procedures.

         We measure a medical care provider’s skill and capability by their knowledge of
appropriate clinic protocol for a prenatal care visit. Our measure of provider knowledge is the
share of the appropriate prenatal care clinical procedures specified in the official Rwandan
Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) for prenatal care (Ministry of Health Contractual Approach
Unit, Rwanda 2006, and Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda 2008).14 The 24 specific clinical
services cover previous pregnancy history, medical history, current pregnancy status, physical
exams, diagnostic laboratory tests, and case-risk management (Table 6).

14
  CPGs are a recommended set of clinical procedures conducted during the prenatal care visit that maximize the
probability of good health outcomes based on the clinical literature and expert opinion. First developed in the United
States (Field and Lohr 1990), the Rwandan guidelines are based on the US version adjusted to local resource
constraints.


                                                         16
         We used a clinical “vignette,” which is a standardized hypothetical patient case with a
specific medical history to collect the data on knowledge. We presented the vignette to a
randomly selected health worker who regularly provides prenatal care and asked the health
worker to describe the clinical protocol that she would apply. We then used the answers to
compute the share of official CPG clinical content items that the provider mentioned without
prompting from the interviewer.15

         Providers, however, do not necessarily deliver clinical services up to their level of
knowledge. We define quality of care as the actual clinical services delivered to patients. We
collected information on actual clinical services provided during prenatal care from exit
interviews of patients leaving facilities and from the household surveys. We measured the quality
of prenatal care by computing the share of actual clinical content items delivered during a
prenatal care consultation to the items that should compose a typical prenatal consultation as
recommended in the Rwandan CPGs.16

         The quality index and the knowledge index cover the same items and therefore are
comparable. At baseline, medical providers knew about two-thirds of the prescribed clinical
protocol for prenatal care (Table 3 Panel D). While providers know two-thirds of the appropriate
protocols, they only delivered about 45 percent of the CPG prescribed protocols (Table 3 Panel
E). This implies a gap of 18 percentage points between knowledge and practice on average,
which translated into providers delivering about two-thirds of clinical services they know they
should deliver. Hence there is substantial distance from the provider practice to their production
possibility frontier. This distance can be interpreted as a measure of inefficiency.

         b. Knowledge versus Effort

         We have argued that the incentives induced providers to put more effort into delivering
higher quality services. An alternative explanation might be that P4P affected provider
knowledge through which changed provider practice.17 This could have happened because


15
   This measure of competency was used in Das and Hammer (2004), Kak et al (2001) and Peabody et al (2004).
16
   This measure has been used in Barber (2006), Barber et al (2007), Peabody et al. (1997), and Das et al (2007).
17
   A third possibility is that the clinic invested in improved structural quality (i.e. drugs and equipment). However,
the identification strategy held constant the level of resources between treatment and control facilities plus mean
structural quality at baseline was already at 96% of drugs and equipment necessary to provide quality prenatal care
as prescribed by the Rwandan Clinical Practice Guidelines (Table 3). Hence, there was very little room for
improvement on this margin and analysis of the data confirm no impact of incentives on prenatal structural quality.


                                                          17
facilities might have changed personnel, substituting better-trained workers for lower-trained
ones or because there could have been an increase in knowledge of the existing personnel. Recall
that as part of the supervision process, district hospital supervisors discuss the results of their
quality assessments with facility personnel, providing recommendations to improve care where
needed. However, these visits were applied to both treatment and comparison facilities, so the
opportunities to learn provided by these visits were no different between treatment and
comparison groups. It is possible, however, that treatment and control facilities differed in the
amounts of learning gained from the feedback provided, because treatment facilities knew that
the quality assessments would directly influence their payment rates; hence treatment facilities
may have been more attentive to advice from the district hospital teams.

        To ascertain the importance of this potential causal pathway, we first estimate the impact
of the P4P program on provider knowledge of the prenatal care protocol using a specification
similar to the difference in difference specification as in equation (6):

                            𝐾!" =∝! + 𝛾!""# + 𝛽 ∙ 𝑃4𝑃! ∙ 𝐼!""# + 𝜀!"                              (7)

where Kjt is provider j’s knowledge of prenatal care clinical procedures in year t and the other
variables are defined as in (6). The unit of observation in this case, however, is the facility and
not the patient.

        The results, reported in the first column of Table 7 show some weak evidence that health
worker knowledge may have improved as a result of P4P. We find a large point estimate of a
0.40 standard deviation increase in knowledge, but it is not statistically significant. The lack of
significance may due to small sample sizes rather than no effect.

        In order to assess whether the association between P4P and quality is driven by
knowledge as opposed to effort, we estimate a difference-in-difference model similar to the one
specified in equation (6) for quality controlling for knowledge:

            𝑄!"# =∝! + 𝛾!""# + 𝛽 ∙ 𝑃4𝑃! ∙ 𝐼!""# + 𝛿 ∙ 𝐾!" +     ! 𝜆!   𝑋!" + 𝜀!"#                 (8)

where Qijt is the quality of prenatal care that provider j gave to individual i in year t and the rest
of the variables are defined as above. In this case, the unit of observation is the patient as the
dependent variable is the quality of prenatal care received by the patient.




                                                 18
       In our base excluding knowledge in Quality of Care Model 1 in Table 7, we estimate that
P4P is associated with a 0.16 standard deviation increase in quality and is significant.
Additionally controlling for knowledge in model 2 does not appreciably alter the estimated
impact of P4P. Therefore, knowledge is not likely to be the main path through which P4P
improved practice; rather, P4P almost surely increased quality through increased provider effort.

       c. Knowledge Complementarities

       Model 2 in Table 7 also allows us to examine the direct effect of knowledge on quality.
In fact, one of the most common interventions to improve quality of care is by training medical
care providers in proper clinical procedures. However, we find no evidence of a direct effect of
increased knowledge on quality of care.

       While changes in knowledge do not seem to directly impact quality, knowledge may be
complementary to P4P in the sense that P4P may be more effective when providers are relatively
high-skilled. More knowledgeable providers maybe able to more easily exploit the P4P
incentives for financial gain by increasing quality of care than less knowledgeable providers.

       To test this hypothesis, we amend the specification in (8) to include an interaction
between treatment and whether the provider was in the top half of the baseline knowledge
distribution:

            𝑄!"# =∝! + 𝛾!""# + 𝛽 ∙ 𝑃4𝑃! ∙ 𝐼!""# + 𝛿 ∙ 𝐾!,!""# ∙ 𝑃4𝑃! ∙ 𝐼!""# + 𝜌 ∙ 𝐾!" + 𝜀!"#    (9)

Where 𝐾!,!""# indicates whether the provider was in the top half of the knowledge distribution at
baseline and all of the other variables are defined as above.

       In this specification, reported in Model 3 of Table 7, we do find differences in the
program’s impact on prenatal care practice between facilities that had health workers with
above-the-median levels of knowledge, as opposed to below the median. Specifically, we
estimate that incentives led to an insignificant effect of 0.07 standard deviations for lower skilled
providers and a highly significant 0.21 increase for higher skilled providers.




                                                 19
       d. Efficiency

       Another interpretation of how P4P works is based on the idea that providers are not
delivering services up their full ability (knowledge) and that the difference between ability and
practice is a measure of efficiency. If we consider a provider’s knowledge as their production
possibilities frontier, then one can interpret the gap between knowledge and practice holding
budget constant as a measure of inefficiency.
       There is evidence of substantial inefficiency as provider delivery of clinical prenatal
services is substantially lower than their knowledge of appropriate clinical procedures. Recall
that providers on average know 63 percent of appropriate procedures, but deliver only 45
percent, leaving an 18-percentage point difference between knowledge and practice.

       We depict the efficiency gap in figure 1 where knowledge is on the horizontal axis as the
share of prenatal CPG recommended clinical services that the provider knows and quality is on
the vertical axis as the share of prenatal CPG recommended clinical services actually provided.
The 45o line is the production possibility frontier (PPF) where providers deliver clinical quality
care to the best of their knowledge. If providers deliver quality of care below their level of
knowledge, then they would be preforming inside the PPF. The vertical distance between the
frontier and the performance point is a measure of inefficiency.

       We also included in Figure 1 the actual performance curves of the providers in our data
set. The curves are bivariate nonparametric regressions of quality against knowledge separately
for treatment and comparison groups at endline. Notice that both lines are well inside the PPF
implying substantial levels of inefficiency at all skill levels. In addition, while the performance
curves are upwards sloping, they are flatter than the PPF. This implies that while knowledge
improves performance, inefficiency increases with knowledge. Finally, the performance curve
for the treatment group is above and steeper sloped than the curve for the comparison group.
This implies that P4P reduced the inefficiency and reduces it more for more skilled providers.

       We estimate the impact of P4P on inefficiency using the specification in equation (8):

         𝐾!" − 𝑄!"# =∝! + 𝛾!""# + 𝛽 ∙ 𝑃4𝑃! ∙ 𝐼!""# + 𝛿 ∙ 𝐾!,!""# ∙ 𝑃4𝑃! ∙ 𝐼!""# + 𝜌 ∙ 𝐾!" + 𝜀!"#   (9)




                                                 20
where the dependent variable is now inefficiency measured as the share of CPG clinical services
the provider knows minus the share of CPG clinical services delivered to a patient.

       The results are reported in Table 8. In the first specification we exclude knowledge and
the interaction with knowledge from the model. In this case, we find that P4P reduces
inefficiency by 3.5 percentage points or about 20 percent on average. When we control for
provider knowledge in Model 2, the effect of P4P on inefficiency increases slightly to 4
percentage points. In this specification higher knowledge is actually associated with greater
inefficiency. In other words, while increases in provider knowledge improve the quality of care,
the improvement in quality is less than the improvement in knowledge. Finally, in Model 3 we
include the interaction between treatment and more knowledgeable providers, we estimate that
P4P has a much larger effect on inefficiency for more knowledgeable providers. We find no
reduction in inefficiency for providers below the knowledge median, but we find a 6-percentage
point improvement among providers above the knowledge median.


6. CONCLUSION

       In this paper we provide evidence on the effect of incentives on provider productivity and
on health outcomes in Rwanda, where we nested a prospective evaluation into the national
rollout of a P4P scheme. In order to identify the incentive effect separately from the increase in
resources, the budgets of the comparison group were compensated so that treatment and
comparison facilities had the same budgets on average, but a portion of the treatment facilities’
budgets were determined based on their performance whereas the comparison facilities’
resources were not.

       We show that the incentives improved access to higher quality care that resulted in
substantial improvements in child health outcomes. In addition, we find that provider incentives
led to a 20 percent improvement in efficiency. These findings lend strong support for the use of
provider performance incentives to improve health outcomes. Finally, we find evidence of
complementarity between the P4P incentive and the knowledge (skill) of health care providers.
This suggests that effects of P4P incentives would be higher if completed with interventions that
improve provider skill, such as training, and the training would have a great impact in settings
with performance incentives.



                                               21
                                             REFERENCES
Alshamsan, Riyadh, Azeem Majeed, Mark Ashworth, Josip Car, and Christopher Millett (2010)
      “Impact of pay for performance on inequalities in health care: systematic review,”
      Journal of Health Services Research and Policy, Vol.15, pp.178—184;
      doi:10.1258/jhsrp.2010.009113
Barber, Sarah (2006), “Does the Quality of Prenatal Care Matter in Promoting Skilled
       Institutional Delivery? A Study in Rural Mexico,” Maternal and Child Health Journal,
       Vol. 10, pp. 419–425.
Barber Sarah, Stefano Bertozzi and Paul Gertler (2007), “Variations in prenatal care quality for
       the rural poor in Mexico”, Health Affairs, Vol. 26(3), pp.w310-23.
Basinga, Paulin, Paul Gertler, Agnes Binagwaho, Agnes Soucat, Jennifer Sturdy and Christel
       Vermeersch (2011), “Effect on maternal and child health services in Rwanda of payment
       to primary health-care providers for performance: an impact evaluation,” The Lancet, Vol
       377, pp. 1421-28.
Cameron, Colin, with Jonah Gelbach and Douglas Miller (2008)“Bootstrap-Based Improvements
      for Inference with Clustered Errors”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 90, 414-
      427.
Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan and F. Halsey
      Rogers (2006), “Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing
      Countries,” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 20, No. 1, pp. 91-116.
Das, Jishnu and Paul Gertler (2007) “Variations In Practice Quality In Five Low-Income
        Countries,” Health Affairs, Vol. 26: pp.296-309
Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer (2004), “Which Doctor? Combining Vignettes and Item
        Response to Measure Clinical Competence,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol.
        78, pp. 348-383.
Das, Jishnu and Jeffrey Hammer (2007), “Money for Nothing: The Dire Straits of Medical
        Practice in Delhi, India,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 83(1), pp. 1-36.
Das, Jishnu, Jeffrey Hammer, and Kenneth Leonard. (2008) "The Quality of Medical Advice in
        Low-Income Countries." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(2): 93–114.
Dewey, Kathryn and Seth Adu-Afarwuah (2008) “Systematic Review of the Efficacy and
      Effectiveness of Complementary Feeding Interventions in Developing Countries,”
      Maternal and Child Nutrition, Vol. 4, pp.24-85.
Donabeidian, A. (1988), “The Quality of Care. How Can it be Assessed?” The Journal of the
      American Medical Association, Vol. 260(12), pp. 1743-1748.
Field, Marilyn and Kathleen Lohr (1990) Clinical Practice Guidelines: Directions for a New
       Program, Institute of Medicine, National Academy Press, Washington D.C.
Flodgren, Gerd, Martin Eccles, Sasha Shepperd, Anthony Scott, Elena Parmelli, and Fiona Beyer
       (2011), “An Overview of Reviews Evaluating the Effectiveness of Financial Incentives in
       Changing Healthcare Professional Behaviours and Patient Outcomes,” Cochrane




                                               22
       Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 7. Art. No.: CD009255. DOI:
       10.1002/14651858.CD009255.
Fritsche, György, Louis Rusa, Rigobert mpendwanzi, Agnes Soucat, Claude Sekabaranga, Bruno
        Meesen (2010), “The National Rollout of Performance-Based Financing for Health
        Services in Rwanda: How It Was Done,” World Bank Working Paper.
Glewwe,Paul, Nauman Ilias, and Michael Kremer (2010) “Teacher Incentives” American
     Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2: 1–25.
Health, Development and Performance (HDP) (2008), “Rapport d’ Enquête de Contre-
       Vérification par la Communauté dans les Districts de Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru et
       Rulindo,” Kigali, Rwanda, online:
       http://www.pbfrwanda.org.rw/index.php?option=com_docman&task=cat_view&gid=24
       &Itemid=29&limitstart=35.
Institut National de la Statistique du Rwanda (INSR) and ORC Macro (2006), Rwanda
         Demographic and Health Survey 2005. Calverton, Maryland, U.S.A.: INSR and ORC
         Macro.
Kak, Neeraj, Bart Burkhalter and Merri-Ann Cooper (2001), “Measuring the Competence of
      Health Care Providers,” QAP Issues Paper, Vol. 2(1), pp. 1-28.
Kalk, Andreas, Jean Kagubare Mayindo, Laurent Musango, Gerard Foulon. (2005), “Paying for
       Health in two Rwandan Provinces: Financial Flows and Flaws,” Tropical Medicine and
       International Health, Vol. 10(9), pp. 872-878.
Leonard, K.L. and M.C. Masatu, “Using the Hawthorne Effect to examine the gap between a
      doctors best possible practice and actual practice,” Journal of Development Economics.
      93 (2): 226-243 (2010a)
Leonard, K.L. and M.C. Masatu, “Professionalism and the Know-Do Gap: Exploring Intrinsic
      Motivation among Health Workers in Tanzania,” Health Economics 19 (12): 1461-1477
      (2010b).
Levine, Ruth and Rena Eichler, Eds. (2009), Performance Incentives for Global Health,
       Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.
Logie, Dorothy, Michael Rowson and Felix Ndagije (2008), “Innovations in Rwanda’s health
       system: looking to the future,” The Lancet, Vol. 372, pp. 256-61.
Miller, Grant, Renfu Luo. Linxiu Zhang, Sean Sylvia, Yaojiang Shi, Patrica Foo, Qiran Zhao,
        Reynaldo Martorell, Alexis Medina and Scott Rozelle (2012), “Effectiveness of Provider
        Incentives for Anaemia Reducation in Rual Child: A Cluster Randomized Trial” British
        Medical Journal, Vol. 345.
Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda (1993), Standards de Prestation des Services au Centre de
       Santé. Soins Préventifs en SMI/PF /Nutrition. Volume 1, Première Edition.
Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda (1997), Normes du District Sanitaire au Rwanda, Kigali,
       Rwanda.
Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda (2003) Normes du District de Santé au Rwanda, Kigali,
       Rwanda.



                                              23
Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda (2006), Fiche Technique du Programme Elargi de Vaccination,
       Kigali, Rwanda.
Ministère de la Santé du Rwanda (2008), Module de Référence de Formation Continue en
       Planification familiale. A l’Usage des Formateurs, Superviseurs et Prestataires au
       Niveau des Formations Sanitaires, Mars, Kigali, Rwanda.
Ministry of Health. Contractual Approach Unit, Republic of Rwanda. (2006) Guide for
       Performance Based Financing. Training module for actors involved in the
       implementation of the PBF program. Kigali: Rwanda.
Ministry of Local Government, Community Development and Social Affairs (MINALOC),
       Republic of Rwanda (2004), Five Year Decentralization Implementation Programme
       2004-2008, available at http://www.minaloc.gov.rw.
Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman (2011), “Teacher Performance Pay:
       Empirical Evidence from India,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 119(1), pp. 39-77.
Olken, Benjamin, Junko Onishi, and Susan Wong (2011), “Should Aid Reward Performance?
       Evidence from a field experiment on health and education in Indonesia,” Working Paper,
       MIT Department of Economics.
Paris, Valérie, Marion Devaux and Lihan Wei (2010), “Health Systems Institutional
        Characteristics : A Survey of 29 OECD Countries,” OECD Health Working Papers, No.
        50, OECD Publishing.
Peabody John and Paul Gertler (1997), “Are clinical criteria just proxies for socioeconomic
      status? A study of low birth weight in Jamaica,” J.Epidemiol.Community Health, Vol.
      51(1), pp. 90-95.
Peabody John, J. Luck, P. Glassman, S. Jain, J. Hansen, M. Spell, et al. (2004), “Measuring the
      quality of physician practice by using clinical vignettes: a prospective validation study,”
      Annuals Internal Medicine, Vol. 141(10), pp. 771-780.
Peabody, John, Riti Shimkhada, Stella Quimbo, Jhiedon Florentino, Marife Bacate, Charles E.
      McCulloch, and Orville Solon (2011), “Financial Incentives and measurement Improved
      Physicians’ Quality of Care In the Philippines,” Health Affairs, Vol. 30(4), pp.773-781.
Reinikka, Ritva and Jakob Svensson (2010), “Working for God? Evidence From A Change in
       Financing of Nonprofit Health Care Providers in Uganda,” Journal of the European
       Economic Association, Vol. 8(6), pp. 1159-78.
Scott A, P Sivey, D Ait Ouakrim, L Willenberg, L Naccarella, J Furler, and D Young (2011)
       “The effect of financial incentives on the quality of health care provided by primary care
       physicians,” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Issue 9, Art. No. CD008451.
       DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD008451.pub2.
Soeters, Robert, Laurent Musango and Bruno Meessen (2005). Comparison of two output based
       schemes in Butare and Cyangugu provinces with two control provinces in Rwanda,
       Global Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA), The World Bank, Washington, DC.
Soeters, Robert, Christian Habineza and Peter Bob Peerenboom (2006) “Performance based
       financing and changing the district health system: experience from Rwanda,” Bulletin of
       the World Health Organization, November, Vol. 8(11).


                                                24
United Nations (2010), The Millennium Development Goals Report. New York: United Nations.
United Nations (2011), The Millennium Development Goals Peport. New York: United Nations.
Van Herck, Pieter, Delphine de Smedt, Lieven Annemans, Roy Remmen, Meredith B Rosenthal
      and Walter Serneus, “Systematic Review: Effects, Design Choices, and Context of Pay-
      for-Performance in Health Care,” BMC Health Services Research, Vol. 10, pp. 247-260.
Witter Sophie, Atle Fretheim, Flora L Kessy, Karin Lindahl (2012), Paying for performance to
       improve the delivery of health interventions in low- and middle-income countries,
       Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012, Issue 2. Art. No.: CD007899. DOI:
       10.1002/14651858.CD007899.pub2.
World Bank (2008), World Development Indicators Database, September, Washington D.C.
World Bank (2010a), “Budgeting for Effectiveness in Rwanda – From Reconstruction to
      Reform,” World Bank Working Paper, No. 205, Washington, DC.
World Bank (2010b), Rwanda A Country Status Report on Health and Poverty, Washington, DC.




                                             25
                   Table 1: Rwanda P4P Performance Indicators and Payment Rates

                                                                               Amount paid per unit (US$)

Visit and Outreach Indicators

     1     Curative care visits                                                            0.18

     2     First prenatal care visits                                                      0.09

     3     Women who completed 4 prenatal care visits                                      0.37

     4     First time family planning visits (new contraceptive users)                     1.83

     5     One-month contraceptive resupply visits                                         0.18

     6     Deliveries in the facility                                                      4.59

     7     Child (0-59 months) growth monitoring/preventive care visits                    0.18

Content of Care Indicators

     8     Children who completed vaccinations on time                                     0.92

     9     Appropriate tetanus vaccine during prenatal care+                               0.46

    10     2nd dose of malaria prophylaxis during prenatal care                            0.46

    11     Appropriate referral to hospital for delivery++                                 1.83

    12     Appropriate Emergency transfers to hospital during delivery++                   4.59

    13     Malnourished child referrals to hospital during preventive care++               1.83

    14     Other emergency referrals during curative treatment++                           1.83
+
    Appropriate is defined to any woman who obtains her second, third, fourth or fifth tetanus shot.
++
     Referrals must be confirmed by hospital that patient was treated and referral was necessary.
Source: Ministry of Health. Republic of Rwanda. Guide for Performance Based Financing. Training
module for actors involved in the implementation of the PBF program. 2006.




                                                       26
            Table 2: Services and Weights Used to Construct the Quality Index for P4P Formula

                                                  Share of         Share of
                                                   weight           weight
             Service                Weight      allocated to     allocated to      Means of assessment
                                                 structural        process
                                                 measures+       measures++

    1    Curative care              0.170           0.23             0.77         Medical record review

    2    Delivery                   0.130           0.40             0.60         Medical record review

    3    Prenatal care              0.126           0.12             0.88           Direct observation

    3    Family planning            0.114           0.22             0.78         Medical record review

    4    Immunization               0.070           0.40             0.60           Direct observation

    6    Growth monitoring          0.052           0.15             0.85           Direct observation

    7    HIV services               0.090           1.00             0.00           Direct observation

    8    Tuberculosis service       0.028           0.28             0.72           Direct observation

    9    Laboratory                 0.030           1.00             0.00           Direct observation

    10   Facility cleanliness       0.028           1.00             0.00           Direct observation

    11   Pharmacy management        0.060           1.00             0.00           Direct observation

    12   General administration     0.052           1.00             0.00           Direct observation

    13   Financial management       0.050           1.00             0.00           Direct observation

         Total                      1.000
+
  Structural measures are the extent to which the facility has the equipment, drugs, medical supplies and
  personnel necessary to deliver the listed service.
++
   Process measures capture the clinical content of care provided for the listed service.
Source: Ministry of Health, Republic of Rwanda (2006) “Guide for Performance Based Financing and
Training Module for Implementation of the PBF Program.” Kigali, Rwanda




                                                   27
                                     Table 3: Facility Characteristics

                                                Treatment           Comparison
                                                                                      Difference      P-
                                                  (N=80)                 (N=86)
                                                                                      in Means       value
                                             Mean     St.Dev.     Mean      St.Dev.
A. Staffing (2006)
 Medical Doctors                              0.05    (0.23)      0.05      (0.27)       0.00         0.94
 Nurses                                       6.31    (6.90)      5.48      (3.30)       0.83         0.41
 Other Clinical Staff                         4.13    (3.09)      4.47      (4.05)       -0.34        0.55
 Non-clinical Staff                           5.25    (3.56)      5.33      (5.09)       -0.08        0.90
B. Structural Quality Indices (2006)
 Curative Care                                0.80    (0.07)      0.81      (0.07)       -0.01        0.58
 Delivery                                     0.78    (0.11)      0.79      (0.10)       0.00         0.84
 Prenatal Care                                0.96    (0.15)      0.97      (0.11)       -0.01        0.29
 Immunization                                 0.94    (0.17)      0.94      (0.15)       0.00         0.90
 Laboratory                                   0.49    (0.32)      0.43      (0.32)       0.06         0.40
C. Expenditures
 Log Total Expenditures (2006)               15.81    (1.04)      15.61     (1.01)       0.20         0.42
 Log Total Expenditures (2008)               16.91    (0.71)      16.99     (1.08)       -0.08        0.57
 Personnel Budget Share (2006)                0.46    (0.23)      0.49      (0.26)       -0.03        0.56
 Medical Supplies Budget Share (2006)         0.22    (0.19)      0.20      (0.19)       0.01         0.71
 Non-medical Budget Share (2006)              0.32    (0.25)      0.30      (0.22)       0.02         0.72
D. Prenatal Care Clinical Knowledge (2006)
  Share prenatal care protocol known          0.63    (0.10)      0.65      (0.09)       -0.02        0.33
  Knowledge of protocol (z-score)             0.02    (0.81)      0.15      (0.77)       -0.13        0.33
E. Prenatal Quality of Care (2006)
  Tetanus vaccine (=1)                        0.71    ----        0.67      ----         0.04         0.33
  Share of protocol provided                  0.45    (0.39)      0.46      (0.43)       -0.01        0.66
  Clinical protocol provided z-score         -0.13    (1.49)      -0.10     (1.63)       -0.02        0.76

Notes: P-values are for two-sided tests of the null hypothesis that the difference in means is zero and
were calculated using WILD bootstrap with 999 draws. Except for prenatal care quality, the unit of
observation is the facility. For prenatal care quality, the unit of observation is the patient visit and the
results are based in 1584 observations.




                                                     28
                       Table 4: Household and Individual Baseline (2006) Characteristics
                                                              Treatment                Comparison            Diff       P-value+
                                                          Mean        St.Dev.       Mean        St.Dev.
A. Household characteristics
    Health insurance (=1)                                  0.54          ---         0.51          ---       0.04         0.58
    Number of household members                            4.92        (4.40)        5.00       (5.16)       -0.07        0.73
    Household-Facility distance (in Km)                    3.31        (6.89)        3.32       (8.20)       -0.02        0.97
    Ownership of land (=1)                                 0.91          ---         0.87          ---       0.04         0.23
    Value of assets                                       11.20        (26.74)      12.59       (29.44)      -1.39        0.35
B. Maternal Characteristics and Utilization
    Age < 20 years (=1)                                    0.03           ---        0.02          ---       0.01         0.32
    Age > 35 years (=1)                                    0.29           ---        0.31          ---       -0.02        0.57
    Primary education or more (=1)                         0.10           ---        0.11          ---       -0.02        0.47
    Living with Partner (=1)                               0.94           ---        0.91          ---       0.04         0.21
    Number of pregnancies (Parity)                         4.32        (4.58)        4.33       (5.24)       -0.01        0.97
    Any prenatal care (=1)                                 0.95           ---        0.96          ---       -0.01        0.77
    Made 4 or more prenatal care visits (=1)               0.18           ---        0.11          ---       0.07         0.03
    Number of prenatal care visits made                    2.76        (1.58)        2.62       (1.80)       0.14         0.18
    1st Prenatal care visit in 1st trimester (=1)          0.11           ---        0.09          ---       0.02         0.55
    Institutional Delivery (=1)                            0.35           ---        0.36          ---       -0.01        0.80
    Use modern contraceptive (=1)                          0.09           ---        0.13          ---       -0.03        0.16
D. Children’s Demographic Characteristics
    Age (months)                                          25.86        (11.01)      26.64       (8.38)       -0.78        0.06
    Female (=1)                                            0.50           ---        0.50          ---       0.00         0.87
    Maternal height (cms)                                 157.84       (14.36)      158.15      (16.45)      -0.31        0.63
    Mother's age (years)                                  31.07        (12.26)      31.28       (13.48)      -0.22        0.68
    Mother completed primary school (=1)                   0.09           ---        0.12          ---       -0.03        0.15
    Father present (=1)                                    0.91           ---        0.88          ---       0.03         0.33
E. Medical Care Utilization in Last 4 Weeks by Children Age 0-23 Months
    Preventive visit (=1)                                 0.213           ---       0.238          ---      -0.025       0.556
    Curative visit conditional on illness (=1)            0.305           ---       0.266          ---       0.039       0.530
F. Medical Care Utilization in Last 4 Weeks by Children Age 24-47 Months
    Preventive visit (=1)                                 0.084           ---       0.140          ---      -0.056       0.116
    Curative visit conditional on illness (=1)            0.201           ---       0.283         ---       -0.082       0.124
G. Health outcomes of Children Age 0-11 Months
    Standardized height for age (z-score)                 -0.03        (2.50)        -0.07      (2.46)       0.04         0.87
    Standardized weight for age (z-score)                 -0.31        (1.91)        -0.12      (2.00)       -0.19        0.32
H. Health Outcomes of Children Age 24-47 Months
    Standardized height for age (z-score)                 -1.95        (1.79)        -1.80      (1.94)       -0.15        0.22
    Standardized weight for age (z-score)                 -0.75        (1.32)        -0.71      (1.44)       -0.04        0.66

Notes: P-values are for two-sided tests of the null hypothesis that the difference in means is zero and were calculated using WILD
bootstrap with 999 draws.




                                                               29
                           Table 5: Impact of P4P on Child Health Outcomes

                                   Control         No Controls           With Controls
                                    Mean                     P-                    P-            N
                                   (2008)          β
                                                            Value
                                                                           β
                                                                                  Value
Children Age 0-11 months

    Height for age Z-Score          -0.20        0.22       0.29         0.16     0.38           800

    Weight for age Z-Score          -0.18        0.54       0.02         0.53     0.03           800

Children Age 24-47 Months

    Height for age Z-Score          -1.80        0.23       0.03         0.25     0.00          1957

    Weight for age Z-Score          0.69         0.01       0.39         0.03     0.34          1957

Notes: P-Values are for one-sided tests of the null hypothesis that β = 0 and are calculated based on a
WILD bootstrap with 999 draws. Controls include the child’s age and sex, maternal height, mother’s
age, whether the mother has completed primary school, whether the father lives in the household,
whether the family is a member of a Mutuelle, the total number of household members, the number of
household members under the age of 6, whether the household owns land, and dummy variables for
quartiles of the household asset value. Age was entered as a series of dummy variables that represent
one-month increments.




                                                  30
     Table 6: Rwandan CPG Prenatal Care Items Collected

1.   MEDICAL HISTORY
     •   High blood pressure
     •   Sexually transmitted infections including HIV
     •   Tetanus immunizations
     •   Pap smear test
     •   Tobacco use
     •   Alcohol use
2.   PRIOR PREGNANCIES INFORMATION
     •   Number of previous pregnancies
     •   Number of previous miscarriages and stillbirths
3.   CURRENT PREGNANCY STATUS
     •   Last menstrual date
     •   Health problems or concerns during pregnancy
     •   Bleeding
     •   Weight loss, nausea, or vomiting
     •   Medications
4.   PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
     •   Height
     •   Weight
     •   Blood pressure
     •   Examine abdomen
     •   Checked for swelling or water retention
5.   LABORATORY EXAMINATIONS
     •   Take a blood sample for anemia test
     •   Take a urine sample for gestational diabetes test
     •   Test for current STI including HIV
6.   PREVENTION AND CASE MANAGEMENT
     •   Tetanus toxoid injection
     •   Iron/vitamin pills
     •   Plan delivery




                               31
                            Table 7: Impact of P4P on Knowledge and Quality of Care
                            Knowledge
                             Z-Score                           Quality of Care Z-Score (Standardized)
                          (Standardized)
                                                     Model 1                 Model 2                 Model 3
                           β       P-Value         β    P-Value            β    P-Value            β    P-Value
P4P                       0.40       0.12         0.16        0.04        0.13      0.01         0.07      0.14

Knowledge Z-Score                                                         0.03      0.21         0.02      0.36
P4P * Knowledge in
                                                                                                 0.142     0.06
Top 50%
N Observations            294                    3,709                   3,709                   3,709
Notes: P-Values are for one-sided tests of the null hypothesis that β = 0 and are calculated based on a WILD
bootstrap with 999 draws. Knowledge share is a continuous variable of the share of the CPG items that the provider
knew and is bounded between zero and 1.




                                                         32
               Table 8: Impact of P4P on Inefficiency (Knowledge Share – Quality Share)

                                            Model 1                  Model 2                  Model 3

                                        β       P-Value          β      P-Value           β       P-Value

P4P (=1)                             -0.035      0.00          -0.04      0.03          -0.02      0.24

Knowledge Share                                                0.16       0.00           0.21      0.00

P4P * Knowledge in Top 50%                                                              -0.06      0.01

N Observations                        3709                     3709                     3709
Notes: P-Values are for one-sided tests of the null hypothesis that β = 0 and are calculated based on a
WILD bootstrap with 999 draws. Knowledge Share is the share of CPG protocol items correctly identified
by the provider during the administration of the vignette. Quality Share is the percentage of CPG protocol
items that were delivered during prenatal care, as reported in patient exit interviews and in household
surveys.




                                                      33
      Figure 1: The Knowledge-Quality Efficiency Gap for Prenatal Care (2008)




Notes: The horizontal axis is Knowledge expressed as the percentage of CPG protocol items correctly identified by
the provider during the administration of the vignette. The horizontal axis is the percentage of CPG protocol items
that were delivered during prenatal care, as reported in patient exit interviews and in household surveys.




                                                        34
           Appendix Table A: Impact of P4P on Health Care Utilization and Quality of Care
                                                         No Controls           With Controls
                                         Control
                                          Mean                    P-            β        P-           N
                                         (2008)          β
                                                                 Value                  Value

Maternal Health Care Utilization
 Any Prenatal Care (=1)                    0.98         0.00      0.46         0.00     0.45        2309
 4 or more Prenatal Care Visits (=1)       0.25         0.01      0.44         0.01     0.44        2223
 Institutional Delivery (=1)               0.50         0.07      0.06         0.08     0.04        2108
 Use Modern Contraception (=1)             0.35         0.02      0.32         0.02     0.27        3154
Utilization by Children Age 0-23 Months
 Preventive Care Visit (=1)                0.48         0.13      0.02         0.12     0.03        1971
 Curative Care Visit (=1)                  0.34         -0.00     0.50        -0.02     0.30         986
Utilization by Children Age 24-47 Months
 Preventive Care Visit (=1)                 .24         0.11      0.00         0.11     0.00        2902
 Curative Care Visit (=1)                  0.42         0.10      0.13         0.08     0.18        1229
Quality of Prenatal Care
 Tetanus Vaccine (=1)                      0.66         0.05      0.06         0.05     0.07        2856
 Clinical Protocol Z-Score                 0.00         0.16      0.06         0.16     0.04        3826
Notes: P-Values are for one-sided tests of the null hypothesis that β = 0 and are calculated based on a
WILD bootstrap with 999 draws. Controls for child utilization include the child’s age and sex, maternal
height, mother’s age, whether the mother has completed primary school, whether the father lives in the
household, whether the family has health insurance, the total number of household members, the number
of household members under the age of 6, whether the household owns land, and dummy variables for
quartiles of the household asset value. Age was entered as a series of dummy variables that represent
one-month increments. Controls for the maternal utilization and quality regressions include whether the
woman is younger than 20 years, is older than 35, has at least primary education, is currently married, in
union or living with the partner. Controls also include the number of household members, the number of
prior pregnancies, and the distance from the household to the health facility whether the household had
health insurance, whether the household owns any land, and quartiles for the household asset value.




                                                   35
