                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  THE ORIGINS AND PERSISTENCE OF BLACK-WHITE DIFFERENCES IN WOMEN'S
                      LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION

                                         Leah Platt Boustan
                                         William J. Collins

                                        Working Paper 19040
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19040


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




This paper was prepared for the Human Capital in History conference in honor of Claudia Goldin
in December 2012. We thank Nayana Bose, Francisco Haimovich, Mike Moody and Greg Niemesh
for able research assistance. Members of the KALER group at UCLA provided useful comments on
our initial draft. We also appreciate suggestions made by our discussant, Richard Freeman, at the Human
Capital in History conference (December, 2012) and those of the conference organizers, Robert Margo
and Carola Frydman. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Leah Platt Boustan and William J. Collins. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Origins and Persistence of Black-White Differences in Women's Labor Force Participation
Leah Platt Boustan and William J. Collins
NBER Working Paper No. 19040
May 2013
JEL No. J22,N11,N12

                                               ABSTRACT

Black women were more likely than white women to participate in the labor force from 1870 until
at least 1980 and to hold jobs in agriculture or manufacturing. Differences in observables cannot account
for most of this racial gap in labor force participation for the 100 years after Emancipation. The unexplained
racial gap may be due to racial differences in stigma associated with women’s work, which Goldin
(1977) suggested could be traced to cultural norms rooted in slavery. In both nineteenth and twentieth
century data, we find evidence of inter-generation transmission of labor force participation from mother
to daughter, which is consistent with the role of cultural norms.


Leah Platt Boustan
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu

William J. Collins
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu
        The twentieth-century rise in women’s labor force participation was one of the most

important social changes in American history. The growth in women’s market work was

precipitated by and, in turn, contributed to a shift in industrial composition from agriculture and

manufacturing to services, a revolution in norms and expectations about women’s careers, and

changes in marriage, fertility, and human capital investment. Writing this complex story—

documenting it, analyzing it, and placing it into its social context—has been one of Claudia

Goldin’s great contributions to scholarship.

        As with so many other social trends, the levels and changes in female labor force

participation have been notably different for black and white women in the United States. Goldin

(1977, 1990) proposes that these long-standing racial differences can, in part, be traced back to a

“double legacy” of slavery. The widespread poverty and low levels of education in the black

population after the Civil War may have had a direct effect on the labor force participation of

black women relative to white women. In addition, slavery may have had an indirect effect by

shaping prevailing social norms in the black community about women’s work. In particular,

Goldin hypothesizes that because black women worked intensively under slavery, African

Americans developed norms and expectations about women’s work that were different from

those of most whites and that were carried into the post-Emancipation era.1 Goldin (1977)

demonstrates that observable economic and demographic characteristics cannot account fully for

black-white differences in women’s labor force participation in the immediate post-bellum


1
  Weiss (1999) estimates an overall participation rate for black women (free and slave, over age 15) of
about 82 percent in 1860. The high rates of LFP for female slaves is well-documented in the historical
literature. Wayne (2007) summarizes this view: “At cotton-picking time everyone, including children and
the elderly, worked in the fields. A male slave from South Carolina remembered: “Women worked in de
field same as de men. Some of dem plowed jes’ like de men and boys. Couldn’t tell’em apart in de field,
as dey wore pantalets or breeches.” Besides working in the field, women might be used as housekeepers,
nannies for white children, laundresses, cooks, personal servants, caregivers for slave children (usually
elderly women), or sexual mistresses for the master” (p. 130). See also Jones (1985).


                                                                                                        1
period, a fact that is consistent with the idea of disparate social norms about women’s work by

race.

        In this paper we explore how the intergenerational transmission of work behavior from

mother to daughter may have influenced racial differences in women’s labor force participation

well into the twentieth century. We begin by describing trends in labor force participation rates

among black and white women from 1870 to the present. Participation in market work is the

outcome of a labor supply decision that is influenced by non-labor income, market wage offers,

and non-pecuniary aspects of employment, including social stigma against women’s work in

particular kinds of jobs that may vary by race. The market wage offers to women and work

conditions, in turn, reflect evolving patterns of labor demand and discrimination, which again

may vary by race. Guided by this framework, we document the presence of a large racial gap in

participation rates even after controlling for proxies for income and wages. This suggests that

racial differences in social norms may play some role in explaining differences in market

activity.

        We then present new evidence that daughters who were raised by working mothers are

themselves more likely to work. Given that social norms are transmitted, at least in part, within

families from parents to children, this intergenerational correlation may reflect racial differences

in norms about women’s work outside of the home, although it could also suggest that daughters

with working mothers develop skills, gather information, or build networks that are conducive to

their subsequent work activity. Higher labor force participation rates for black mothers, coupled

with the intergenerational correlation in work behavior between mother and daughter, can

explain one third of the racial gap in female labor force participation in the early twentieth

century and around 10 percent of the remaining gap in the mid-twentieth century. This aspect of




                                                                                                    2
our paper contributes to the growing literature on the role of “culture” in explaining variation in

female labor force participation across groups (e.g., Reimers 1985, Farré and Vella 2007,

Fernández and Fogli 2009, and Blau et al. 2012).



1. Trends in female labor force participation by race

       In this section, we begin by presenting trends in labor force participation (henceforth

“LFP”) among black and white women. We confirm and extend patterns that are familiar to

readers of Goldin (1990, chapter 2). Our data are drawn from the Integrated Public Use

Microdata Series (IPUMS, Ruggles et al. 2010), which are based on the federal Census of

Population manuscripts.2 Some of our analysis will focus specifically on participation by

married women, where the changes for whites have been largest, but for the most part we present

data for all women regardless of marital status to give a wider perspective on the range of

women’s activities.

       The characterization of changes in LFP over such a long period is, of course,

accompanied by some caveats. The modern concept of labor force participation was

implemented with the 1940 census, whereas earlier censuses collected occupational information

for “gainful workers.” Complete consistency between these two concepts is impossible due to

inherent differences in their definitions and year-to-year variation in enumerator instructions and

practices. In addition to these conceptual differences, the late nineteenth-century censuses appear

to undercount female workers relative to later years, particularly among married white women

living on farms and those taking in boarders in urban areas. Goldin (1990, appendix to chapter 2)

explores this issue in depth, drawing on a variety of sources to adjust figures for 1890. She


2
 The 2010 data are from the American Community Survey. See dissertations by Matthew Sobek (1997)
and Evan Roberts (2007) for detailed discussion of the census data on women’s work.


                                                                                                      3
concludes that the LFP for married women was understated by at least 10 percentage points in

that year; for all women (single and married), the undercount is at least 7 percentage points. Most

of our description and analysis relies on the IPUMS-based labor force variable without

modification, but we have attempted some adjustments (discussed below) to get a sense of the

potential magnitude of miscounting.

        Figures 1A and 1B show participation rates in samples of black and white women, ages

25 to 54 from 1870 to 2010, taking the IPUMS coding of LFP at face value. In each census year,

women are in one of four mutually exclusive categories: in the labor force and married (with

spouse present); in the labor force and not married (or spouse not present); not in the labor force

and not married; and not in the labor force and married. The combination of the first two groups

yields the overall share of women in the labor force. Appendix Table A1 provides the data that

underlie Figure 1, along with some additional summary statistics.

        A few key facts are clear from Figures 1A and 1B. First, the conventionally measured

participation rate among black women was much higher than among white women in the late

nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. From 1870 to 1900, black LFP was around 40 percent,

whereas white LFP was below 15 percent, with the vast majority of white workers consisting of

unmarried women. Even in our upward adjusted LFP rates, discussed below, the overall white

participation rate did not reach 40 percent until 1960, almost a full century later than for blacks.3

        Second, whereas an increase in the number of married workers drove the twentieth-

century rise in white women’s participation, an increase in the number of unmarried workers

3
  For perspective, it is important to recognize that the LFP rate for black women was much higher before
Emancipation. As mentioned above, Weiss (1999) estimates an overall participation rate for black women
(free and slave, over age 15) of about 82 percent in 1860, compared to 35 percent in 1870. The sharp
postwar decline reflects the end of coercion under slavery (Ransom and Sutch 1977) and may also reflect
a fall in southern wages and labor productivity (Margo 2004). Whether the remaining black-white gap is
attributable to differences in observable socioeconomic variables is explored in the next section.



                                                                                                       4
accounts for most of the rise in black women’s participation, especially after 1970.4 This is not

because the participation rate within the group of married black women fell or stagnated (to the

contrary it increased), but rather because the share of black women who were married (with

spouse present) declined sharply, from more than 60 percent through 1960 to just 29 percent in

2010. Focusing exclusively on married women would miss this important aspect of black

women’s labor market participation. Although selection into marriage is outside the focus of this

paper, the trend among black women is likely to be connected in complex ways to the declining

share of black men in the labor force (Wilson 1990).

       Third, and shown directly in Figure 1C, the racial gap in women’s LFP narrowed

significantly between 1920 and 1950 (from 27 to 14 percentage points), as the white rate

increased over this period while the black rate remained nearly constant. As we discuss below,

the rise among white women reflects both a shifting demand for clerical workers, as firms and

the federal government grew larger and more complex, and a shifting supply of high-school

educated white women. Black women, on the other hand, were generally barred from the

expanding clerical sector, and relatively few had had the opportunity to attend high school.5

       After 1950, both black and white rates rose steeply and almost in parallel until 1970.

Over the next few decades, the overall gap narrowed again and was nearly eliminated by 1990. It

is notable that the gap in LFP narrowed as much between 1920 and 1950 as it did between 1950



4
  The overall LFP among whites increased by 61 percentage points from 1900 to 2000, of which 47 points
can be attributed to higher participation by married women (subject to caveats about undercounts of
married women’s work circa 1900). Among blacks, the overall LFP increased by 32 percentage points
from 1900 to 2000, of which only 13 points can be attributed to married women. From 1970 to 2010, the
share of married-and-working women declined among blacks by 8 points (despite rising participation
within the married group), but this was more-than-offset by the growth of the not-married-and-working
group in driving an increase in overall participation.
5
  There were remarkably few public high schools for black students in the South in the early decades of
the twentieth century.


                                                                                                     5
and 1990. It is worth re-emphasizing that the entire gain in white LFP between 1920 and 1950

came from an increase in married workers.

       Our attempts to account for under-enumeration of women’s work, particularly on farms

or in boarding houses, are reported in Appendix Table A2. In the microdata, we simply

reassigned LFP for women who lived on farms or had boarders present (and were “head of

household” or “spouse-of-head”, substituting the LFP rate observed in the same

race/region/farm/married/boarder-status cells for later census years (1920, 1940, or 1960), all of

which had more careful enumerator instructions about how to count female workers. For white

women between 1870 and 1900, the adjusted rates are 1 to 15 percentage points higher,

depending on the year chosen as the basis for the adjustment. Because within-cell rates are

substantially higher in 1960 than previously (particularly on farms), using 1960 as the base year

leads to the largest adjustments. For black women, however, the modifications lead to relatively

small differences in LFP. Thus, the magnitude of the racial gap at any point in time is sensitive to

adjustments for differential undercounting of white women, but it remains in all cases a sizable

difference.



Stigma, the rise of white-collar work, and the rise of women’s LFP

       Goldin explains that, “The social stigma against wives working in paid manual labor

outside the home is apparently widespread and strong… The stigma is a simple message. Only a

husband who is lazy, indolent, and entirely negligent of his family would allow his wife to do

such labor” (1995, p. 71). In a static model of women’s labor supply, building on Gronau (1977),

Goldin (1995) shows how such a stigma may affect a woman’s likelihood of entering the labor




                                                                                                     6
force. The key idea is simply that when the household’s utility loss from the stigma is greater

than the utility gain from working outside the home, then a woman will not enter the labor force.

        In this framework, a higher level of stigma would lead to a lower rate of labor force

participation for married women, all else the same. A higher level of family income, conditional

on existing levels of stigma, would also lower the likelihood of a wife’s participation in the labor

market because the utility gain from her marginal income would be low (e.g., a high income

husband is unlikely to have a wife working in a factory).6 On the other hand, a higher market

wage for women, perhaps associated with higher levels of (or returns to) education or

experience, or improving non-pecuniary job characteristics would tend to pull women into the

labor force. In this sense, changes on the demand-side of the labor market may be critical to

drawing women into the labor force.

        For white women, rising levels of education and the growing availability of “clean jobs”

offered the opportunity to work without incurring the stigma associated with physically

demanding or dirty tasks. Figure 2A shows the occupational distribution for white women,

including a category for not-in-labor-force to provide a broad view of the range of women’s

activities. It is striking that white women’s participation increased almost in lockstep with the

rise in white-collar work (professional, clerical, manager, and sales occupations). Clerical work

was a key component of this growth up to 1970 (Appendix Table A3), and clerical sector

experience early in a woman’s career was relatively conducive to persistent labor force

participation (Goldin 1989). Even women who left the workforce to raise children found that

they could re-enter clerical jobs later in life.


6
 A goal of Goldin (1995) is to explain not only the twentieth-century rise in women’s LFP, but also the
apparent decline in the late nineteenth century. The model with stigma attached to women’s manual labor
predicts that, as average income rises in the late nineteenth century, women’s LFP will fall, thereby
explaining the downward portion of the U-shaped pattern.


                                                                                                     7
        The rise of black women’s labor force participation over the twentieth century was

associated with some of the same forces that influenced white women, but this rise also differed

in key respects. One important difference is that black women completed high school in large

numbers a full generation after white women. This educational delay was due, in large part, to

the black population’s concentration in the South, which lagged behind the rest of the country in

education in general and under-supplied schools for black children (Collins and Margo 2006). As

a result, a relatively small share of black women was prepared for office work in the early

twentieth century. In addition, on the demand-side of the market, discrimination against black

women in clerical work delayed the rise in black women’s work in this sector until the 1960s

even as their educational attainment increased (Sundstrom 2000).7 Figure 2B shows that the rise

in black women’s LFP did coincide with a rise in white-collar work, but only after 1950. The

jump in black women’s clerical employment from 4 percent of all black women in 1960 to 18

percent by 1980 is especially noteworthy (Appendix Table A4); this includes a sizable increase

in government employment from 1.6 to 5.3 percent of all black women.

        A second salient feature of Figure 2B is that black women were heavily concentrated in

agriculture and domestic service until the latter part of the 20th century, exactly the kind of

arduous labor that was heavily stigmatized for married white women. Thus, not only were black

women far more likely to be in the labor force than white women, but they were also far more

likely to endure difficult working conditions once in the labor force.

        One possible explanation for the gap in women’s LFP is that black families were poorer

than white families, implying that the marginal income from female employment was more

valuable. In combination with low levels of human capital and hiring discrimination in the

7
 Goldin (1990, p. 147) cites the prevalence of racial discrimination in clerical employment revealed in a
Women’s Bureau survey of firms in 1940. Collins (2003) finds that anti-discrimination laws implemented
at the state level in the 1940s and 1950s had positive effects on black women’s labor market outcomes.


                                                                                                       8
clerical sector, this would lead to a concentration of black women in “dirty jobs.” Another

potential explanation is that the stigma associated with married women’s work applied to a

smaller share of black women because fewer black women were married. In addition, women’s

work in arduous tasks may have been less subject to stigma in the black community, which leads

us back to Goldin’s hypothesis—that the historically high rates of women’s work under slavery

may have shaped attitudes towards married women’s work in the black community. We explore

this hypothesis in more detail in the next two sections.



2. Observables and racial differences in women’s LFP, 1870-2010

       This section explores the extent to which differences in observables can account for the

racial gap in LFP over the last 140 years. In a simple model of labor supply, a person’s decision

to enter the labor force depends on a comparison of the available market wage and the person’s

reservation wage. The reservation wage, in turn, depends on the level of non-labor income,

wealth, costs associated with taking up work, and preferences. Therefore, one might expect large

racial differences in women’s labor force participation to be accounted for by differences in

education, location, family composition, and household economic characteristics. We argue that

the portion of the gap in LFP that cannot be explained by these socio-economic factors may be

due to unobservable differences in the stigma associated with market work between white and

black populations.

       The 1870 Census of Population is an especially interesting place to start our

investigation. It is, of course, the first post-Emancipation census, and unlike all subsequent

censuses, it includes information about the value of personal and real property (i.e., wealth).

Goldin (1977) collected a random sample of census manuscripts from seven southern cities in




                                                                                                    9
1870 and 1880, and found that large black-white differences in LFP remained after adjusting for

differences in observable characteristics. We use the national IPUMS one-percent sample for

1870 to present simple regressions that confirm Goldin’s conclusion in a broader dataset, yield

some additional insights, and dovetail with our analysis for later years.

        Given the scarcity of individual wage and non-wage income data in this period, we do not

attempt to estimate a standard labor supply equation.8 Rather, our goal is simply to determine

whether an extensive set of personal and household observables can account for the large

difference in black and white LFP rates. These observables may control for a large part of

slavery’s “direct effect” on labor market behavior, operating through low family income, wealth,

place of birth, education, and family structure. The residual difference in LFP may then reflect

differences in norms or expectations about women’s work outside the home, potentially an

“indirect” product of slavery. Of course, given the scope for omitted variables and endogeneity,

interpreting the residual requires caution and qualification. For example, black women may have

been more likely to work than white women (controlling for observables) because they expected

a higher likelihood of marital instability or believe that their husbands have a higher risk of

unemployment or mortality, expectations that we cannot observe in the census data.

        Table 1 reports coefficients from separate linear probability model regressions of LFP on

an indicator for race (black=1) in 1870.9 The base sample in Panel A includes all women, age 25


8
  In addition to Goldin (1990), see Fraundorf (1979) and Rotella (1980) for efforts to estimate women’s
labor supply equations with historical data. A large literature on the topic emerged in the 1960s, including
notable contributions from Mincer (1962) and Bowen and Finegan (1969). See Heckman and
Killingsworth (1986) for a review of this literature and Blau and Kahn (2007) for more recent evidence.
9
  The analyses in Tables 1 and 2 are pooled regressions (black and white women) with a race indicator
and controls for observables. The coefficient on the race indicator can be interpreted as the “unexplained”
portion of a version of the Blinder-Oaxaca decomposition in which the intercepts for each group are
constrained to be equal but opposite. See Fortin (2008) for elaboration. In this setting, we see that the
unexplained portion of the gap is large relative to the overall gap in LFP. We have implemented a version
of this decomposition with a detailed breakdown within the explained and unexplained categories such


                                                                                                         10
to 54; Panel B presents results for a subsample of married women. Within each panel, we

estimate separate regressions for samples from the entire U.S., the South, and the non-farm South

to see if narrowing the basis of comparison affects the main results. Column 1’s specification

includes only the race dummy, reflecting the unadjusted racial difference in participation rates.

Column 2 adds fixed effects for state of birth and age, our limited set of clearly exogenous

background variables. Column 3 adds controls for several other observables, including literacy,

the number of own children in the household (separate categorical variables for children under

and over 5 years of age), city-resident status, farm-resident status, household wealth (four

categories), and husband’s status (9 occupational categories and a no-husband-present category).

       Among women in the South, the racial difference in LFP is approximately 32 percentage

points in 1870. Our extensive set of control variables and fixed effects account for very little of

the racial difference, approximately 5 percentage points out of 32. The levels are slightly

different in the other rows of Panel A (all U.S. and non-farm South), but the basic story is

unchanged: observables account for little of the large racial gap in women’s labor force

participation in the wake of the Civil War.

       Among married women who reside with their spouse, the magnitude of the base racial

gap is smaller (Panel B, Column 1) than in Panel A. This sample composition effect reflects both

the relatively high level of participation among unmarried black women and the relatively large

share of unmarried women among blacks. Adjusting for observables can explain more of the

racial LFP gap for married women in Panel B than for all women in Panel A. Nonetheless, the

residual gap in women’s LFP is still greater than 15 percentage points, more than half of the

unadjusted gap. The large residual gap is notable because the 1870 data provide a measure of

that the breakdown is invariant to the choice of omitted categories (Jann 2008). Much of the unexplained
portion of the gap is located in the differences in the constant terms, as opposed to differences in
responsiveness to observables.


                                                                                                     11
household wealth, which is typically an omitted variable in contemporary studies of women’s

labor force participation.10 The presence of a large residual gap in women’s LFP, as Goldin

(1977) found, is consistent with differences in social norms or stigma associated with women’s

work by race, which may be an indirect legacy of slavery.

        The “unexplained” gap in women’s labor force participation persisted for more than 100

years, although this residual narrowed alongside the overall gap. Figure 3A plots three sets of

coefficients from regressions that are similar to those described above for a national sample of

black and white women: one plot simply shows the difference in black-white LFP at each census

date (unadjusted), whereas the other two show adjusted differences in LFP rates (i.e., the

coefficient on black, conditional on observables). One of the adjusted plots begins in 1940

because that year is the first in which we can observe women’s educational attainment in detail

(as opposed to just “literacy” in earlier years).11 Censuses after 1870 do not provide measures of

wealth, but husband’s occupation and the other covariates should capture wealth differences to

some extent.12

        Consistent with earlier depictions of LFP levels, Figure 3A documents a large but

declining unadjusted difference in black-white LFP. The new information in this graph is

conveyed by the plots showing the size of the racial gap conditional on observables. Until 1930,

controlling for observables makes little difference in the size of the racial gap. Around mid-


10
   Relative to households with zero wealth (about one quarter of the sample) and controlling for other
observables (including husband’s status), women from wealthier households were more likely to be in the
labor force, though the coefficients vary across the subsamples of Table 1. This could simply reflect the
endogeneity of household wealth with respect to women’s past work.
11
   For the “adjusted” plot that runs from 1880 to 2010 we have a literacy variable in all specifications. Up
to 1930, this is based on the ability to read and write, as reported by the census enumerator. From 1940
onward, when the census did not inquire about literacy but did inquire about educational attainment, we
code women as literate if they went beyond fourth grade.
12
   Results from the fully specified regressions for married women in 1870 are not much different if the
categorical wealth controls are omitted.


                                                                                                         12
century (1940-70), observable differences begin to account for a larger portion of the gap, both

absolutely and relative to the gap’s unadjusted size. By 1990, however, the overall black-white

gap is very small by historical standards, and, in contrast to the earlier years, adjustments for

observables tend to increase the racial gap.13

        For reference, at 20-year intervals, coefficients for key variables from linear probability

models of LFP are reported in Table 2, where the omitted “husband category” consists of women

who were “single, never married.” By 1940, there is a strong positive link between educational

attainment and women’s LFP, even after controlling for husband’s occupation. Relative to never-

married women, LFP for married women declines from 1880 to 1920 across all categories of

husbands’ occupations, but then the pattern reverses, such that by 2000 the differences between

married and unmarried women are small by historical standards. Blinder-Oaxaca decompositions

corresponding to the regression specifications in Table 2 are reported in Appendix Table A5.14

In this setting, differences in husband’s presence and occupation may account for some portion

of the racial difference in women’s LFP, which is consistent with the expectation that for most of

U.S. history single women and women married to men in relatively low-earning occupations are

more likely to work for pay than others. The estimated contribution ranges from 4 percentage

points in the early twentieth century to 7 percentage points in 1960, but differences in other

observables tend to have little explanatory power. As noted earlier, given that education is


13
   Starting in 1940, we are able to add more detailed educational attainment variables as controls (up to
this point, literacy is the only human capital variable). Higher educational attainment is associated with
higher labor force participation rates. In each year, black women lower educational attainment (on
average) than white women. Therefore, adjusting for educational attainment tends to increase the
coefficient on the black indicator variable.
14
   The usual caveats about decompositions apply here, as well. See Fortin, Lemieux, and Firpo (2011) for
an extended discussion. In addition to the mechanical (but important) issues related to the choice of
coefficient vectors, omitted categories, and linear versus non-linear methods, we note that some of the
variables in our regressions are likely endogenous to women’s labor force participation. We present the
decomposition results for descriptive purposes.


                                                                                                       13
positively associated with LFP, racial differences in educational attainment cannot explain the

relatively high level of black women’s participation.

        Figure 3B shows that the racial gap in the likelihood of working “dirty jobs” was large

throughout most of the twentieth century, even with controls for marital status, husband’s

occupation, number of children, birthplace, and literacy or highest grade of education. From

1940 onward, we see that controlling for years of educational attainment accounts for a sizable

share of the gap, though a nontrivial share remains unexplained despite a pronounced decline in

agricultural and household-service employment as a share of all women’s work (Bailey and

Collins 2006).15

        In sum, for at least 100 years after Emancipation, black women participated in the labor

force at significantly higher rates than white women. Prior to 1950, observable characteristics

fail to account for most of this gap, suggesting that something else that is correlated with race

mattered, and that it mattered more in the decades immediately after the Civil War than later in

the twentieth century. . Differences between blacks and whites in the strength of the stigma

against married women’s work in physically demanding jobs, reflecting an indirect legacy of

slavery, might help account for this pattern. To be a persuasive interpretation of the patterns

described above, this influence would have to be found to persist across generations. The next

section looks for traces of intergenerational transmission in attitudes towards women’s work.




15
   Restricting the sample to non-Hispanic whites has little impact on the size of the conditional gap in the
late twentieth century relative to what is shown in Figure 3B.


                                                                                                         14
3. Evidence on intergenerational transmission

       Thus far, we have presented indirect evidence that racial differences in social norms

about women’s work may have contributed to the generation and perpetuation of the racial gap

in female LFP. In particular, we interpreted the presence of a residual in a regression of women’s

LFP on a set of socio-economic traits as suggestive evidence that other factors, including social

norms, are needed to explain the racial participation gap. In this section, we present more direct

evidence about the role of historical differences in women’s work activity by race, stemming

from the era of slavery, in sustaining the racial gap in women’s work behavior over time. We

demonstrate a strong association between the work activity of mothers and daughters in both the

late nineteenth century, a generation after Emancipation, and in the mid-twentieth century. As a

result, initial differences in women’s work behavior have persisted over time. The link between

mothers’ and daughters’ behavior is large enough to explain up to a third of the black-white gap

in female LFP a generation or more after slavery.

       Racially distinct attitudes and expectations about women’s work outside the home

provide one explanation for the observed correlation in work behavior between mothers and

daughters. Social norms about women’s work (and many other social phenomena) are

transmitted to children, in part, through interactions with their parents (Moen, et al., 1997). These

norms may be transmitted tacitly, as young women observe the work behavior of their mother, or

they may be actively conveyed through conversation and exhortation. Alternatively, working

mothers may provide their daughters with skills or a labor market network, which could increase

her economic return to market work. Although we cannot econometrically distinguish between

the transmission of attitudes and norms, on the one hand, or of skills and information on the

other, estimating the reduced-form relationship between the work behavior of mothers and




                                                                                                  15
daughters is interesting in its own right and may help account for racial differences in the

propensity to work outside of the home.

       Our analysis is related to a series of recent papers that has investigated the role that

“culture,” broadly defined as beliefs or preferences, plays in explaining differences in women’s

market work across groups (Fernandez and Fogli, 2009; Blau, Kahn, Liu and Papps, 2012; Farré

and Vella, 2007). Because attitudes about women’s work are formed in a particular economic

context, it is an empirical challenge to disentangle the effect of culture on female LFP from the

role of economic conditions. For this reason, the recent literature has focused on the work

behavior of immigrant women. Immigrants leave the economic environment in which their

preferences were first formed but may still carry with them specific attitudes or norms shaped in

their source country. Consistent with this hypothesis, Fernandez and Fogli (2009) show that the

LFP of immigrant women is correlated with lagged female LFP in their source country, and

Blau, et al. (2012) find an association between the LFP of first- and second-generation immigrant

women from the same country of origin.



Nineteenth-century data

       We begin our analysis of the intergenerational correlation of women’s work behavior by

investigating the generation of daughters born immediately after Emancipation. We focus on the

birth cohorts of 1866 to 1884, members of which were old enough to participate in the labor

force in 1900. For this group, we ask whether women whose mothers were born into slavery

were themselves more likely to engage in market work in adulthood. Data are drawn from the

five-percent IPUMS sample of 1900. Although mother’s slave status is unknown, we assume that




                                                                                                  16
black daughters whose mothers were born in the South are the direct descendants of slaves (see

also Sacerdote, 2005).16

       In particular, we estimate:

       I(daughter works) = α + β1 I(black) + β2 I(mother born in South) +                          (1)
                               β3 [I(mother born in South) * I(black)] +
                               γ1 I(born in South) + γ2 [I(born in South) * I(black)] + (X') Δ + ε.


The dependent variable is an indicator equal to one if the daughter participates in the labor force

in 1900. The coefficient β1 identifies the racial gap in labor force participation. β2 compares the

work behavior of all women, both white and black, whose mothers were born in the South. The

coefficient of interest is β3, which isolates any additional effect of having a mother who was born

in the South for black women. We interpret the additional effect in β3 as reflecting the effect of

being a descendant of slaves. Daughters of former slaves differ from daughters of free blacks

both in the likelihood that their own mothers worked, which may have influenced their own

attitudes about the value and suitability of women’s work, and also, perhaps, in other aspects of

family background such as accumulated wealth. β3 estimates the net effect of these various

differences between the descendants of slave and free blacks.

       Daughters of southern-born mothers are themselves more likely to live in the South. We

therefore control for the daughter’s own place of birth (alone and interacted with race) to account

for contemporaneous regional differences in industrial composition or agricultural practice that

may influence women’s labor force participation. We also include a quadratic in age and a

dummy variable for literacy in the vector X.




16
   The youngest daughter in the sample was 16 years old in 1900. As long as her mother was 20 years old
at the time of her birth, her mother would have been born under slavery.


                                                                                                      17
        Results for this estimation are reported in Table 3. The first column uses an expansive

definition of the South, while the second column excludes the “border states.”17 In both cases,

we find that black daughters whose mothers spent their first few decades (or more) under slavery

are themselves 5 to 9 percentage points more likely to be in the labor force, even after controlling

for daughter’s region. The relationship is stronger if we contrast daughters whose mothers grew

up in the Deep South to mothers who grew up either under freedom or in a border state. In both

cases, we find that white daughters whose mothers came of age in the antebellum South were

less likely to work outside the home, perhaps because they absorbed a white southern attitude

that work outside of the home was fit only for slaves.18

        In the early twentieth century, black women were 27 percentage points more likely than

white women to be in the labor force (see Figure 1C). Therefore, our estimates imply that up to

33 percent of the black-white gap in female LFP may be attributed to the inter-generational

effects of slavery, which include both the direct effect of slavery on household wealth as well as

the indirect effect of slavery on attitudes towards women’s work (= 9/27).

        Columns 3 and 4 provide suggestive evidence that mother’s slave status influences

daughter’s work behavior through transmission of attitudes, skills or networks between mother

and daughter, rather than through the direct effect of slavery on later socio-economic status.

Column 3 considers an older cohort of daughters born between 1836 and 1855. Members of this

cohort were old enough to have worked as slaves and absorbed the bundle of norms about and

17
   The expansive definition of the South includes all states in the three southern Census regions. The
narrower definition excludes the District of Columbia, Delaware, Maryland, Missouri, Oklahoma and
West Virginia. Despite the fact that slavery was legal in the border states, the slave population in these
areas was unlikely to work on large plantations or in the cultivation of cotton where the norm of women’s
work was the most well-developed (Jones, 1985).
18
   In the antebellum South, white women primarily engaged in home production. “Southern white women
of all classes managed farms, homes, children, and sometimes slaves… they were responsible for tasks
such as organizing the household, food production, attending to the medical needs of their families, and
educating their own children” (Wayne, 2006, p. 135).


                                                                                                       18
skills related to women’s work inherent in the slave system on their own. Therefore, after

controlling for daughter’s own place of birth, we do not expect mother’s place of birth to have an

additional effect on daughter’s work behavior due to transmission between mother and daughter–

and, indeed, we find no association between mother’s slave status and daughter’s labor force

participation in this older cohort. Column 4 looks instead at sons born after Emancipation. We do

not expect a mother’s slave status to influence her son’s propensity to work given the strong

norm of near-universal male LFP in both the slave and non-slave economy. Reassuringly,

mother’s slave status has no effect on son’s behavior either.



Mid-twentieth century data

       The nineteenth century data allow us to observe work behavior of the descendants of

slaves and free people in the first generation after Emancipation. It is also of interest to assess

whether the intergenerational continuity of the higher participation rates under slavery lasted

beyond the first generation of black women and can help explain the racial gap in LFP in the

second or third generation after slavery. For this, we examine data from the first cohort of young

women in the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS), which was initiated in 1968. These women

(the daughters, in our analysis) were born between 1944 and 1954; their mothers were typically

born between 1910 and 1930. In other words, many of their mothers belonged to the second

generation after Emancipation, while they belong to the third (or fourth) generation.

       At the survey’s inception, women were asked a series of questions about their family

background, including whether or not their mother worked for pay during their own teenage

years. Women were then re-surveyed and asked to report on aspects of their own work and

family life every three years. We investigate a series of associations between the work behavior




                                                                                                      19
of a mother and her daughter, asking: Does growing up with a working mother change a

daughter’s expectations about working for pay? Are women whose mothers worked during their

formative years more likely to work themselves? And is this relationship equally strong for all

women or is it particularly powerful for black women, perhaps because the values transmitted by

a working mother are reinforced by more affirming attitudes towards women’s work in the wider

black community?

       We address these questions in a set of regressions relating a daughter’s work behavior to

an indicator for whether or not her mother worked when she was 14 years old. In particular, we

estimate:

       Daughter’s behavioriy = α + β I(black)i + γ1 I(mother worked at age 14)i +                 (2)
                               γ2 [I(mother worked)i * I(black)i] + (X1i ') Δ + (X2iy') Θ + εiy


Our main dependent variable is an indicator variable equal to one if daughter i works for pay in

calendar year y. We estimate this relationship in six separate years, beginning in 1977 when the

typical respondent was 28 years old and ending in 1993, when she was 44 years old. We also

consider other aspects of a daughter’s work and family life that could be influenced by her

mother’s work behavior, including her expectations about engaging in market work in 1968 (at

the modal age of 19) and her marital and fertility history.

       The explanatory variable of interest is an indicator for whether a respondent’s mother

worked for pay when she was 14 years old (in the modal year of 1963). We interact this indicator

with a race variable equal to one for black respondents to test whether the association between

mother’s and daughter’s work behavior was stronger in the black community. In some

specifications, we also include vectors of family background characteristics (X1i) or

contemporaneous measures of a daughter’s economic circumstance (X2iy). The family



                                                                                                  20
background characteristics include mother’s and father’s educational attainment, father’s

occupation (in four categories), a dummy variable for whether the daughter lived with both of

her parents at age 14, and an indicator for whether the daughter had a library card at age 14, a

common measure of family resources and commitment to education.19 Contemporaneous

economic measures consist of the daughter’s educational attainment, her marital status and the

presence of children in her household. All regressions are weighted to account for the fact that

the NLS oversampled poor households.

         Table 4 reports characteristics for the 3,565 daughters in our sample, 24 percent of whom

are black. In 1977, at the average age of 28, 55 percent of the white women and 61 percent of the

black women were in the labor force, a 6 percentage-point gap in participation by race. By 1991,

when the typical respondent was 42 years old, the labor force participation rate rose to 72 percent

for whites and 74 percent for blacks.

         The racial gap in LFP was larger among mothers of sample women: 36 percent of white

mothers and 50 percent of black mothers worked for pay when their daughters were 14, in the

modal year of 1963. These figures, which are derived from daughters’ recollections in the first

survey period (1968), match labor force participation rates for married women for this year

reasonably well (according to interpolations between the 1960 and 1970 census years, 35 percent

of white married women and 45 percent of black married women were in the labor force in

1963).

         Our family background measures reveal large differences in the socio-economic status of

the households in which white and black respondents were raised. Only 50 percent of black

women held a library card at age 14, compared to 79 percent of white women, and the mothers of

19
   We classify father’s occupation into four categories as follows: high white collar (professional,
managerial), low white collar (clerical, sales), high blue collar (craftsmen, operatives), low blue collar
(service, labor).


                                                                                                       21
black women had two fewer years of education than their white counterparts (9.2 versus 11.2

years). By the daughters’ generation, the racial gap in educational attainment had declined but

had not disappeared entirely. Black daughters completed one fewer year of schooling than white

daughters (12.4 versus 13.4 years). In addition, black daughters were more likely to have

children in their twenties (despite little difference in the probability of ever having a child), and

were less likely to be married both in their twenties and in their thirties.

        Table 5 investigates the relationship between a daughter’s labor force participation and

her mother’s work behavior in 1977 at the average age of 28. Model 1 contains only dummy

variables for race and for having a working mother during one’s teenage years, and the

interaction between the two. We find that daughters of working mothers are 3.4 percentage

points more likely to be working themselves at age 28; this relationship is statistically significant

at the 10 percent level. Having a working mother has an even stronger effect on one’s own

propensity to be in the labor force for black women although the interaction between race and

mother’s work cannot be statistically distinguished from zero.

        These estimates suggest that eight percent of the black-white labor force participation gap

in 1977 can be explained by inter-generational transmission of labor force behavior from mother

to daughter. Black mothers were 14 percentage points more likely than white mothers to be in

the labor force in 1963, and, by our estimate, women with working mothers are 3.4 percentage

points more likely to be in the labor force themselves. Together, these figures imply that inter-

generational transmission can explain eight percent of the black-white participation gap in 1977

(= [0.14 mother’s gap * 0.034 effect of mother’s work] / 0.06 gap).20



20
  In Model 1, which contains limited controls, it appears that the effect of mother’s work may be stronger
for black daughters. However, after controlling for family background in Model 2, this interaction
disappears.


                                                                                                       22
        Model 2 controls for our family background measures to account for the fact that growing

up with a working mother may be an indication of a family’s socio-economic circumstances,

which could itself influence a daughter’s propensity to work, either through attitudes or through

a daughter’s acquisition of human capital. Daughters from families of higher socio-economic

status – those with a library card or those whose father graduated from high school – are more

likely to work, perhaps because they have more skills and thus can earn higher wages for doing

so. However, these factors have no effect on the core relationship between mother’s and

daughter’s propensity to work.21

        Model 3 controls for a daughter’s own educational attainment to assess whether mother’s

work behavior has a direct effect on a daughter’s LFP beyond any indirect effects it may have on

a daughter’s human capital acquisition.22 Daughters who have graduated from high school

(college) are 12 (24) percentage points more likely to be in the labor force than are high school

dropouts. Yet, adding daughter’s educational attainment to the model does not weaken the

relationship between mother’s work behavior and daughter’s labor force attachment. However,

we do note that accounting for a daughter’s educational attainment eliminates any association

between our family background measures and a daughter’s propensity to be in the labor force,

suggesting that the relationship between socio-economic status and labor force participation

operates through investments in human capital.

        Model 4 demonstrates that a daughter’s labor force participation is strongly related to her

own family circumstance. Daughters with children in the household are 36 percentage points less

likely to be currently in the labor force. Daughters who never married (or who are widowed or

21
   Model 2 requires us to drop the 557 women who do not report one or more of the family background
items. Results are nearly unchanged if we re-run Model 1 for this reduced sample.
22
   A daughter’s educational aspirations could be directly influenced by her mother’s work behavior; in
this sense, educational attainment is an endogenous variable (as are marital and fertility history in Model
4).


                                                                                                        23
divorced) are 13 (25) percentage points more likely to be in the labor force than are those who

are currently married. Somewhat surprisingly, accounting for a daughter’s domestic situation

increases the association between a daughter’s and her mother’s labor force participation by 60

percent. This pattern is consistent with findings below demonstrating that daughters of working

mothers are more likely to be currently married and to have a child living at home.

       Thus far, we have considered the effect of a mother’s work behavior on her daughter’s

outcomes in 1977 when daughters were in their mid- to late-twenties. The influence of one’s

mother’s example may be strongest in these years because daughters are still relatively young

and thus turning to their parents for guidance. In addition, women’s labor force participation

tends to increase over the lifecycle as their children age, leaving less scope for individual factors

(like differences in mother’s work behavior) to generate differences in outcomes (Goldin, 1990).

       Figure 4 graphs the estimated effect of having a working mother on a daughter’s

propensity to be in the labor force according to the baseline specification (Model 1) in six survey

years: 1977, 1982, 1985, 1988, 1991 and 1993. We find a strong and stable association between

a mother’s work behavior and her daughter’s labor force attachment in the 1970s and early

1980s. In these years, daughter in the NLS cohorts are still likely to have young children at home

(average ages of 28, 33 and 36). However, in the late 1980s and 1990s, when the daughters are

older, we no longer find that a daughter’s labor force participation is related to her mother’s

work behavior. The coefficient on mother’s work at age 14, as well as the interaction between

mother’s work and race, fall nearly to zero for daughters between the ages of 39 and 45. Because

we are only able to follow a single cohort in the NLS, we cannot identify whether the declining

association between mother’s and daughter’s work behavior is a period or an age effect. Our data

are consistent with the possibility that the example set by one’s own mother has become less




                                                                                                   24
relevant over time as female LFP became more commonplace. Alternatively, it could be that

having a working mother as a role model is particularly important to a woman’s decision to

couple work with childrearing but is less relevant for women without children or women with

older children, many more of whom work outside of the home.

       Table 6 explores the channels through which a mother’s work behavior influences her

daughter’s own labor force attachment. Following Goldin (2006), we suspect that having a

working mother changes daughters’ expectations about the course of their own lives. Rather than

presuming that they will marry and specialize in home production, daughters of working mothers

may expect that they too will work outside of the home, as their mothers did. As a result, they

may be more likely to invest in human capital to increase the return to this market work and may

delay marriage until after completing their schooling.

       We find some evidence consistent with these conjectures but other patterns that are quite

contrary to them. As expected, column 1 demonstrates that daughters of working mothers are 4.9

percentage points less likely to expect that they will be employed as a housewife when they

reach the age of 35, even after controlling for other family background measures. These

expectations are elicited in the first survey wave when the daughters are, on average, 19 years

old. Yet despite holding more ambitious expectations in their teenage years, daughters of

working mothers do not attain more years of education on average and are no more likely to

graduate from college or attain a post-baccalaureate degree (last result not shown). Even more

surprisingly, mother’s work is associated with a higher probability of ever marrying and, among

those who do marry, with earlier ages of first marriage and first child birth (by 0.5 to 0.6 of a




                                                                                                    25
year).23 In contrast, having a father or mother who graduated from high school raises the age of

first marriage and first birth by one to two years, respectively; moreover, living with both parents

in childhood and having a library card at age 14 are also associated with delay of childbearing.

        The positive association between mother’s work and early marriage is somewhat of a

puzzle. Perhaps daughters whose mothers worked outside of the home have adopted a more

equitable view of marriage and do not associate marriage with specialization in home production.

In that case, the cost of marrying in terms of foregone earnings or independence would be lower

and therefore these daughters would be more likely to marry and to do so at younger ages.

Alternatively, this early marriage may simply reflect the fact that poorer families are more likely

to have two working parents and that daughters from a lower socio-economic status background

are more likely to marry and engage in childbearing at younger ages (although this interpretation

would be difficult to reconcile with the higher levels of educational attainment at the top end of

the attainment distribution).



4. Conclusion

        Large racial differences in women’s labor force participation persisted for more than 100

years after the Civil War. Following Goldin (1977), we hypothesize that these differences might,

in part, reflect an indirect legacy of slavery that operated through differences in social norms

about women’s work in arduous occupations. We find that well into the twentieth century only a

portion of the racial difference in women’s LFP (or in their work specifically in physically

demanding jobs) can be attributed to differences in observable characteristics, which is



23
  That daughters of working mothers marry at younger ages (and, for this reason, are less likely to be in
the labor force) explains why controlling for marital status augments the relationship between mother’s
work and daughter’s labor force participation in Table 5.


                                                                                                      26
consistent with the presence of some persistent propensity toward work outside of the home that

initially derived from the institution of slavery.

       Two separate analyses further test the inter-generational transmission of female labor

force participation. In 1900, it appears that women born to ex-slaves were significantly more

likely than other black women to be in the labor force. Later in the twentieth century, the NLS

data reveal that daughters of working mothers were more likely to work themselves even when

controlling for a number of background characteristics.

       The structural transformation of the US economy and rapid gains in educational

attainment greatly expanded the scope for women’s work in relatively “clean” jobs. White

women started moving into such jobs in the early decades of the twentieth century, but black

women did not make large inroads in white-collar work until after World War II. Thereafter,

participation rates for both white and black women increased as white-collar jobs became more

prevalent, such that by the end of the twentieth century, the racial gap in women’s labor force

participation had greatly narrowed. A small residual difference remained in terms of employment

in more arduous occupations, perhaps a last trace of a long-standing difference in social norms

with respect to such work.




                                                                                                  27
                                          References

Bailey, Martha J. and William J. Collins. 2006. “The Wage Gains of African-American Women
in the 1940s.” Journal of Economic History 66, 3: 737-777.

Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L. Papps. 2012. “The
Transmission of Women’s Fertility, Human Capital and Work Orientation Across Immigrant
Generations.” Journal of Population Economics.

Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. “Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of Married
Women: 1980-2000.” Journal of Labor Economics 25: 393-438

Bowen, William G. and T. Aldrich Finegan. 1969. The Economics of Labor Force Participation.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Collins, William J. 2003. “The Labor Market Impact of State-level Anti-discrimination Laws,
1940-1960.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56 (2): 244-272.

Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2006. “Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in
Schooling in the United States.” In E. Hanushek and F. Welch (eds.), Handbook of the
Economics of Education, Volume 1, 107-154. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Farré, Lidia and Francis Vella. 2007. “The Intergenerational Transmission of Gender Role
Attitudes and Its Implications for Female Labor Force Participation.” IZA Discussion Paper
2802.

Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli. 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work, and Fertility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1(1): 146-177.

Fortin, Nicole M. 2008. “The Gender Wage Gap among Young Adults in the United States: The
Importance of Money versus People.” Journal of Human Resources XLIII (4): 884-918.

Fortin, Nicole M., Thomas Lemieux, and Sergio Firpo. 2011. “Decomposition Methods.” In O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 4A, 1-102. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.

Fraundorf, Martha Norby. 1979. “The Labor Force Participation of Turn-of-the-Century Married
Women.” Journal of Economic History 39: 401-418.

Goldin, Claudia. 1977. “Female Labor Force Participation: The Origin of Black and White
Differences, 1870 to 1880.” Journal of Economic History 37, 1: 87-108.

Goldin, Claudia. 1989. “Life-Cycle Labor Force Participation by Married Women: Historical
Evidence and Implications.” Journal of Labor Economics 7: 20-47.

Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
Women. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.


                                                                                              28
Goldin, Claudia. 1995. “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic Development
and Economic History.” In T. Paul Schultz, ed., Investment in Women’s Human Capital.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Gronau, Reuben. 1977. “Leisure, Home Production, and Work—the Theory of the Allocation of
Time Revisited.” Journal of Political Economy 85, 6: 1099-1124.

Jann, Ben. 2008. “The Blinder-Oaxaca Decomposition for Linear Regression Models.” Stata
Journal 8 (4): 453-479.

Jones, Jacqueline. 1985. Labor of Love, Labor of Sorrow: Black Women, Work, and the Family
from Slavery to the Present. New York: Basic Books.

Killingsworth, Mark R. and James J. Heckman. 1986. “Female Labor Supply: A Survey.” In O.
Ashenfelter and R. Layard (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1, pp. 103-204.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Margo, Robert A. 2004. “The North-South Wage Gap Before and After the Civil War.” In D.
Eltis, F. Lewis, and K. Sokoloff (eds.), Slavery in the Development of the Americas, pp. 324-351.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Mincer, Jacob. 1962. “Labor Force Participation of Married Women.” In Aspects of Labor
Economics. National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Moen, Phyllis, Mary Ann Erickson and Donna Dempster-McClain. 1997. “Their Mother’s
Daughters? The Intergenerational Transmission of Gender Attitudes in a World of Changing
Roles.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 59(2): 281-293.

Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch. 2001 [1977]. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic
Consequences of Emancipation. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

Reimers, Cordelia W. 1985. “Cultural Differences in Labor Force Participation among Married
Women.” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 75, 2: 251-255.

Roberts, Evan Warwick. 2007. Her Real Sphere? Married Women’s Labor Force Participation
in the United States, 1860-1940. Ph.D. thesis, University of Minnesota.

Rotella, Elyce. 1980. “Women’s Labor Force Participation and the Decline of the Family
Economy in the United States.” Explorations in Economic History 17: 95-117.

Ruggles, Steven, Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.




                                                                                              29
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2005. “Slavery and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital.”
Review of Economics and Statistics 87, 2: 217-234.

Sobek, Matthew Joseph. 1997. A Century of Work: Gender, Labor Force Participation, and
Occupational Attainment in the United States, 1880-1990. Ph.D. thesis, University of Minnesota.

Sundstrom, William A. 2000. “From Servants to Secretaries: The Occupations of African-
American Women, 1940-1980.” Unpublished paper, Santa Clara University.
Wayne, Tiffany K. 2006. Women’s Roles in Nineteenth Century America. Santa Barbara, CA:
ABC-Clio.

Weiss, Thomas. 1999. “Estimates of White and Nonwhite Gainful Workers in the United States
by Age Group, Race, and Sex: Decennial Census Years, 1800-1900.” Historical Methods 32: 21-
35.

Wilson, William Julius. 1990. The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
Public Policy. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.




                                                                                             30
      Figure 1A: White Women’s Labor Force Participation, 1870-2010

100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
        1870

                1880

                       1890

                              1900

                                     1910

                                            1920

                                                   1930

                                                          1940

                                                                  1950

                                                                         1960

                                                                                1970

                                                                                       1980

                                                                                              1990

                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                            2010
               Married and In Labor Force                        Not Married and In Labor Force
               Not Married and Not In Labor Force                Married and Not In Labor Force


        Figure 1B: Black Women’s Labor Force Participation, 1870-2010

100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
        1870

                1880

                       1890

                              1900

                                     1910

                                            1920

                                                   1930

                                                          1940

                                                                  1950

                                                                         1960

                                                                                1970

                                                                                       1980

                                                                                              1990

                                                                                                     2000

                                                                                                            2010




               Married and In Labor Force                        Not Married and In Labor Force
               Not Married and Not In Labor Force                Married and Not In Labor Force




                                                                                                                   31
              Figure 1C: Levels and Gaps in Overall LFP among Women, 1870 to 2010

             100
              90
              80
              70
              60
              50
              40                                                     gap=14
              30                            gap=27

              20
              10
                0
                    1870

                           1880

                                  1890

                                         1900

                                                1910

                                                       1920

                                                              1930

                                                                       1940

                                                                              1950

                                                                                     1960

                                                                                            1970

                                                                                                   1980

                                                                                                          1990

                                                                                                                 2000

                                                                                                                        2010
                                                       White LFP                 Black LFP


Notes: The sample includes women ages 25 to 54. From 1870 to 1930, “participation” is determined by
whether the person reported a “gainful occupation”. See the text for discussion of this issue. The 1910
census counted gainful occupations (especially for black women in agriculture) in a manner that appears
to be inconsistent with earlier or later practice and is therefore omitted here. We define “married” as
“married and spouse present.” In 1870, the IPUMS does not include a marital status variable, and so
“married” is determined by whether the relation to household head is “spouse.”




                                                                                                                               32
Figure 2A: White Women’s LFP and Occupational Distribution, 1870-2010

100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
      1870

               1880

                      1890

                             1900

                                    1910

                                           1920

                                                  1930

                                                         1940

                                                                1950

                                                                       1960

                                                                              1970

                                                                                     1980

                                                                                            1990

                                                                                                   2000

                                                                                                          2010
             Professional/Clerical/Manager/Sales                Agricultural
             Craft/Operative/Laborer                            Household and Non-HH Service
             Not In Labor Force



Figure 2B: Black Women’s LFP and Occupational Distribution, 1870-2010

100
 90
 80
 70
 60
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0
      1870

               1880

                      1890

                             1900

                                    1910

                                           1920

                                                  1930

                                                         1940

                                                                1950

                                                                       1960

                                                                              1970

                                                                                     1980

                                                                                            1990

                                                                                                   2000

                                                                                                          2010




         Professional/Clerical/Manager/Sales                    Agricultural
         Craft/Operative/Laborer                                Household and Non-HH Service
         Not In Labor Force




                                                                                                                 33
   Figure 3A: Regression-Adjusted Black-White Gap in Labor Force Participation, All Women

             0.35

             0.30

             0.25

             0.20

             0.15

             0.10

             0.05

             0.00

            -0.05
                    1880

                           1890

                                  1900

                                            1910

                                                   1920

                                                          1930

                                                                 1940

                                                                        1950

                                                                               1960

                                                                                      1970

                                                                                               1980

                                                                                                      1990

                                                                                                               2000

                                                                                                                      2010
                                         Unadjusted gap            Adj. gap (lit)            Adj. gap (educ)




           Figure 3B: Regression Adjusted Black-White Gap in “Dirty Jobs,” All Women

             0.35

             0.30

             0.25

             0.20

             0.15

             0.10

             0.05

             0.00

            -0.05
                    1880

                           1890

                                  1900

                                           1910

                                                   1920

                                                          1930

                                                                 1940

                                                                        1950

                                                                               1960

                                                                                      1970

                                                                                               1980

                                                                                                      1990

                                                                                                             2000

                                                                                                                      2010




                                         Unadjusted gap            Adj. gap (lit)            Adj. gap (educ)

Notes: “Dirty jobs” are defined as craft, operative, laborer, household service, and non-household-service
(e.g., janitors, cleaners, hospital attendants, cooks, waitresses), as opposed to “clean jobs” in the
categories of professional, clerical, managerial, and sales, and the not-in-labor force category.




                                                                                                                             34
   Figure 4: Relationship Between Work Behavior of Mothers and Daughters, Coefficients from
                             Regressions using NLS data, 1977-1993




Notes: Coefficients on ‘mother works’ and the interaction of ‘mother works’ and a dummy variable for
‘black.’ Estimates of regression reported in Table 5, Model 4 for each survey wave between 1977 and
1993. Modal daughter is 28 years old in 1977 and 44 years old in 1993.




                                                                                                       35
                      Table 1: Race and Labor Force Participation in 1870

Dependent variable =1 if in labor force
                                                  1                   2                    3
Panel A: All women, 25-54
All U.S.                                        0.284               0.284               0.243
                                              (0.0288)            (0.0230)             (0.0333)
All South                                       0.320               0.303               0.269
                                              (0.0277)             (0.272)             (0.0196)
Non-farm South                                  0.329               0.307               0.289
                                              (0.0344)            (0.0317)             (0.0269)

Panel B: Married women, 25-54
All U.S.                                        0.233               0.212               0.171
                                              (0.0357)            (0.0316)             (0.0245)
All South                                       0.253               0.234               0.167
                                              (0.0364)            (0.0349)             (0.0234)
Non-farm South                                  0.283               0.245               0.193
                                              (0.0411)            (0.0372)             (0.0270)

Controls for age and birthplace                  no                  yes                  yes
Additional controls                              no                  no                   yes

Notes and sources: Data are from the IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2010) sample for 1870. The IPUMS
coding of labor force participation is taken at face value. Standard errors are clustered by state of
birth. The base sample includes all white and black women age 25 to 54. Column 1’s
specification includes only the race dummy, giving the unadjusted difference in participation
rates. Column 2 adds fixed effects for state of birth and age. Column 3 adds controls for several
other observables, including literacy, the number of own children under 5, the number of own
children over 5 (in household), marital status, city-resident status (based on IPUMS “metro”
variable), farm-resident status, household wealth (four categories), and (if married with spouse
present) husband’s occupation. Wealth is the combination of real and personal property value.




                                                                                                  36
                        Table 2: Linear Probability Models of LFP, 1880-2000

Dependent variable=1 if in labor force
                        1880        1900         1920       1940a        1940b        1960        1980        2000

Black                   0.267       0.223       0.230        0.112       0.120       0.076        0.054       0.001
                       (0.019)     (0.011)     (0.009)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.009)     (0.011)
Husband
Categories
  Absent spouse        -0.091      -0.133       -0.176      -0.179      -0.165       -0.236      -0.101      -0.097
  Separated              ---         ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.013      0.016       0.017
  Divorced             -0.012       0.033       0.016       0.007       0.019        0.080       0.109       0.047
  Widowed              -0.087      -0.055       -0.110      -0.129      -0.115       -0.031      -0.017      -0.064
  Professional         -0.359      -0.501       -0.574      -0.497      -0.501       -0.311      -0.097      -0.051
  Farmer               -0.261      -0.440       -0.482      -0.452      -0.439       -0.319      -0.159      -0.015
  Craftsmen            -0.362      -0.500       -0.572      -0.507      -0.490       -0.288      -0.087      -0.020
  Operatives           -0.363      -0.494       -0.550      -0.468      -0.448       -0.233      -0.056      -0.015
  Service (hh)         0.015       -0.206       -0.292      -0.206      -0.189       -0.126      0.092
  Service (non-hh)     -0.386      -0.510       -0.535      -0.455      -0.438       -0.197      -0.015      0.015
  Farm Laborer         -0.297      -0.461       -0.501      -0.446      -0.426       -0.224      -0.084      -0.010
  Laborer              -0.365      -0.496       -0.538      -0.490      -0.468       -0.230      -0.048      -0.010
  Doesn’t work         -0.336      -0.453       -0.497      -0.403      -0.389       -0.253      -0.136      -0.146
Literate               -0.016      -0.009       0.001       0.049         ---          ---         ---         ---
Years of school
  N/A or none            ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.131      -0.347      -0.366      -0.299
  1-4 years              ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.070      -0.182      -0.216      -0.206
  5-8 years              ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.049      -0.095      -0.175      -0.257
  9 years                ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.036      -0.051      -0.148      -0.214
  10 years               ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.026      -0.035      -0.113      -0.173
  11 years               ---          ---         ---         ---        -0.026      -0.016      -0.081      -0.160
  12 years
  (omitted)              ---          ---         ---         ---
  1 year college         ---          ---         ---         ---        0.012        0.012       0.041       0.063
  2-3 years college      ---          ---         ---         ---        0.040        0.028       0.050      0.103
  4 years college        ---          ---         ---         ---       0.068        0.074       0.077       0.110
  5+ years college       ---          ---         ---         ---       0.123        0.179        0.161      0.170
1 child under 5        -0.022       -0.026      -0.061      -0.138      -0.139       -0.221      -0.223      -0.129
2 child under 5        -0.032       -0.040      -0.075      -0.162      -0.162       -0.303      -0.383      -0.253
3+ child under 5       -0.036       -0.042      -0.087      -0.173      -0.171       -0.341      -0.462      -0.333
1 child over 4         -0.021       -0.016      -0.034      -0.076      -0.071       -0.057      -0.038      0.011
2 children over 4      -0.021       -0.013      -0.041      -0.106      -0.099       -0.105      -0.075      -0.012
3+ children over 4     -0.029       -0.011      -0.034      -0.111      -0.101       -0.124      -0.105      -0.056

N                         81662      131920       198743    277727        277727      342983      423501      537356
Notes and sources: Data are from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2010), and we take the IPUMS coding of labor force
participation at face value. The sample includes all women, age 25 to 54. All regressions include fixed effects for
state of birth and age, city-resident status (based on IPUMS “metro” variable), and farm-resident status. The omitted
“husband category” consists of single, never married women. Occupation categories are based on the IPUMS
“occ1950” codes. The omitted educational attainment category (highest grade completed) is 12 years. Standard
errors clustered by state of birth are reported under the coefficient for “black”; others are omitted to save space but
the full results are available on request.




                                                                                                                     37
                     Table 3: Mother’s slave status and daughter’s LFP, 1900

Dependent variable = 1 if in the labor force
Gender                          Women           Women             Women                Men
Birth cohort                   Born after      Born after        Born before        Born after
Region                         Full South      Deep South        Deep South         Deep South
Mother south * black             0.045           0.092              0.004             0.004
                                (0.014)         (0.012)            (0.013)           (0.008)

Mother born in south            -0.092           -0.105             -0.002            -0.004
                                (0.003)          (0.004)            (0.003)           (0.002)

Born south * black               0.186            0.113              0.046             0.045
                                (0.013)          (0.011)            (0.013)           (0.007)

Born in south                   -0.054           -0.044              0.029             0.011
                                (0.003)          (0.004)            (0.003)           (0.002)

Black                            0.094            0.134              0.234            -0.017
                                (0.010)          (0.006)            (0.007)           (0.004)


N                               440,177          440,177           220,497            445,387
Ages in 1900                     16-34            16-34             45-64              16-34
Notes: Estimates from 1900 IPUMS 5 percent sample. Columns (1) and (2) include daughters
born after Emancipation (birth cohorts of 1866 to 1884). Column (3) contains daughters born
before Emancipation (birth cohorts of 1836 to 1855). Column (4) contains sons born after
Emancipation. In column (1), the ‘South’ includes all states in the three southern Census regions.
In columns (2)-(4), the ‘South’ excludes the border states of DC, DE, MD, MO, OK and WV.
All regressions include a quadratic in sons or daughter’s age and an indicator for literacy.




                                                                                                 38
                 Table 4: Summary statistics for NLS sample

  Variable                                      Whites             Blacks


  Age in 1977                                    27.71              27.63
                                                 (3.13)             (3.11)
                                                  2731               834

  LFP in 1977                                     0.55               0.61
                                                 (0.50)             (0.49)

  LFP in 1991                                     0.72               0.74
                                                 (0.45)             (0.44)
                                                  2236               592

  Mother worked at age 14                         0.36               0.50
                                                 (0.48)             (0.50)

  Years of education (1982)                      13.37              12.36
                                                 (2.42)             (2.48)
                                                  2421               718

  Any children in 1977                            0.66               0.73
                                                 (0.47)             (0.44)

  Any children in 1991                            0.73               0.74
                                                 (0.44)             (0.44)

  Currently married in 1977                       0.76               0.50
                                                 (0.43)             (0.50)

  Currently married in 1991                       0.74               0.40
                                                 (0.44)             (0.49)

  Library card at age 14                          0.79               0.50
                                                 (0.41)             (0.50)

  Mother's years of education                   11.23                9.25
                                                (2.74)              (3.03)
                                                 2530                701
Notes: Cells report sample means with standard deviations in parentheses. The
number of observations used to calculate means for selected variables are reported
in italics to demonstrate attrition over time.




                                                                                     39
   Table 5: Mother’s work and daughter’s LFP in 1977 (At average age = 28)

 Dependent variable = 1 if in labor force
                                   Model 1   Model 2    Model 3     Model 4
Mother worked (R aged 14)          0.034*    0.036*      0.033*     0.054***
                                   (0.018)   (0.020)     (0.020)   (0.018)

Mother worked x black               0.031     0.007       0.006      0.014
                                   (0.056)   (0.064)     (0.063)    (0.058)

Black                               0.041    0.087*      0.078*      0.034
                                   (0.039)   (0.046)     (0.046)    (0.042)

Library card at 14                            0.041*      0.009     -0.009
                                             (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.022)

Mother’s education 9-12                      -0.003      -0.031     -0.028
                                             (0.026)     (0.026)    (0.024)

Mother’s education >12                        0.005      -0.056     -0.063*
                                             (0.036)     (0.036)    (0.033)

Father’s education 9-12                       0.037       0.017      0.000
                                             (0.024)     (0.024)    (0.022)

Father’s education > 12                       0.078**     0.034     -0.003
                                             (0.033)     (0.033)    (0.031)

Lives w/ both parents (age 14)                0.011      -0.016     -0.010
                                             (0.040)     (0.039)    (0.036)

Own education = 12                                      0.124***    0.112***
                                                        (0.031)      (0.029)

Own education >13                                       0.258***    0.165***
                                                        (0.033)     (0.031)

Any children                                                       -0.360***
                                                                    (0.021)

Previously married                                                  0.251***
                                                                     (0.027)

Never married                                                       0.133***
                                                                     (0.027)



                                                                               40
 Constant                             0.487***     0.319***      0.237***    0.594***
                                      (0.030)       (0.059)       (0.060)     (0.044)
 Dummies for father’s occup.              N            Y             Y           Y
 Observations                           3565         2994          2994        2990
 * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Notes: Cells report coefficients from a regression of daughter’s labor force participation in
1977 on mother’s work and other covariates for the NLS sample. Standard errors are reported
in parentheses. In addition to the reported covariates, all regressions include dummy
variables for daughter’s age in 1977 (average = 28 years old). Mother’s work activity and
other family background characteristics are reported by the daughter in 1968 and refer to the
year in which the daughter was 14 years old. The daughter characteristics added in Models 3
and 4 are measured in 1977.




                                                                                          41
                       Table 6: Mother’s work and other daughter outcomes

                                                        Dependent variables
                         Expectation       Highest      College      Ever       Age at first   Age at first
                          housewife         grade        degree     married      marriage        birth

Mother worked               -0.049**        0.017         -0.006      0.017*    -0.637***        -0.491**
                            (0.019)        (0.091)       (0.017)     (0.010)      (0.187)        (0.243)

Mom work x black             0.015          0.005         0.042       0.009        -0.290         0.028
                            (0.064)        (0.300)       (0.056)     (0.031)      (0.647)        (0.770)

Black                      -0.237***        0.145         0.007     -0.096***    1.695***         -0.520
                            (0.046)        (0.218)       (0.041)      (0.023)    (0.476)         (0.561)

Library card at 14           0.005         0.891***    0.064***       -0.011     0.585***        0.825***
                            (0.023)        (0.110)      (0.021)      (0.011)     (0.223)         (0.287)

Mother’s educ 9-12          0.052**        0.602***     0.050**      0.021*        -0.227        0.925***
                            (0.026)        (0.120)      (0.023)      (0.012)      (0.246)        (0.315)

Mother’s educ > 12           0.035        1.641***     0.240***       0.024       0.583*        2.679***
                            (0.035)        (0.165)      (0.031)      (0.017)      (0.342)        (0.440)

Father’s educ 9-12          -0.006         0.432***     0.053**      -0.029**    1.140***        0.521*
                            (0.023)        (0.110)      (0.021)       (0.011)     (0.225)        (0.288)

Father’s educ > 12          -0.001         1.122***    0.184***     -0.043***    1.659***       1.585***
                            (0.032)        (0.153)      (0.029)      (0.016)      (0.315)        (0.407)

Lived with 2 parents        -0.028         0.770***    0.101***       -0.004       0.072        1.049**
                            (0.039)        (0.182)      (0.034)      (0.019)      (0.373)       (0.477)

Constant                   0.588***       11.348***       0.088*    0.972***    20.102***      20.369***
                            (0.057)         (0.274)      (0.052)     (0.029)      (0.561)       (0.705)
Observations                 2735            2636          2636       2913         2720          2608
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Notes: Regression follow the format of Model 2 in Table 5, with the exception of the dependent
variables. ‘Expectation housewife’ is measured from a survey question of what the daughters
expect to be doing at age 35. The question is asked in 1968, when the daughters were, on
average, 19 years old. ‘Highest grade’ and ‘ever married’ are measured in 1982 when the
daughters were, on average, 33 years old. ‘College degree’ is constructed from ‘highest grade’
and is equal to one for women who completed 16 years or more of schooling.




                                                                                                        42
                                Appendix Table A1: Women’s Labor Force Participation, by Race, 1870-2010

                               1870       1880      1900     1920     1930      1940     1950     1960      1970     1980      1990     2000     2010
 Panel A: White women, age 25-54
 In LF and married             0.60       1.27      1.58     4.15     6.42      10.09    17.99    27.62     34.48    43.04     49.53    48.29    44.71
 In LF and not married         7.93       8.05      13.02    14.72    14.66     16.15    13.88    12.31     13.60    19.22     25.22    26.90    32.32
 Not in LF and not married     20.52      17.08     13.77    9.76     8.88      8.70     6.53     4.90      5.25     4.96      4.93     6.14     7.86
 Not in LF and married         70.96      73.61     71.63    71.36    70.03     65.06    61.60    55.17     46.66    32.78     20.32    18.68    15.11
 Overall LFP                   8.52       9.31      14.60    18.88    21.08     26.24    31.87    39.93     48.08    62.26     74.75    75.18    77.03

 Percent of married in LF        0.83     1.69      2.16     5.50     8.40      13.43    22.60    33.36     42.50    56.77     70.91    72.11    74.74
 Percent of not-married in LF    27.87    32.02     48.60    60.14    62.26     64.99    68.01    71.55     72.13    79.49     83.64    81.41    80.44
 Share of married in pop.        71.55    74.88     73.21    75.52    76.46     75.16    79.59    82.79     81.15    75.83     69.84    66.96    59.82

 Panel B: Black women, age 25-54
 In LF and married             13.81      17.59     13.68    20.61    19.84     17.72    21.90    28.39     31.97    32.51     29.56    26.89    23.89
 In LF and not married         23.10      21.66     27.12    24.89    26.56     27.15    23.98    25.01     27.14    36.09     45.35    46.19    55.68
 Not in LF and not married     16.60      11.01     7.78     6.97     8.71      12.38    14.80    13.35     16.22    17.33     17.14    18.23    15.19
 Not in LF and married         46.49      49.74     51.42    47.53    44.89     42.75    39.31    33.26     24.67    14.07     7.95     8.69     5.24
 Overall LFP                   36.91      39.25     40.80    45.50    46.40     44.87    45.88    53.40     59.11    68.60     74.91    73.08    79.56

 Percent of married in LF        22.90    26.12     21.02    30.25    30.65     29.30    35.78    46.05     56.44    69.80     78.80    75.57    82.00
 Percent of not-married in LF    58.20    66.30     77.70    78.13    75.30     68.68    61.83    65.21     62.59    67.56     72.57    71.70    78.56
 Share of married in pop.        60.30    67.33     65.10    68.14    64.74     60.47    61.21    61.64     56.64    46.58     37.51    35.58    29.13

 Panel C: U.S.-born white women, age 25-54
 In LF and married             0.47      1.01       1.47     3.85     6.37      9.94     18.02    27.61     34.65    43.43     50.04    49.17    45.63
 In LF and not married         6.40      6.96       12.86    15.26    15.24     16.66    13.86    12.16     13.55    19.32     25.36    27.32    32.80
 Not in LF and not married     23.22     18.88      14.70    10.38    9.20      8.62     6.29     4.83      5.13     4.67      4.78     5.83     7.67
 Not in LF and married         69.91     73.15      70.97    70.51    69.19     64.77    61.84    55.39     46.67    32.58     19.82    17.68    13.90
 Overall LFP                   6.87      7.97       14.33    19.11    21.61     26.60    31.87    39.77     48.20    62.75     75.40    76.49    78.43

 Percent of married in LF          0.67        1.36      2.03      5.18      8.43      13.31    22.56     33.26    42.61 57.13 71.63   73.56     76.66
 Percent of not-married in LF      21.60       26.93     46.65     59.51     62.35     65.89    68.78     71.57    72.53 80.54 84.15   82.41     81.05
 Share of married in pop.          70.38       74.17     72.44     74.36     75.56     74.71    79.85     83.00    81.32 76.01 69.86   66.85     59.53
Notes and sources: Microdata are from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2010). “Overall LFP” is the sum of “In LF and married” and “In LF and not married” categories.
Participation rate conditional on marital status are reported in row labeled “Percent of married in LF” and so on.

                                                                                                                                                        43
                Appendix Table A2: Alternative Series of Women’s Labor Force Participation, by Race, 1870-1920

                                      1870            1880             1900             1910             1920             1930             1940
      Based on 1920 cell-specific rates
      White Women                    11.47           12.14            15.75            17.80            18.88            20.77            25.51
         Married                      2.79            3.11             3.24             4.78             5.50             8.09            12.48
         Single                      37.16           39.04            49.94            55.52            60.14            61.93            64.94
      Black Women                    40.39           41.86            43.95            49.52            45.50            47.65            47.66
         Married                     28.05           29.06            25.92            33.80            30.25            32.16            31.80
         Single                      62.81           68.23            77.60            81.54            78.13            76.08            71.93

      Based on 1940 cell-specific rates
      White Women                    13.07           13.72            17.09            19.07            19.94            21.69            26.24
         Married                      4.91            5.24             5.08             6.49             6.88             9.27            13.43
         Single                      37.21           39.00            49.90            55.55            60.21            62.02            64.99
      Black Women                    38.37           38.71            39.73            45.60            41.39            44.45            44.87
         Married                     26.72           26.20            22.06            30.09            26.51            29.37            29.30
         Single                      59.53           64.50            72.68            77.19            73.20            72.13            68.68

       Based on 1960 cell-specific rates
       White Women                    22.48          23.13            25.04            26.00             26.08            26.71           30.69
           Married                    15.58          15.98            14.23            14.47             13.93            14.94           18.52
           Single                     42.89          44.45            54.59            59.45             63.54            64.96           67.51
       Black Women                    40.25          42.06            43.18            49.22             45.02            47.42           47.29
           Married                    30.69          32.26            29.09            36.88             33.34            35.21           34.45
           Single                     57.62          62.26            69.46            74.35             70.00            69.82           66.93
Notes and sources: Microdata are from IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2010). To create an alternative LFP series back to 1870, we first estimate within-cell
participation rates for all women (25-54) in 1920, 1940, and 1960 categorized by interactions of race, farm, south, married, and has-boarders status. “Has
boarders” is 1 for women who are household heads or spouses of household heads who reside with at least one person whose relation is coded “other non-
family” in the IPUMS. Then, for women who lived on farms or had boarders in each census year, we replaced their IPUMS reported LFP with the cell-
specific rate observed in 1920, 1940, or 1960.




                                                                                                                                                       44
                           Appendix Table A3: Women’s LFP and Occupational Distribution, by Race, 1870-2010

                                        1870     1880      1900     1920     1930      1940     1950     1960      1970     1980      1990     2000     2010
 Panel A: White women, 25-54
 Professional/Clerical/Manager/Sales    1.12     1.66      3.87     8.60     11.46     14.00    18.37    23.59     31.12    43.74     56.04    58.77    59.46
 Agricultural                           0.53     0.76      1.32     1.05     0.79      0.49     0.84     0.56      0.35     0.51      0.44     0.35     0.39
 Craft/Operative/Laborer                2.67     3.49      4.71     5.07     4.36      6.41     8.05     8.62      9.38     9.20      8.00     6.35     5.00
 Household and Non-HH Service           4.21     3.40      4.70     4.16     4.48      5.11     4.51     5.95      7.14     8.69      10.19    9.65     12.05
 Not In Labor Force                     91.48    90.69     85.40    81.12    78.92     74.00    68.23    61.28     52.01    37.87     25.34    24.88    23.10

 Panel B: Black women, 25-54
 Professional/Clerical/Manager/Sales    0.09     0.22      0.74     1.64     2.43      3.40     5.97     9.48      20.17    34.84     43.95    47.04    51.51
 Agricultural                           17.98    15.96     14.70    14.13    9.40      5.63     3.22     1.80      0.79     0.29      0.24     0.09     0.08
 Craft/Operative/Laborer                2.21     6.77      4.09     4.47     4.68      4.86     8.27     9.01      12.83    14.41     12.64    9.28     6.90
 Household and Non-HH Service           16.64    16.30     21.27    25.25    29.89     30.76    28.27    30.99     25.15    18.73     17.73    16.43    20.81
 Not In Labor Force                     63.09    60.75     59.20    54.50    53.60     55.34    54.26    48.71     41.06    31.73     25.45    27.15    20.70

 Panel C: U.S.-born white women,
 25-54
 Not In Labor Force                     93.13    92.03     85.67    80.89    78.39     73.64    68.22    61.45     51.89    37.37     24.67    23.55    21.66
 Professional/Clerical/Manager/Sales    1.10     1.69      4.38     9.84     12.85     14.97    18.89    23.93     31.65    44.91     57.18    60.61    62.58
 Agricultural                           0.67     0.92      1.52     1.18     0.88      0.51     0.88     0.57      0.35     0.49      0.41     0.32     0.27
 Craft/Operative/(nonfarm) Laborer      2.50     3.27      4.77     4.61     4.01      6.08     7.70     8.24      9.01     8.64      7.74     6.15     4.55
 Household and non-HH Service           2.59     2.09      3.67     3.47     3.87      4.80     4.30     5.81      7.09     8.60      9.99     9.37     10.93

Notes and sources: Data are from the IPUMS (Ruggles et al. 2010). A small number of women who are counted as “in labor force” but without an occupation are
omitted from this sample. Therefore, the “not in labor force” row does not necessarily match results in Appendix Table A1. Occupation codes are based on the
IPUMS “occ1950” coding scheme.




                                                                                                                                                         45
                           Appendix Table A4: Women’s Detailed Occupational Distribution, 1870-2010
                                    1870    1880    1900    1920    1930    1940    1950    1960    1970    1980    1990    2000    2010
      Panel A: White women, 25-54
0     Not in Labor Force            91.48   90.69   85.40   81.12   78.92   74.00   68.23   61.28   52.01   37.87   25.34   24.88   23.10
1     Professional                  0.73    1.06    2.01    3.03    3.83    4.12    4.57    5.62    8.71    13.79   20.04   23.77   25.36
1.5      Teacher                    0.57    0.80    1.32    1.77    2.24    2.26    2.03    2.44    3.34    4.78    5.62    5.54    5.81
1.6      Other professions          0.16    0.27    0.68    1.26    1.59    1.86    2.54    3.18    5.37    9.02    14.42   18.23   19.55
2     Clerical                      0.03    0.05    0.73    3.37    4.80    6.45    9.15    12.73   16.73   21.21   22.19   20.01   18.92
3     Craft                         0.32    0.30    0.39    0.44    0.37    0.45    0.65    0.61    0.98    1.49    1.70    1.47    1.13
4     Operative                     2.31    3.04    4.11    4.25    3.65    5.71    7.19    7.81    7.97    6.99    5.36    4.20    3.17
4.5      Manufacturing              0.87    1.19    1.54    2.71    2.55    4.53    5.90    6.68    6.61    5.51    3.66    2.62    1.64
4.6      Laundry                    0.01    0.05    0.09    0.20    0.31    0.35    0.44    0.36    0.23    0.12    0.12    0.09    0.07
4.7      Other Operatives           1.43    1.80    2.48    1.34    0.79    0.83    0.84    0.77    1.13    1.36    1.59    1.50    1.45
5     Laborer                       0.04    0.15    0.21    0.37    0.33    0.25    0.22    0.20    0.42    0.72    0.94    0.67    0.70
6     Service Household             3.80    2.76    3.20    2.31    2.15    2.20    0.91    0.93    0.61    0.40    0.41    ---     ---
7     Service Non-Household         0.41    0.65    1.50    1.85    2.32    2.91    3.60    5.02    6.52    8.29    9.78    9.65    12.05
8     Manager                       0.25    0.39    0.53    0.73    0.96    1.29    1.65    1.73    1.87    4.68    9.01    10.29   10.48
9     Sales                         0.10    0.16    0.60    1.46    1.87    2.14    3.01    3.51    3.80    4.05    4.80    4.71    4.69
10    Farmers and farm laborers     0.53    0.76    1.32    1.05    0.79    0.49    0.84    0.56    0.35    0.51    0.44    0.35    0.39
      Panel B: Black women, 25-54
0     Not in Labor Force            63.09   60.75   59.20   54.50   53.60   55.34   54.26   48.71   41.06   31.73   25.45   27.15   20.70
1     Professional                  0.02    0.12    0.43    0.95    1.53    2.12    2.77    4.13    7.92    12.23   14.76   17.11   19.46
1.5      Teacher                    0.02    0.10    0.37    0.76    1.15    1.69    1.72    2.36    3.52    4.72    4.44    3.81    4.09
1.6      Other professions          0.00    0.01    0.06    0.20    0.38    0.44    1.04    1.77    4.39    7.52    10.32   13.30   15.37
2     Clerical                      0.00    0.01    0.05    0.25    0.31    0.50    1.90    3.97    9.96    18.40   21.54   20.15   19.99
3     Craft                         0.00    0.06    0.05    0.07    0.14    0.21    0.32    0.42    0.93    1.65    2.09    1.69    1.25
4     Operative                     0.54    0.85    1.65    3.02    3.54    4.02    7.10    8.00    11.07   11.43   9.27    6.66    4.81
4.5      Manufacturing              0.12    0.15    0.15    1.04    1.13    1.85    3.71    4.58    7.97    9.16    6.73    4.37    2.47
4.6      Laundry                    0.00    0.06    0.43    0.62    1.45    1.21    2.35    2.26    1.53    0.51    0.38    0.25    0.15
4.7      Other Operatives           0.42    0.63    1.06    1.36    0.96    0.95    1.04    1.16    1.57    1.77    2.17    2.04    2.18
5     Laborer                       1.67    5.87    2.38    1.38    1.00    0.64    0.84    0.59    0.84    1.33    1.27    0.93    0.85
6     Service Household             14.30   12.91   15.01   21.02   24.85   26.07   19.24   18.82   9.70    2.40    1.00    ---     ---
7     Service Non-Household         2.34    3.39    6.26    4.23    5.04    4.69    9.04    12.17   15.45   16.34   16.73   16.43   20.81
8     Manager                       0.03    0.07    0.15    0.32    0.41    0.43    0.71    0.60    0.72    2.39    5.03    6.48    8.18
9     Sales                         0.04    0.03    0.11    0.13    0.18    0.35    0.60    0.78    1.58    1.81    2.62    3.31    3.87
10    Farmers and farm laborers     17.98   15.96   14.70   14.13   9.40    5.63    3.22    1.80    0.79    0.29    0.24    0.09    0.08


                                                                                                                                      46
                                       Appendix Table A5: Decompositions of Differences in LFP, 1880-2000

                                              1880           1900           1920         1940A           1940B            1960           1980           2000
          White                             0.0931         0.1460         0.1888         0.2624          0.2606         0.3837         0.5932         0.7228
          Black                             0.3925         0.4080         0.4550         0.4487          0.4487         0.5325         0.6591         0.7005
          Difference                       -0.2994        -0.2620        -0.2663        -0.1863         -0.1881        -0.1488        -0.0659         0.0223

          Explained (due to differences in Xs)
           Literacy or education          -0.0109         -0.0044         0.0002         0.0119          0.0221         0.0307         0.0230         0.0282
           Children                        0.0018          0.0005        -0.0046        -0.0119         -0.0115        -0.0033         0.0062        -0.0015
           Husband                        -0.0229         -0.0385        -0.0422        -0.0547         -0.0591        -0.0712        -0.0345        -0.0111
           Age                            -0.0063         -0.0028        -0.0039        -0.0074         -0.0070        -0.0011        -0.0033        -0.0030
           Farm and metro                  0.0006          0.0090         0.0192         0.0092          0.0085        -0.0072         0.0026         0.0036
           Birth states                    0.0055         -0.0025        -0.0046        -0.0217         -0.0206        -0.0145        -0.0083         0.0101
          Total explained                 -0.0321         -0.0387        -0.0358        -0.0746         -0.0676        -0.0667        -0.0143         0.0263

          Total unexplained                -0.2673        -0.2233        -0.2304        -0.1117         -0.1204        -0.0821        -0.0516        -0.0040

Notes: In this context “explained” refers to the differences in LFP accounted for by racial differences in observables weighted by a vector of coefficients that
corresponds to the regressions in table 2. Negative values in the “explained” rows imply that racial differences in that set of characteristics contribute to the racial
gap (e.g., differences in husband’s presence and occupation tend to “explain” part of the LFP gap). The subcategories under “explained” each represented several
variables. For instance, “children” captures the influence racial differences summed across all the relevant “child” variables in Table 2. The decomposition
method follows Fortin (2008) and is implemented with Stata’s “Oaxaca” command with “pooled” and “categorical” options applied, as described by Jann (2008).
This approach dovetails with Table 2, but of course other decomposition methods could be chosen.




                                                                                                                                                                    47
