NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

URBANIZATION IN THE UNITED STATES, 1800-2000
Leah Platt Boustan
Devin Bunten
Owen Hearey
Working Paper 19041
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19041
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

Forthcoming in The Oxford Handbook of American Economic History, edited by ed. Louis Cain, Price
Fishback and Paul Rhode. We thank Robert Margo and Evan Roberts for useful conversations about
data collection and Walker Hanlon for comments on the draft . The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Leah Platt Boustan, Devin Bunten, and Owen Hearey. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Urbanization in the United States, 1800-2000
Leah Platt Boustan, Devin Bunten, and Owen Hearey
NBER Working Paper No. 19041
May 2013, Revised August 2014
JEL No. N91,N92,R0
ABSTRACT
This handbook chapter seeks to document the economic forces that led the US to become an urban
nation over its two hundred year history. We show that the urban wage premium in the US was remarkably
stable over the past two centuries, ranging between 15 and 40 percent, while the rent premium was
more variable. The urban wage premium rose through the mid-nineteenth century as new manufacturing
technologies enhanced urban productivity; then fell from 1880 to 1940 (especially through 1915) as
investments in public health infrastructure improved the urban quality of life; and finally rose sharply
after 1980, coinciding with the skill- (and apparently also urban-) biased technological change of the
computer revolution. The second half of the chapter focuses instead on the location of workers and
firms within metropolitan areas. Over the twentieth century, both households and employment have
relocated from the central city to the suburban ring. The two forces emphasized in the monocentric
city model, rising incomes and falling commuting costs, can explain much of this pattern, while urban
crime and racial diversity also played a role.
Leah Platt Boustan
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
UCLA
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
lboustan@econ.ucla.edu
Devin Bunten
University of California at Los Angeles
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
devinbunten@gmail.com

Owen Hearey
University of California at Los Angeles
Department of Economics
8283 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
owen.hearey@gmail.com

I. Introduction
Over its two hundred year history, the US has become an urban nation. Workers and
firms flowed to cities following urban-biased productivity shocks, including the new
manufacturing technologies of the first and second industrial revolution and, more recently, the
advent of computerization. In addition, workers were drawn to cities by improvements in the
quality of urban life, especially in public health.
Seminal work in urban economics by Rosen (1978) and Roback (1982) suggests that the
urban wage and rental premia can be used to disentangle these competing explanations for urban
growth. Novel wage and rent series for urban and rural areas back to 1820 (wages) and to 1918
(rents) show that the urban wage premium in the US was remarkably stable over the past two
centuries, ranging between 15 and 40 percent, while the rent premium was somewhat more
variable, reaching above 70 percent in 1940 and again more recently.
Despite this overall stability, fluctuations in urban wage and rental premia provide insight
into the economic forces underlying city growth. Urban premia rose from 1870 to 1940 as new
manufacturing technologies enhanced urban productivity and then again after 1980, coinciding
with the skill- (and apparently also urban-) biased technological change of the computer
revolution.
Changes in urban wages and rents reflect both the productivity of economic activity and
the quality of life in urban areas. Historical episodes provide useful variation to document the
presence of agglomeration economies in cities and to understand the mechanisms through which
density enhances productivity. An extensive literature documents that the urban public health
investments of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century led to dramatic reductions in urban

2

mortality; newer work has collected and analyzed data on public health improvements at the
neighborhood level.
As urbanization continued, the location of workers and firms within metropolitan areas
began to decentralize. Over the twentieth century, both households and employment relocated
from the central city to the suburban ring. The two forces emphasized in the monocentric city
model, rising incomes and falling commuting costs, can explain much of this pattern, while
urban crime and racial diversity also played a role.
The housing units and commercial buildings that make up a city are often more durable
then the city’s population itself. The last section discusses the problems associated with “vintage
capital” in cities – including the lingering housing stocks in declining cities as well as the
coordination failures that delay redevelopment in existing neighborhoods.

II. Urbanization rates, 1790-2010
Since the country’s founding, the US population has been moving from rural to urban
areas and from smaller towns to larger cities. Figure 1 displays population trends over the past
two centuries. The figure reports the share of the population that lives in an urban place, defined
as a town with 2,500 or more residents, as well as the share of the population that lives in a
metropolitan area. Metropolitan areas are geographic units defined by the Census Bureau to
include one or more contiguous counties anchored by a central city of a sufficient size. The
number of metropolitan areas increased over time from 66 in 1900 to 373 by 2010. As a result,
the metropolitan share shown in Figure 1 increased both because existing areas attracted a larger
share of the population and because the number of metropolitan areas expanded over time.

3

The US population experienced little growth in urbanization in the first decades of the
nineteenth century, with the urbanization rate remaining below 10 percent. From 1830 to 1930,
the pace of urbanization accelerated quickly, with the urban share of the population increasing
more than six-fold from 9 to 56 percent. After a decade of stasis in the 1930s, the urban share
again increased rapidly from 1940 and 1970 and then more slowly from 1970 to 2010, reaching
81 percent in 2010. The share of the population living in a metropolitan area tracks the urban
share closely.1
The trends in Figure 1 classify locations as “urban” (or “metropolitan”) if they reach a
certain population threshold. However, within the US, cities varied tremendously in their size
and population density over time and across regions. Figure 2 graphs county-level population
density for the median resident by region. Despite the rapid expansion of urbanization after 1830,
population density rose more slowly through the nineteenth century. In the Northeast, the growth
in population density accelerated after 1890, whereas density in other regions only began
increasing rapidly after 1940 (West) or 1970 (South). Regional gaps in population density are
driven both by variation in urbanization rates and by differences in density within urban areas.

III. Historical Background
The pattern of urban growth over time and across regions was shaped by historical shifts
in industrial composition and transportation technology. The towns and cities of the early- to

1

The South has long lagged behind other regions in urbanization rates, although this gap has narrowed over time. As
shown in Figure 1.1, in 1900 only 18 percent of southern residents lived in an urban area, compared to 66 percent of
the Northeast. By 2010, the South had caught up with the Midwest but both regions still lagged behind the West and
the Northeast. Wright (1986) attributes this gap to differences between free and slave agriculture. He argues that free
farmers held their wealth in land and therefore supported transport improvements, which indirectly supported city
growth. Southern plantation owners, in contrast, held their wealth in slaves, the value of which was not tied to a
particular place. In addition, farmers of staple grains sent their produce to town to be processed, while southern
planters processed cotton on plantation. Meyer (1988) provides some empirical evidence to support this hypothesis,
although further research on the history of this regional urbanization gap is needed.

4

mid-nineteenth century served as “central places” for their agricultural hinterlands. As the US
economy shifted from agriculture to manufacturing over the late 1800s, cities expanded their
functions from central places for the trade and shipment of agricultural products to the location
of industrial activity.2 The transition from waterways to rail as the primary modes of locomotion
also influenced the ascendancy of various cities at particular moments in time.
In the early period, towns emerged as hubs for surrounding farmers to process and sell
their crops and, once there, to purchase consumer goods and specialized services, such as legal
and financial assistance. Weiman (1988) provides a useful case study of this process in Atlanta.
The location of these central places was strongly influenced by geographic advantages, such as
the presence of waterways and the proximity to rich farmland, but it was also reinforced by
human investments in supportive infrastructure – a process that Cronon (1992) refers to as
“second nature.” New York City, for example, was built around a natural harbor that provided
access to domestic and international markets. In addition, the Hudson and East rivers offered
connections to agricultural land in upstate New York and Long Island. The fertile farmland in
these areas supported a large rural population that generated a customer base for the services
offered in the city. Beyond these natural advantages, New York City’s ascendancy was
strengthened by investment in the Erie Canal, which linked upstate New York to the Great Lakes
and thereby expanded the city’s set of easily accessible markets.
The natural advantages that shaped the historical locations of cities in the US changed
over time as innovation rendered existing transportation infrastructure obsolete. The stagnation
of St. Louis in the twentieth century offers one such example. St. Louis sits at the junction of the
2

Michaels, Rauch and Redding (2012) argue that the shift from agriculture to manufacturing can explain why
population growth is not correlated with initial population density at low density levels but becomes positively
correlated with initial density at intermediate density levels. At low density levels, they argue, population growth is
driven by agricultural shocks, which are mean reverting, whereas at higher density levels, population growth is due
to shifts into non-agricultural employment, which is stronger in areas with higher initial density.

5

Mississippi and Missouri rivers. Furthermore, the Mississippi river narrows at this point,
preventing the passage of large steamboats traveling from New Orleans and requiring traders to
offload their cargo onto smaller boats to complete their journey to northern markets. This
confluence of trade created an opportunity for commercial activity and, hence, St. Louis
emerged. Yet, as river transport was eclipsed by rail, which minimized the need for these transshipment points, St. Louis became overshadowed by Chicago as the largest city in the Midwest
(Cronon, 1992, p. 296).3
Even as natural advantages diminish, forces of path dependence can preserve a relatively
stable array of city locations as long as there are sufficiently strong “agglomeration economies,”
by which the productivity advantages of proximity to other firms either leads existing firms to
stay in place or encourages new firms to locate in the area. Even St. Louis, which has been
surpassed in regional prominence, remains a city of 320,000 residents anchoring a metropolitan
area of nearly 3 million in a location that was historically valuable, despite the fact that there
might be little independent reason to build a city in this location today. Bleakley and Lin (2012)
illustrate this point further by examining the contemporary fate of cities located at historical
portage sites.
With the growth of the railroad, transportation costs fell and manufacturing
establishments no longer needed to remain close to local customers. Instead, manufacturing firms
could concentrate production in regions that offered productive advantages, such as an
abundance of natural resources (Kim, 1995), or access to broader markets (Klein and Crafts,
2012). Furthermore, the switch first from water power to coal-fired steam power in the 1840s
and, eventually, to electricity freed up firms from locating close to power sources (Chandler,
1972; Rosenberg and Trajtenberg, 2004; Kim, 2005). By 1920, 69 percent of manufacturing
3

Belcher (1947) provides further detail on the rivalry between St. Louis and Chicago.

6

employment occurred in a metropolitan setting, compared to only 43 percent of general work
activity.4

IV. Theoretical framework
As the relative advantages of urban and rural locations change over time, where do
workers choose to settle and where do firms choose to operate? A Rosen-Roback model of firm
and worker location generates predictions about how the relative wages and rents in urban areas
change with the desirability of urban locations. We then use these predictions to interpret
historical time series of urban factor prices.
Consider a group of workers and firms, each free to move between a set of cities. Cities
are endowed with a fixed quantity of land (L) and distinguished by an amenity level (S). S can
include consumer amenities (e.g. cultural activities) that attract workers as well as productive
amenities (e.g. access to natural waterways) that attract firms. In each city i, workers receive a
wage (wi) and allocate their resources between a consumption good (Xi) and land for housing
(Lhi). Firms in location i produce consumption good Xi with a combination of labor, land for
production (Lpi) and – if relevant – the productive amenity Si. Wages and rents adjust until, in
equilibrium, each firm and worker is indifferent between locating in all possible cities.
Implicitly, the model assumes that the consumption good can be shipped without cost between
markets, a condition that limits the applicability of the model in the nineteenth century but may
be a reasonable approximation in the twentieth century.
Cities will grow either if workers are attracted to the area by a new consumer amenity or
if firms are attracted to the area by a new producer amenity. First, consider a new producer
amenity such as a new port for international shipping in city i. Firms move to city i to take
4

Authors’ calculations from the IPUMS sample (Ruggles, et al., 2008).

7

advantage of this local productivity boost. Firms in city i are now willing to pay higher wages
because each worker generates more output, thereby inducing workers from elsewhere to move
to city i. As firms and workers move to the area, competition over the fixed land resource drives
up rents, offsetting the increase in wages and equalizing worker utility across locations. Despite
the productivity advantage in city i, the need to pay higher rents and higher wages together
ensure zero profits for firms. Therefore, we can infer that cities whose growth is due to the
arrival of a new productive amenity will offer higher wages and charge higher rents.
Next, consider a new consumption amenity like the development of a new theater district.
This consumption amenity will attract workers to the area and thereby drive up rents. Firms
facing higher rents will lower their demand for land, thereby reducing workers’ marginal product
and their wage. The combination of higher rents and lower wages counterbalance the higher
consumer amenity level, equalizing worker utility across cities. Therefore, we can conclude that
cities whose growth is due to a new consumption amenity will offer lower wages and charge
higher rents. Note that, in both cases, the model predicts that urban growth is accompanied by
higher rents; what distinguishes between producer- or consumer-led growth is the correlation
between urban growth and wages.

V. Urban wage and rent premia in the United States, 1820 to 2010
The Rosen-Roback model can be combined with long-run series of urban wage and rental
premia to infer the underlying causes of urban growth in the US over time.
We use Census and American Community Survey data from the Integrated Public-Use
Microdata Series (IPUMS) to construct wage series for the period 1940 to 2010 and rental series
for the period 1930 to 2010. Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ (BLS) Cost of Living

8

Survey Series, the Iowa State Census and the Census of Manufacturing permit us to extend the
series back to 1820 for wages and 1918 for rents (Ruggles, et al., 2008).5,6 Wages are calculated
for working-age men who are currently employed (i.e. not unemployed and not out of the labor
force) and who report earning non-negative annual wage and salary income.7 The rent series is
calculated using contract rents.8 All dollar figures are inflation-adjusted to 2010 values using the
urban consumer price index from the BLS for 1913 onward and from David and Solar (1977)
before 1913. Before 1918, the series compares urban to rural workers using the 2,500 resident
threshold; after 1918, we compare metropolitan to non-metropolitan workers.9
Figure 3 shows the US urban wage premium for the period 1820 to 2010, along with the
underlying urban and rural wages; Figure 4 portrays the corresponding rent series for the period
1918 to 2010. Both the wage and rent premia are positive over the entire period – the wage
premium ranges between 13 and 42 percent over nearly two centuries, while the rent premium
ranges between 25 and 102 percent – suggesting a consistent productivity advantage for urban
areas despite the considerable decade-by-decade volatility in the series.
Taken together, the figures broadly illustrate four episodes of urban evolution in the US.
In the early nineteenth century (1820-1870), our series is characterized by fairly flat wages in the

5

The Weeks Report database, collected from the 1880 U.S. Census, also provides wage data for the mid-to-late
nineteenth century period. However, because it is a retrospective survey of a non-random sample of surviving
manufacturers and does not report the number of employees at each firm, it is inferior to the Census of
Manufacturing for our purposes. In particular, we found that reported wages in rural and urban areas were
substantially closer together in the Weeks Report data than in the Census of Manufacturing, likely because the rural
firms that kept retrospective payroll records were larger and less remote than the typical rural firm.
6
Other cost of living surveys in the BLS series could not be used to extend the rent series beyond 1918. The data
from the 1888-1890 survey do not provide sufficient geographic precision, only identifying respondents’ state of
residence, while the microdata for 1901 were destroyed.
7
In addition, we restrict our sample to men in the civilian labor force who are not living in group quarters or on a
farm and not currently attending school. Given the data at hand, the nineteenth century observations contain only
manufacturing workers while the twentieth century series is calculated using workers employed in all industries.
8
Calculations using total income or gross rent, when available, yielded similar findings.
9
Calculations using a consistent definition (such as an incorporated city of at least 2,500) or a consistent geography
(such as the metropolitan statistical areas as of 1900, those as of 2000, or those consistently identifiable in the
IPUMS data set) produced qualitatively similar results.

9

manufacturing sector within urban and rural areas and a steady urban wage premium of around
20 percent.10 From 1870 to 1940, we find steadily rising wages in both urban and rural areas and
a rising urban wage premium, which increased from 17 percent to 37 percent. Together with the
fact that workers continued to move to the cities during this period, the heightened wage
premium suggests that cities were becoming more productive centers of economic activity during
the second industrial revolution.11
The third episode, spanning from 1940 to 1980, is characterized by rapidly rising wages
and rents together with declines in the urban wage and rent premia. Over this period, wages more
than doubled in each sector while the urban wage premium fell substantially, from 37 percent to
22 percent. At the same time, urban and rural rents also increased while the urban rent premium
declined substantially, from 86 percent to 48 percent. According to the Roback model, a
simultaneous decline in both the urban wage and rental premia suggests that productive
amenities in cities were falling relative to those in non-metropolitan areas – perhaps due to the
construction of interstate highways and the rise of trucking, which minimized the need to be near
fixed transportation nodes in central cities (e.g. train depots or ports). For a fixed housing supply,
then, as assumed in the Roback framework, we would expect population to shift away from
urban areas. Yet throughout this period, the urbanization rate continued to rise. Taken together,

10

The urban wage premium appears to rise much more over this period if, instead of using wage data from the
Census of Manufacturing, we instead rely on wage data for three occupation categories (unskilled, blue collar and
white collar) from Lindert and Williamson (forthcoming). The premia based on this source are represented in Figure
3 by the open white circles and are explained in more detail in the figure’s notes.
11
Although systematic data on urban and rural rents are not available for this period, we do have information on
farm land values (Pressley and Schofield, 2001). We compare farm values in metropolitan and non-metropolitan
counties nationwide and in a subsample of counties that changed from non-metropolitan to metropolitan status (or
vice versa); we use the IPUMS definition to classify counties as “metropolitan.” In both cases, we observe a
declining urban land value premium from 1880 to 1920. One determinant of agricultural land values in areas near
cities is the opportunity cost of developing this land for other urban uses. Taken literally, the decline in both urban
wage and urban land value premia would suggest that the relative productivity of urban areas was declining over this
period, which we find unlikely. Instead, this pattern may simply reveal the heightened productivity of areas far from
urban centers for agricultural use over this period given the improvements in transportation that facilitated bringing
agricultural products to market.

10

these trends suggest that the growth in the urbanization rate in the mid-twentieth century was
likely driven by an increase in urban housing supply. The substantial amount of homebuilding in
the suburban ring in the decades after World War II reduced urban rents, thereby leading to an
increase in urban residence despite the loss of relative urban productivity.
The fourth episode, from 1980 to the present, is characterized by another sustained
increase in both urban wage and rental premia. The urban wage premium grew from 22 to 34
percent over this period. Likewise, the rent premium jumped from 48 to 66 percent. At the same
time, the urbanization rate grew modestly. In light of the Roback model’s predictions, these
trends imply that urban areas enjoyed a boost in productivity – coinciding with the diffusion of
the personal computer and later the Internet. It is often suggested that the skill-biased
technological change of this era contributed to rising income inequality by education level. What
is less well known is that computerization was also associated with rising inequality between
metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas. In other words, computers and cities appear to be
complements; computers may facilitate the types of learning or worker-firm matching that take
place in cities (Wheeler, 2001).
One caveat to the above analysis is the issue of worker quality. The Roback model
assumes that all workers supply one identical unit of labor. Yet if the highest quality workers are
attracted to city living, then the urban wage premium could simply be due to higher-quality
workers sorting into cities, rather than to underlying changes in urban productivity for workers of
a fixed quality. Furthermore, it is possible that changes in sorting patterns over time could
account for a rising (or falling) urban wage premium if the most talented rural dwellers leave for
the city, thereby lowering the average rural wage and, at the same time, either increasing or

11

decreasing the urban wage depending on how these in-migrants compare to the existing urban
population. For a modern approach to this selection problem, see Glaeser and Mare (2001).

VI. Agglomeration economies
Our historical wage and rental series suggest that the productivity of urban areas, relative
to their rural counterparts, has fluctuated over time. Urban productivity appeared to increase
sharply from 1980 to 2010. Perhaps as a result, academic interest in the concept of
“agglomeration economies,” or the potential productivity advantages of being in close proximity
to other firms, has expanded tremendously in recent years.12 This section emphasizes the
contributions of economic history to this growing field, both in documenting the presence (or
absence) of agglomeration economies in various historical settings and in using these historical
episodes to distinguish between possible mechanisms underlying the forces of agglomeration.
The use of historical data allows scholars to chronicle the strength of agglomeration
economies over long periods of time and to contrast the role of agglomeration economies under
different technological regimes. Davis and Weinstein (2002) examine regional population
growth in Japan over the past 8,000 years. In particular, they highlight the persistence of this
spatial distribution even in the face of the decimation of many cities during World War II. The
authors claim that the post-war rebound of Japanese cities is more consistent with a story of
locational fundamentals, in which cities arise in areas that are blessed with innate productive
advantages, than a story of agglomeration economies, in which initial density confers
productivity advantages. Yet, they also demonstrate that the most productive regions of Japan

12

Google scholar catalogs fewer than 2,000 papers that mention the words “economics” and “agglomeration” in the
year 1995-96. Ten years later, this number had increased to more than 11,000, expanding at a pace twice as fast as
the recorded number of hits for the word “economics” alone. We acknowledge that this measure may not be exact
because the relative reliance on terms used to describe agglomeration economies (such as “increasing returns” and
“external economies”) may have changed over time.

12

grew relatively more populous after industrialization, suggesting that agglomeration economies
may have played a larger role over time.
The emergence of agglomeration economies in Japan only after industrialization is
echoed in the findings of Bleakley and Lin (2012), who document the long-run growth of early
American cities established at portage sites. Portage sites emerged at river rapids when early
travelers needed to disembark and carry their boats, generating opportunities for trade. Even as
the initial raison d'être for these cities disappeared with the advent of canals, railroads, and
trucking, these portage cities maintained their size advantage well into the twentieth century.
While locational fundamentals provided the initial impetus for the location of portage cities, the
long-term growth differentials suggest that these cities were subject to forces of agglomeration.13
Although the benefits of agglomeration have been present throughout the industrial
period, our long-run wage and rent series suggest that these forces have strengthened in recent
decades. A burgeoning literature in urban and labor economics documents the presence of these
spillovers at the firm level; Moretti (2004b) and Rosenthal and Strange (2004) provide useful
reviews of this contemporary literature. Recent studies like Fu (2007), Greenstone, Moretti and
Hornbeck (2010), and Baum-Snow and Pavan (2012) continue to advance this research agenda.14
Beyond documenting the presence of agglomeration economies, it is also important to
understand the mechanisms by which proximity to other firms may generate productivity
advantages. A growing literature is utilizing the historical record to shed light on possible

13

Ahlfeldt, et al. (2012) argue that agglomeration economies are also likely at work within cities. In particular, they
show that employment centers near East Berlin experienced falling land prices as the Cold War partition cut them
off from workers and customers but rebounded soon after reunification.
14
In contrast, Buenstorf and Klepper (2009) present evidence from the U.S. tire industry suggesting that industrial
clustering occurs through “heredity” as successful parent firms generate spinoffs, rather than through forces of
agglomeration.

13

benefits of locating in a city, including access to larger product markets, larger input markets,
and larger numbers of similar firms from which to learn new production techniques.
In the early nineteenth century, the large customer base available in cities allowed urban
firms to economize on transportation costs. Sokoloff (1988) demonstrates the importance of
market size in the nineteenth century by focusing on geographic variation in innovation, an
economic activity with high fixed costs that often only becomes profitable if the resulting
product can be sold in high volume (e.g., Krugman 1991). Sokoloff finds that, in the first half of
the nineteenth century, patenting rates were higher in urban areas and along navigable rivers and
canals.
With the rapid decline in transport costs in the late nineteenth century, the importance of
access to a large local customer base receded. Instead, agglomeration economies may now arise
due to the advantages of large labor markets in urban areas. Contemporary white collar and
technical jobs require specialized knowledge or experience and, thus, educated workers are often
more productive at firms that are well-matched to their specific skills. The potential for finding
better matches in the labor market provides an edge to firms locating in large urban areas. Costa
and Kahn (2000) explore the role of thick labor markets in generating agglomeration economies
by focusing on the location choices of dual-career couples. They find that college-educated
couples are more likely to live in large metropolitan areas and that this sorting has increased in
recent decades alongside the growth in the urban wage premium.
Marshall (1890) theorized that the forces of agglomeration are strongest between firms in
related industries that can more easily share ideas, workers, and inputs and output linkages.
Offering a historical test of this hypothesis, Bostic, Gans, and Stern (1997) contrast possible

14

industrial externalities within large U.S. cities in the late nineteenth century; their findings point
to an important role for agglomeration externalities in urban growth.
Moving beyond the concept of city-wide agglomeration forces to that of specific interindustry linkages is a promising direction for future work.15 Hanlon (2012), for example, traces
the asymmetric effects of the cotton blockade during the American Civil War on the growth rates
of various industries in cotton- and wool-producing towns in England. He finds that industries
closely related to textiles, such as machine tools, experienced much slower employment growth
during and after the Civil War in cotton-producing towns, both relative to industries less
connected to textiles and relative to similar industries in wool-producing towns. That is, the
removal of certain links in the local industry mix seems to have particularly strong and longlasting impacts on firms in related industries.
Another promising direction for new research on agglomeration is the use of historical
conditions to generate cross-city variation in persistent factors that may contribute to
contemporary economic growth. Moretti (2004c), for instance, uses the historical allocation of
land grant universities as an instrument for the share of a city’s workforce with a college degree.
Glaeser, Kerr and Kerr (2012) and Bunten et al. (2013) leverage the historical location of mining
activity and other heavy industry to predict which areas will lack high levels of entrepreneurship
today.

15

Ellison, Glaeser and Kerr (2010) provide a general framework for measuring patterns of coagglomeration between
industry pairs in a single cross section. They find that sharing inputs, workers and ideas all contribute to
coagglomeration, in that order of importance. Hanlon and Miscio (2013) are extending this framework to historical
data (1850-2000), in part to determine whether the patterns of coagglomeration and the channels generating such
coagglomeration have changed over time.

15

VII. Amenities and disamenities in cities: The case of public health
In addition to taking advantage of the productivity advantages of density, workers may
choose to locate in cities to enjoy the amenities of proximity to other households and firms.
Recent work by urban economists tends to emphasize the positive aspects of density – namely,
that cities offer a wider array of shopping venues, cultural events, and bars and restaurants
(Glaeser, Kolko, Saiz, 2001; Sinai and Waldfogel, 2004). However, in the past, the negative
aspects of density likely outweighed the positive, most importantly the spread of communicable
and water-borne disease. Simply put, cities were deadly places until the spread of investments in
clean water and sewer systems.16 The role of public health in moderating urban mortality rates
has been studied extensively in economic history, historical sociology and epidemiology.
In 1900, death rates, particularly infant mortality, were substantially higher in urban areas
than in rural areas, in large part due to infectious disease (Condran and Crimmins, 1980; Haines,
2001).17 Part of the urban wage premium in the nineteenth century may have been a
compensating differential for the health costs borne by urban residents (Figure 4).18 The urban
mortality penalty and corresponding wage premium both declined in the early twentieth century
as cities began investing in clean water systems, sewage control and sanitation. Early work by
Gaspari and Woolf (1985) on these investment projects in 122 cities in 1910 finds that the extent
of sewer lines in an area has a negative association with mortality rates.
16

The case of urban public health illustrates that the sharp division between productive and consumption amenities
does not always hold. Improvements in public health may have attractive to both consumers and firms, if healthy
workers were more productive on the job (see, for example, Arora, 2001).
17
Cain and Hong (2009) show that survival rates were higher in smaller cities than in larger cities in a late
nineteenth century sample of men who served in the Union Army. Kesztenbaum and Rosenthal (2011) use French
military records to study the health consequences of moving to a city from a rural area. They find that rural
newcomers enjoy a survival advantage for the first few years of urban residence but, within a decade, converge to
the high mortality rates present in the city. Having been born in the city does not appear to confer a survival
advantage due, say, to immunities to transmitted diseases but neither did growing up in a rural area save migrants
from the deadly conditions of the city due to improved childhood nutrition.
18
Williamson (1982) demonstrates that locations in England with higher infant mortality rates in the mid- and latenineteenth century had higher wages, thereby compensating workers for this extra risk.

16

Cutler and Miller (2005) substantially improve on this analysis by following a subset of
14 cities from 1900 to 1930. The cities most likely to invest in clean water technology may have
been those most susceptible to severe disease outbreaks or, alternatively, may have been those
with the largest tax base and an otherwise healthy population. By following cities over time,
Cutler and Miller can control for fixed differences across cities and instead estimate how a city’s
health record changes after implementing a new public health project. They find that cities
experienced a 13 percent reduction in total mortality after the introduction of their first clean
water systems, primarily due to a decline in deaths from water-borne disease. By this estimate,
clean water alone can explain nearly half of the urban mortality decline in the early twentieth
century.19
Looking ahead, we believe that the recent explosion of data collection at the
neighborhood level within cities is a promising trend in the study of urban public health.
Kesztenbaum and Rosenthal (2012) compile information on mortality and sewer infrastructure,
along with income and rents, for the 80 quartiers of Paris. In the mid-nineteenth century, the
average life expectancy in Paris was five years lower than in the rest of the country; yet at the
same time there was a twelve (!) year gap in life expectancy between residents of the healthiest
and least healthy neighborhoods within Paris. In Paris, building owners had to pay a fee to
receive a hook-up to the sewer main and so early sewer infrastructure widened the health
disparity between wealthy and poor neighborhoods. In the US, in contrast, Troesken (2002)
argues that even African-Americans, often a city’s poorest residents, benefited from the
provision of water and sewerage systems, especially in cities with lower levels of residential

19

Ferrie and Troesken (2008) analyze Chicago’s three distinct water projects from 1867 to 1917. They find that each
project reduced death both from typhoid fever, a typical water-borne disease, and from seemingly-unrelated causes
of death. This pattern is consistent with the epidemiological theory that reductions in water-borne disease
strengthened the population’s resistance to other health shocks.

17

segregation. The Center for Population Economics at the University of Chicago will soon release
comprehensive neighborhood data for eight US cities. This data will allow scholars to measure
local variation in disease and mortality rates and to understand how US cities were able to reduce
disease in poor areas through public health investments (if, indeed, this result is borne out in the
broader data).20
In a related study, Villarreal (2012) shows that historical variation in the health
conditions between neighborhoods can have persistent effects on neighborhood quality (as
proxied by housing prices) over time. He focuses on neighborhoods built in the historical
marshland in New York City, which had high rates of water-borne disease in the nineteenth
century. Over time, this health disamenity disappeared as the marshes were drained and
infrastructure for clean water and sewers improved. Yet the housing price disparity between
former marshland and the rest of the city remained – and even grew – over time, in large part due
to the persistent sorting of poor residents into historically disadvantaged areas.

VIII. Location of workers and firms within urban areas
A. Population suburbanization
Thus far, we have focused on workers’ and firms’ decisions to locate inside or outside of
urban areas. Once inside an urban area, workers and firms have the choice to settle in many
possible locations, some closer to the central city and others on the periphery. Over the twentieth
century, the share of households and firms located in the central city has declined substantially.
Figure 5, which was originally published in Boustan and Shertzer (2013), documents trends in
city and suburban growth from 1940 to 2000 for the 103 metropolitan areas anchored by a

20

Price Fishback, Shawn Kantor and Trevor Kollmann also plan to release neighborhood-level data on XX cities for
the 1930s, including information on XX. For preliminary work using some of this data, see Kollmann (2011).

18

central city that had at least 50,000 residents by 1970. Over the second half of the twentieth
century, the share of metropolitan residents living in a central city fell from 58 percent to 36
percent. Yet, with the exception of the 1970s, the average central city experienced positive
population growth in each decade.21 Despite population growth in central cities, the suburban
population continued to grow at a substantially higher rate, leading to a steady decline in the
share of the metropolitan population living in central cities.
The Tiebout model is one useful structure for understanding the location decisions of
households amongst various municipalities in a metropolitan labor market (Tiebout, 1955).
Mobile households within a metropolitan area are free to choose amongst a variety of
municipalities offering different bundles of public goods and tax rates. As incomes rise,
households may shift toward locations with better schools and correspondingly higher tax rates,
which tend to be located in the suburbs. Yet Rhode and Strumpf (2003) caution that the long run
data is not consistent with some aspects of the Tiebout model. The framework implies that, as
transportation costs fall, household sorting should rise. However, in samples of US
municipalities and counties, Rhode and Strumpf show that jurisdictions have converged in their
taxing and spending decisions over time.
The monocentric city model – jointly attributed to the work of Alonso (1964), Muth
(1969), and Mills (1972) – offers an alternative approach to analyzing spatial location within
metropolitan areas. A core feature of the model is the assumption that all employment is
concentrated in a central business district (CBD). Households then decide whether to locate close

21

The growth of central cities in Figure 5 is partly driven by the expansion of land area in central cities via
annexation. In 1940, the average city in this sample was 48 square miles; by 2000, it had grown to 117 square miles.

19

to or far from the CBD, trading off a shorter commute for the higher rents of parcels closer to the
CBD.22
According to the monocentric framework, suburbanization will occur – that is,
households will move further from the CBD – when: (1) transportation improvements reduce the
time cost of travel and (2) incomes rise, thereby increasing the demand for land and housing
services and encouraging households to move to the periphery where housing prices (per square
foot) are lower.23 These hypotheses are borne out in the historical record. Margo (1992)
demonstrates that rising real income can explain around 40 percent of suburbanization in the
post-World War II period (1950 to 1980). At the same time, construction of the interstate
highways reduced the time cost of commuting between the central city and outlying towns.
Baum-Snow (2007) uses the original 1947 federal highway plan, which was designed for
purposes of defense and inter-state trade, to instrument for the actual number of highways later
built in a metropolitan area. He finds that another one-third of the change in relative city
population can be explained by the availability of new highways.
The core economic variables emphasized in the monocentric city model (rising income,
falling commuting costs) explain a large portion of suburbanization over the twentieth century.
Demographic and social changes within cities, including rising crime rates and growing racial
diversity, also encouraged some households to relocate to insulated suburbs via Tiebout-style
sorting. Property crime in urban areas doubled between 1960 and 1990. Cullen and Levitt (1999)
find that a 10 percent increase in city crime rates corresponds to a 1 percent decline in city
22

The assumption that all employment takes place in the CBD is not well-suited to most American cities, especially
those that developed after the diffusion of the automobile and often feature two or more employment centers. Yet,
despite its stylized nature, this framework generates sensible predictions for the conditions under which the majority
of the population will live close to the city center and the conditions under which it will move further away.
23
This prediction will hold as long as the income elasticity of demand for land area is greater than the income
elasticity of commuting costs. Glaeser, Kahn and Rappaport (2008) show that, empirically, the income elasticity of
demand for land is not large enough to account for very much of the association between income and suburban
residence.

20

population. According to this estimate, the mid-century crime wave should have reduced city
population by at least 10 percent, which, in combination with the other factors above, would
greatly over-explain the decline in city population. Yet, since 1990, crime rates have fallen
almost as dramatically as they initially rose, which may have counteracted some of the initial
mobility response.
Boustan (2010) exploits variation in black migration from the rural South to northern and
western cities to estimate the role of “white flight” in suburbanization process. She finds that
each black arrival led to 2.7 white departures. By this estimate, white flight can account for
around 10 percent of mid-twentieth century suburbanization, equivalent to the construction of
one new highway. White departures from central cities contributed to a rise in racial residential
segregation; by 1970, 80 percent of black and white households would have needed to switch
residences in order for each neighborhood in a metropolitan area to reflect the racial composition
of the area as a whole (Cutler, Glaeser and Vigdor, 1999).
In the US, suburban households are more likely to be white and affluent (although the
same is not true of many European cities; see Brueckner, Thisse and Zenou, 1999).24 Glaeser,
Kahn, and Rappaport (2008) suggest that, in the US, the rich are more likely than the poor to live
in the suburbs because they tend to commute by car, whereas the poor rely on public
transportation. Given that public transportation is more readily available in city centers, the poor
are more likely to locate downtown.25 In addition, once central cities began to attract poor

24

The income gap between cities and suburbs in the US has widened over time. In 1940, the typical suburban
resident earned only three percent more than his urban counterpart; by 2000, the city-suburban income gap increased
to 16 percent.
25
Of course, this association raises the question: why is there more transit in central cities? To a certain extent,
downtown’s identity as a transit center may be a legacy of the historical concentration of economic activity in
central cities and/or may be a natural outgrowth of the design of transit systems in hub-and-spoke arrangements.
Yet, it is also possible that the continued investment in downtown transit is in response to the demands of poor local
constituents, rather than the main cause of their location decisions. Historical analysis could be used to disentangle
the relationship between access to transit and neighborhood poverty.

21

residents, this concentration of poverty may have begotten more poverty, either due to an
endogenous clustering of public services and private businesses attractive to the poor or to the
example of peers with weak attachment to the labor force.
Despite the strong predictive power of models allowing free mobility, households’
optimal location decisions are often circumscribed in reality by the available housing stock,
which is in turn influenced by local zoning restrictions. The first zoning laws were implemented
in the 1910s and were upheld by the Supreme Court in 1926.

Fischel (2001) models

municipalities as selecting a triad of property taxes, public good and zoning rules to maximize
property values for the median homeowner/voter. In this modified Tiebout approach, zoning
regulations ensure that new households with different preferences are unable to simply move in
and overwhelm the local consensus of taxation and expenditures. Historically, Fischel argues,
zoning enabled municipalities to add industrial employment centers, low-income apartment
buildings, and other disfavored uses only when the use generated municipal revenues capable of
offsetting the nuisance and congestion costs imposed on local residents.
If zoning enables municipal coordination, then the introduction of zoning laws ought to
have increased property values by improving the fit between resident preferences and local
conditions. McMillen and McDonald (2002) examine the implementation of Chicago’s first
zoning ordinance in 1923 and find that blocks zoned residential such that no industrial uses were
permitted, save for those already in place, experienced an uptick in (estimated) land values
relative to areas zoned to allow both industrial and residential use. Although industrial zones
may be an eyesore to local residents, they also generate additional tax revenue that can be shared
by a broader set of municipal residents; future work ought to address this trade-off.

22

The rapid implementation of zoning laws around 1920 presents a unique opportunity to
study these processes.26 In San Francisco, this implementation occurred shortly after the
devastating 1906 earthquake and fire – disasters that resulted in a substantial increase in housing
density within the burned area. Bunten and Siodla (2013) provide evidence that the resulting
differences between burned and non-burned areas were codified in the city’s first zoning law in
1921. The authors then use this historical coincidence to shed light on the contemporary effects
of zoning restrictions on housing prices.

B. Employment decentralization
As population left city centers over the twentieth century, metropolitan employment also
relocated to the open land in the suburbs. Glaeser and Kahn (2001) document that, by 2000, the
majority of both residence and employment was located in the suburbs in the typical
metropolitan area. Information-based industries like finance have not decentralized as rapidly –
hence the density of Manhattan, an extreme outlier – but the majority of cities have experienced
ongoing employment decentralization since at least 1950.
The decentralization of employment may simply be a byproduct of suburbanization as
firms follow workers out of the city, or it may be driven by independent forces that allow more
efficient production to occur at greater distances from the city center. One factor that may have
encouraged firms to leave central cities was the growing network of interstate highways and the
rise of truck-based transport, which decoupled distribution from downtown rail depots. Indeed,
Baum-Snow (2010) shows that highways did not simply enable citizens to move outward and

26

Brooks and Lutz (2013) argue that zoning regulations can “lock in” existing levels of urban density, rendering reoptimization difficult. They demonstrate that density remains higher around historical street car stops in Los
Angeles even eighty years after the street car lines ceased to operate.

23

commute inward; rather they appear to have encouraged both households and firms to locate at a
distance from the central city.
Baum-Snow’s analysis cannot disentangle whether highways first encouraged households
to move to the suburbs with firms following suit, or vice versa. Boustan and Margo (2009a)
analyze this interaction between workers and firms by contrasting the residential choices of
workers whose employers are immobile, such as state government workers in state capitals or
clerks at the US Postal Service, with similar workers whose employers moved to the suburbs.
They find that these government workers are more likely to live downtown, suggesting that
household location decisions are closely tied to firm location. Their results suggest that, if not for
the decentralization of employment, suburbanization rates would be substantially lower today.
Of course, employers may also follow households, so the two effects can be mutually reinforcing
in a decentralized equilibrium.
The decentralization of employment opportunities has affected groups differently
according to their ability to suburbanize. Boustan and Margo (2009b) present indirect evidence
that urban blacks faced diminished employment opportunities as firms left cities by documenting
a notable uptick in black employment at US Postal Service sorting facilities, a large employer
that remained rooted in downtown areas, as other firms moved to the suburbs circa 1960.

IX. Vintage capital and “lock-in” effects
Although cities are, most importantly, dense centers of population, they are also made
manifest physically through their architecture. The long-lived nature of urban buildings and
neighborhoods has important implications for how households and firms organize themselves
within and between cities. For instance, new residences can be constructed rapidly, but old

24

houses decay slowly. This observation generates a number of predictions, which were outlined
by Glaeser and Gyourko (2005). First, housing prices should not increase as a city expands
because the construction sector should satisfy growing demand. Yet housing prices will fall
quickly in contracting cities as demand for the existing housing stock declines. Second, lower
housing prices will compensate residents for falling wages, thereby ensuring a slow decline in
population: while cities can explode overnight, they take decades or more to fade away. In the
meantime, the population of declining cities will be disproportionately low-skilled and lessattached to the labor force. These predictions may help to explain patterns of rapid boom and
slow decay experienced by many US cities including, most recently, Detroit.
Intra-city housing dynamics are also affected by the longevity of the housing stock. In
any metropolitan area, high-income residents tend to occupy houses that are newer, larger, and of
higher-quality. As these houses age, their residents may seek newer homes, leaving the older
units to “filter” down to lower-income denizens of the city. Brueckner and Rosenthal (2009)
argue that, initially, filtering helped to explain why rich households were more likely to live in
the suburbs with plentiful new construction. Yet, going forward, they predict that this process
will encourage gentrification of urban neighborhoods as deteriorating homes and neighborhoods
in the central city are redeveloped.
The distributional consequences of urban gentrification remain an open question. Turning
to history, one particularly controversial incidence of central-city redevelopment was the massive
urban renewal efforts of the mid-twentieth century. Proponents argued that the strong negative
externalities of “slum” neighborhoods could limit economic activity in the rest of the city.
Furthermore, they asserted that private interests were unable to overcome the transaction costs of
redevelopment and so local governments should use eminent domain to assemble land in

25

affected neighborhoods and provide grants and loans to enable redevelopment. Exploiting
differential passage of the necessary laws at the state level, Collins and Shester (2013) find that
redevelopment had a positive and long-lasting effect on city growth across a number of metrics.
Siodla (2012) studies another (accidental) example of large-scale twentieth-century
redevelopment: the rebuilding of San Francisco following the 1906 earthquake and fire. In the
early twentieth century, San Francisco was growing rapidly and yet its existing housing stock
was primarily composed of low-density single family homes. Areas that were razed by the fire
transitioned more rapidly to a dense streetscape of apartment houses than did neighboring
unburned areas. This differential persisted for over two decades, suggesting that the
redevelopment costs and external coordination problems faced by durable capital owners are
indeed significant enough to prevent rapid re-optimization of the urban capital stock in the face
of shifting demands. Hornbeck and Keniston (2013) provide a model of this redevelopment
process, along with further empirical evidence from the Boston fire of 1872.

X. Concluding remarks
This chapter analyzes the sources of urbanization over two hundred years of US history.
Using newly-compiled series on urban wage and rental premia, we argue that urban growth in
the US was driven by a combination of urban-biased technological advances that enhanced
productivity in cities and improvements in urban quality of life, especially due to investments in
public health. Interest in agglomeration economies, their causes, and their implications for urban
growth and persistence has been growing in recent years; historical work has much to contribute
to this line of inquiry.

26

A combination of rising incomes and major road-building projects in the mid-twentieth
century spurred both households and firms to leave central cities and settle in suburbs. Yet cities
and suburbs are not only separated in space but are also jurisdictionally distinct. Aspects of local
political economy, including differences in crime rates and police protection, public
transportation investments, and zoning regulations, reinforced this spatial redistribution.

27

References
Ahlfeldt, G. M., Redding, S.J., Sturm, D. M. and Wolf, N. (2012). The economics of density:
Evidence from the Berlin Wall. Manuscript.
Alonso, W. et al. (1964). Location and land use. Toward a general theory of land rent. Harvard
University Press.
Arora, S. (2001). Health, human productivity, and long-term economic growth. Journal of
Economic History, 61.3: 699-749.
Atack, J., and Bateman, F. (2004). National Sample from the 1880 Census of Manufacturing.
ICPSR Study No. 9385. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research [distributor].
Atack, J., Bateman, F. and Weiss, T. (2004). National Samples from the Census of
Manufacturing: 1850, 1860, and 1870. ICPSR Study No. 4048. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
Baum-Snow, N. (2007). Did highways cause suburbanization? Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122(2):775-805.
Baum-Snow, N. (2010). Changes in transportation infrastructure and commuting patterns in US
metropolitan areas, 1960-2000. American Economic Review, 100(2):378-82.
Baum-Snow, N. and Pavan, R. (2012). Understanding the city size wage gap. Review of
Economic Studies, 79(1):88-127.
Belcher, W. (1947). The economic rivalry between St. Louis and Chicago. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Bleakley, H. and Lin, J. (2012). Portage and path dependence. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(2):587-644.
Bostic, R. W., Gans, J. S., & Stern, S. (1997). Urban productivity and factor growth in the late
nineteenth century. Journal of Urban Economics, 41(1):38-55.
Boustan, L. P. (2010). Was postwar suburbanization "white flight"? Evidence from the black
migration. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1):417-443.
Boustan, L. P. and Margo, R. A. (2009a). Job decentralization and postwar suburbanization:
Evidence from state capitals. Brookings-Wharton Papers in Urban Affairs, 1-20.
Boustan, L. P. and Margo, R. A. (2009b). Race, segregation, and postal employment: New
evidence on spatial mismatch. Journal of Urban Economics, 65(1):1-10.

28

Boustan, L. P. and Shertzer, A. (2013). Population trends as a counterweight to central city
decline, 1950-2000. Demography, 1-23.
Brooks, L. and Lutz, B. (2013). Vestiges of transit: Urban persistence at a micro scale.
Manuscript.
Brueckner, J. K. and Rosenthal, S. S. (2009). Gentrification and neighborhood housing cycles:
Will America’s future downtowns be rich? Review of Economics and Statistics, 91(4):725-743.
Brueckner, J. K., Thisse, J.-F., and Zenou, Y. (1999). Why is central Paris rich and downtown
Detroit poor?: An amenity-based theory. European Economic Review, 43(1):91-107.
Buenstorf, G. and Klepper, S. (2009) Heritage and agglomeration: The Akron tyre cluster
revisted. The Economic Journal, 119(4):705-733.
Bunten, D. and Siodla, J. (2013). The San Francisco Fire and the Zoning Tax. Manuscript.
Bunten, D., Weiler, S., Zahran, S., and Thompson, E. (2013). Entrepreneurship, information, and
economic growth. Manuscript.
Cain, L. and Hong, S. C. (2009). Survival in 19th century cities: The larger the city, the smaller
your chances. Explorations in economic history, 46(4):450-463.
Chandler, A. D., Jr. (1972). Anthracite coal and the beginnings of the industrial revolution in the
United States. Business History Review, 46(2): 141-181.
Collins, W. J. and Shester, K. L. (2013). Slum clearance and urban renewal in the United States.
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics.
Condran, G. A. and Crimmins, E. (1980). Mortality differentials between rural and urban areas
of states in the northeastern United States 1890-1900. Journal of Historical Geography,
6(2):179-202.
Costa, D. L. and Kahn, M. E. (2000). Power couples: changes in the locational choice of the
college educated, 1940-1990. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4):1287-1315.
Cronon, W. (1992). Nature's metropolis: Chicago and the Great West. WW Norton & Company.
Cullen, J. B. and Levitt, S. D. (1999). Crime, urban flight, and the consequences for cities.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 81(2):159-169.
Cutler, D. and Miller, G. (2005). The role of public health improvements in health advances: The
twentieth-century United States. Demography, 42(1).
Cutler, D., Glaeser, E. L., and Vigdor, J. L. (1999). The rise and decline of the American ghetto.
Journal of Political Economy. 107(3): 455-506.
29

David, Paul A. and Solar, P. (1977). A bicentenary contribution to the history of the cost of
living in America. Research in Economic History, 2: 1–80.
Davis, D. R. and Weinstein, D. E. (2002). Bones, bombs, and break points: The geography of
economic activity. American Economic Review.
Ellison, G., Glaeser, E. L. and Kerr, W. R. (2010). What causes industry agglomeration?
Evidence from coagglomeration patterns. American Economic Review, 100: 1195-1213.
Ferrie, J. P. and Troesken, W. (2008). Water and Chicago’s mortality transition, 1850-1925.
Explorations in Economic History, 45(1):1-16.
Fischel, W. A. (2001). The Homevoter Hypothesis. Harvard University Press.
Fu, S. (2007). Smart cafe cities: Testing human capital externalities in the Boston metropolitan
area. Journal of Urban Economics, 61(1):86-111.
Gaspari, K. C. and Woolf, A. G. (1985). Income, public works, and mortality in early twentiethcentury american cities. Journal of Economic History, 45(02):355-361.
Glaeser, E. L. and Gyourko, J. (2005). Urban decline and durable housing. Journal of Political
Economy, 113(2):345-000.
Glaeser, E. L., Kahn, M. E. (2001). Decentralized employment and the transformation of the
American city. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 1-63.
Glaeser, E. L., Kahn, M. E., and Rappaport, J. (2008). Why do the poor live in cities? The role of
public transportation. Journal of Urban Economics, 63(1):1-24.
Glaeser, E. L., Kerr, S.P. and Kerr, W. R. (2012). Entrepreneurship and Urban Growth: An
Empirical Assessment with Historical Mines. NBER Working Paper 18333.
Glaeser, E. L. and Mare, D. C. (2001). Cities and skills. Journal of Labor Economics, 19(2):316342.
Goldin, C. and Katz, L. (2010). The 1915 Iowa State Census Project. ICPSR Study No. 28501.
Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
Greenstone, M., Hornbeck, R., and Moretti, E. (2010). Identifying agglomeration spillovers:
Evidence from winners and losers of large plant openings. Journal of Political Economy, 118(3).
Haines, M. R. (2001). The urban mortality transition in the united states, 1800-1940. NBER.
Haines, M. R. (2010). Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States,
1790-2002. ICPSR Study No. 2896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political
and Social Research [distributor].
30

Hanlon, W.W. (2012). Industry connections and the geographic location of economic activity.
Manuscript.
Hanlon, W.W. and Miscio, A. (2013). Agglomeration economies: A dynamic analysis.
Manuscript.
Hornbeck, R. and Keniston, D. (2013). Creative destruction from the Great Boston Fire of 1872:
Barriers to urban growth illuminated. Manuscript.
Kesztenbaum, L. and Rosenthal, J.-L. (2011). The health cost of living in a city: The case of
France at the end of the 19th century. Explorations in Economic History, 48(2):207-225.
Kesztenbaum, L. and Rosenthal, J.-L. (2012). The democratization of longevity: How the poor
became old in Paris, 1870-1940. Manuscript.
Kim, S. (1995). Expansion of markets and the geographic distribution of economic activities: the
trends in US regional manufacturing structure, 1860-1987. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
110(4):881-908.
Kim, S. (2005). Industrialization and urbanization: Did the steam engine contribute to the growth
of cities in the United States? Explorations in Economic History, 42(4):586-598.
Klein, A. and Crafts, N. (2012) Making sense of the manufacturing belt: Determinants of U.S.
industrial location, 1880-1920. Journal of Economic Geography, 12: 775-807.
Kollmann, T. M. (2011). Housing Markets, Government Programs, and Race during the Great
Depression. Dissertation, University of Arizona.
Krugman, P. (1991). Increasing returns and economic geography. Journal of Political Economy,
99(3).
Lindert, P. and J. G. Williamson. (Forthcoming). America’s First Two Centuries: Growth and
Inequality 1650-1870.
Margo, R. A. (1992). Explaining the postwar suburbanization of population in the United States:
The role of income. Journal of urban economics, 31(3):301-310.
Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of Economics. London: MacMillan for the Royal Economic
Society.
McMillen, D. P., & McDonald, J. F. (2002). Land values in a newly zoned city. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 84(1): 62-72.
Meyer, D. R. (1988). The industrial retardation of southern cities, 1860-1880. Explorations in
Economic History, 25(4):366-386.

31

Michaels, G., Rauch, F. and Redding, S.J. (2012). Urbanization and structural transformation.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(2): 535-586.
Mills, E. S. (1972). Studies in the structure of the urban economy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Press.
Moretti, E. (2004a). Local multipliers. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings.
Moretti, E. (2004b). Workers’ education, spillovers, and productivity: evidence from plant-level
production functions. American Economic Review, 656-690.
Moretti, E. (2004c). Estimating the social return to higher education: evidence from longitudinal
and repeated cross-sectional data. Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2): 175-212.
Muth, R. (1969). Cities and housing: The spatial patterns of urban residential land use.
University of Chicago.
Rhode, P. W., and Strumpf, K. S. (2003). Assessing the importance of Tiebout sorting: Local
heterogeneity from 1850 to 1990. American Economic Review, 93(5), 1648-1677.
Pressley, T. J., and W. H. Scofield. Farm real estate values in the United States, 1850-1959.
ICPSR ed. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
[producer and distributor], 2001.
Roback, J. (1982). Wages, rents, and the quality of life. Journal of Political Economy, 12571278.
Rosen, S. (1979). Wage-based indexes of urban quality of life. Current issues in urban
economics, 3.
Rosenberg, N. and Trajtenberg, M. (2004). A general-purpose technology at work: The Corliss
steam engine in the late-nineteenth-century United States. Journal of Economic History,
64(01):61-99.
Rosenthal, S. S. and Strange, W. C. (2004). Evidence on the nature and sources of agglomeration
economies. Handbook of regional and urban economics, 4:2119-2171.
Ruggles, S., Alexander, J. T., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., Schroeder, M. B. and Sobek, M.
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota, 2010.
Siczewicz, Peter. U.S. Historical Counties. Dataset. Emily Kelley, digital comp. Atlas of
Historical County Boundaries, ed. by John H. Long. Chicago: The Newberry Library, 2011.
Available online from http://publications.newberry.org/ahcbp.

32

Sinai, T. and Waldfogel, J. (2004). Geography and the internet: is the internet a substitute or a
complement for cities? Journal of Urban Economics, 56:1-24.
Siodla, J. (2012). Razing San Francisco: The 1906 disaster as a natural experiment in
understanding urban land use. Manuscript.
Sokoloff, K. L. (1988). Inventive activity in early industrial America: Evidence from patent
records, 1790-1846. Journal of Economic History, 48(4):813-850.
Sokoloff, K.L and Villaflor, G.C. (1992). The Market for Manufacturing Workers during Early
Industrialization: The American Northeast, 1820 to 1860, in Strategic Factors in Nineteenth
Century American Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert W. Fogel. University of
Chicago Press.
Tiebout, C.M. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy: 416424.
Troesken, W. (2002). The limits of Jim Crow: Race and the provision of water and sewerage
services in American cities, 1880-1925. Journal of Economic History, 62(3):734-772.
United States Department of Labor. (1986). Cost of Living in the United States, 1917-1919.
ICPSR Study No. 8299. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
Research [distributor].
Villarreal, C. (2012). The persisting influence of historical marshes on the rental price of housing
in New York City 1830-1940. Manuscript.
Weiman, D. (1988). Urban growth on the periphery of the antebellum cotton belt: Atlanta, 18471860. Journal of Economic History, 48(2):259-72.
Wheeler, C. H. (2001). Search, sorting, and urban agglomeration. Journal of Labor Economics,
19(4): 879-899.
Williamson, J. G. (1982). Was the industrial revolution worth it? Disamenities and death in 19th
century British towns. Explorations in Economic History, 19(3):221-245.
Wright, G. (1986). Old south, new south: Revolutions in the southern economy since the Civil
War. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press.

33

Figure 1: Before 1950,, the urban share only inccludes residen
nts living in iincorporated places. From
m 1950
g in both inco rporated and
d unincorporated places. Daata on
onward, the urban share includes reesidents living
pulation sharres are from the U.S. Census Bureau.. Metropolitaan area popu
ulation shares were
urban pop
calculated
d using data an
nd the contem
mporaneous deefinitions provvided by IPUM
MS in each yeaar.

34

Figure 1.1
1: Before 1950, the urban share only in
ncludes resideents living in incorporated places. From
m 1950
onward, the urban share includes reesidents living
g in both inco rporated and
d unincorporated places. Daata on
pulation sharees and region definitions
d
aree from the U.S
S. Census Burreau.
urban pop

35

Figure 2: Population deensities were calculated
c
usiing population
n data from Haines (2010) and land areaa data
ollow the Censsus.
from Siczeewicz. Region definitions fo

36

Figure 3: All dollar figu
ures for the period 1913 to 2010 are infllation-adjusted
d to 2010 valu
ues using the urban
f
the BLS;; David and Solar’s
S
(1977) historical cosst of living estimates are used for
consumer price index from
years prio
or to 1913. Th
he values for 1820
1
and 1832
2 are from Sookoloff and Viillaflor (1992)), and represeent the
urban wage premium in
i New Engla
and and the Mid-Atlantic
M
ffor male man
nufacturing w
workers in a ccounty
ast one city off 10,000 resideents or more, or in a countyy adjacent to such a countyy. The premiu
um for
with at lea
1850 to 18
880 was calcullated using firrm-level data on monthly w
wages from th
he Census of M
Manufacturingg, and
representss the premium
m nationally fo
or men (and women
w
for 18770 and 1880) eemployed in n
non-farm indu
ustries
earning non-negative
n
wages
w
in inco
orporated citiees of at least 2,500 residents. The estim
mates for all years
control forr industry and
d state fixed effects;
e
those for
f 1870 and 11880 also conttrol for month
hs of operatioon and
the workfforce share of women and children.
c
The premium wa s calculated aat the mean vaalues of the control
variables (Atack and Batemen,
B
2004
4; Atack, Weiss and Batem
man, 2004). Th
he open whitee circles for 18850 to
ban wage prem
mium preparred using dataa from Lindeert and Williaamson
1870 reprresent estimattes of the urb
(forthcom
ming). The Lin
ndert and Willliamson estim
mates are calcu
ulated by weigghting the urb
ban wage preemium
for three occupation ca
ategories – un
nskilled (common labor), b
blue collar (m
manufacturingg) and white collar
he shares of th
hese categoriees in the work
kforce in 18500 (= 48.2, 39.66 and 12.1 perrcent).
(male teacchers) – by th
The urban
n wage premium for 1915 is
i estimated frrom the Iowaa State Censuss and represen
nts the premiium in
Iowa for working
w
age men
m employed
d in non-farm
m industries eaarning non-neegative wage income annuaally in
Des Moinees, Davenportt and Dubuqu
ue (Goldin and
d Katz, 2010)). The open w
white diamond
d in 1915 reprresents
the actual urban wage premium
p
in Io
owa, whereas the closed blaack diamond rrepresents thee estimated naational
ge premium, which
w
we calcculate by adjusting the Iowaa premium up
pward using th
he ratio of thee Iowa
urban wag
premium relative to thee national preemium in the IPUMS
I
data ffrom 1940 onw
ward. The urban wage preemium
t 2010 was ca
alculated usin
ng data provid
ded by IPUM S, and repressents the prem
mium nationallly for
for 1940 to
working age
a men employed in non--farm industrries earning n
non-negative wage income annually liviing in
metropolittan areas. Ressults are simillar if we insteead use men liiving in urban
n areas, defineed as towns w
with at
least 2,500
0 residents.

37

ures for the period 1918 to 2010 are infllation-adjusted
d to 2010 valu
ues using the urban
Figure 4: All dollar figu
f
the BLS;; David and Solar’s
S
(1977) historical cosst of living estimates are used for
consumer price index from
years prio
or to 1913. Th
he value for 1918 was calcu
ulated using d
data from the Bureau of Laabor Statistics, and
representss the premiu
um nationally
y for househ
holds of indu
n cities locatted in
ustrial workers living in
metropolittan areas (US
S Departmentt of Labor, 19
986). The valu
ues for 1930-22010 were callculated usingg data
from IPUM
MS, and repreesent the prem
mium nationallly for non-farrm householdss in metropoliitan areas.

38

Figure 5: City and suburban population growth by decade, 1940–2000
Suburb Growth Rate

Share of Metro Pop Living in City

0.600

0.700

0.500

0.600

0.400

0.500

0.300

0.400

0.200

0.300

0.100

0.200

0.000

0.100
1940s

‐0.100

1950s

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

Share of metropolitan residents in central city

Growth Rate

City Growth Rate

0.000

Figure 5: Source is Boustan and Shertzer (2013). Share of metropolitan population living in city refers to the
end of the decade on the x-axis. Sample includes 103 metropolitan areas anchored by a city that had at least
50,000 residents in 1970. City and county population are taken from the City and County Data Books. The
1970 county definitions of metropolitan areas are applied in all years. Suburban population is computed as
the total metropolitan area population minus the city population.

39

