Research. Economic
of Bureau National the of those not and authors the of those
are
expressed
opinions Any Formation. Capital Taxation and Budget
Government in projects and Taxation in program research NBER1s
the of part is here reported research The Department. Treasury
the of policy a as construed be should here nothing ticular,
par- In
affiliated. are we which with organizations the of any to
attributed be not should and own, our are paper this in expressed
views The assistance. research for Schilit Robert to and support,
financial for Institute Enterprise American the to grateful are
We Poterba. James and Ballentine, Gregory J. Auerbach, Alan from
comments helpful received have We Institute. Enterprise American
the and Boston, of Bank Reserve Federal the College, Amherst
at was Henderson while and Institute, Enterprise American the
and Virginia of University the at was Fullerton while conducted was
paper this for research The 1986. 13-16, February Florida, Beach,
Palm Formation, Capital on Taxation of Effects The on Conference
Research Economic of Bureau National the at presented was paper This

1986 April
02138 MA Cambridge,
Avenue Massachusetts 1050
RESEARCH ECONOMIC OF BUREAU NATIONAL

1904 No. Paper Working

Henderson Kodrzycki Yolanda
Fullerton Don

RESOURCES OF ALLOCATION
THE ON REFORM TAX
FUNDAMENTAL OF IMPACT THE

SERIES PAPER WORKING NBER

202/862-6482
20036 DC Washington,
NW Street, Seventeenth 1150
Institute Enterprise American
and
617/973-3809

02106 MA Boston,
Bank Reserve Federal
T-28 Department, Research
Henderson Kodrzycki Yolanda

202/566-2563
20220 DC Washington,
NW Avenue, Pennsylvania 1500
Treasury the of Department
Fullerton Don

industries. and sectors, assets, among capital of allocations
alternative shows paper the Finally, values. baseline their above output of value
real the and stock capital the both raise reforms these case, this in parameters
of set favorable least the for Even distortions. intertemporal increases longer no
plan Treasury the view, this Under assets. among differences as well as distortions
intersectoral reduce thus They paid. dividends for deductions partial their through
taxation corporate reduce plans both incentives, investment on effect significant
a have taxes dividend that view" "old the Under stock. capital the in declines
slight with even gains welfare net generate reforms both parameters, most for Still,
distortions. intertemporal exacerbate would plan Treasury the but distortions,
intersectoral reduce would plan Presidents the and distortions interasset reduce
would reforms both incentives, investment on effect small a have taxes dividend
that
"new the Under 1985. May of proposal Presidents the and 1984, November
view"
of plan reform tax Treasury the law, current compare to used is model The

crucial. is effects multiple these
of consideration simultaneous the proposals, reform tax alternativeof evaluation
overall the For welfare. in changes associated and allocations resource alternative
simulate can it system, equilibrium general fully a In incentives. investment
total on impact the evaluate to together these weighs it and industries, arid sectors,
assets, individual for capital of costs compare can It gains. capital and interest
of indexation the as such features other and allowances, depreciation credits,
rates, statutory in changes of effects net the measuring of capable is It incomes.
capital on taxes of design the in issues multiple these addresses paper this in
model The distortions. intertemporal and interindustry, intersectoral, interasset,
on emphasis relative their in differ reform tax fundamentalfor proposals Recent
ABSTRACT
Resources of Allocation the on
Reform Tax Fundamental of Impact The

1986 April
#1904 Paper Working NBER

different across treatment tax the equal more making from increase might Efficiency
questioned. been has sector corporate the within investment of allocation the
in improvements the of magnitude the points, two first the to related and Third,

capital. business
to relative housing for treatment favorable this maintain we if reform significant
achieve to possible is it whether asked been has It deductible. are payments
interest mortgage while taxation federal escape housing to returns the law, current
Under housing. owner-occupied of treatment the unchanged largely leave proposals
reform tax that concern been has there Second, sector. noncorporate the and sector
corporate the between misallocations exacerbate and investment corporate reduce
might sector corporate the in rates tax effective Higher income. corporate on tax
the for base comprehensive more the offset to enough is reduction rate the whether
asked been has it First, income. capital

of treatment the to respect with raised

been have issues several reform, tax fundamental on debate continuing the During
principles.' general same the by motivated were they but reform, tax of
features specific the changed Representatives of House the by passed legislation and
President the by proposal subsequent A output. national increase turn in would which

investment, of mix superior a for incentives produce would treatment even-handed
more This industries. and sectors, assets, alternative from returns the uniformly
more tax would code proposed the that argued was it law, current to Compared rates.
lower at base that taxing and income, economic as base tax the defining toward steps
large took plan Department's Treasury The growth. economic and fairness enhance
to designed were incentives investment in changes The reform. tax fundamental
for proposal a advanced Department Treasury U.S. the 1984, of fall the In

judgments. policy final to essential criteria other or simplicity, equity, on reform
tax of effects the about information provide not does it incentives, investmentof
model comprehensive a contains paper the While conclusions. our summarizes 4 section

and detail, in results simulation our presents

3

Section economy. the in changes

aggregate measure as well as resources of reallocation expected the trace can model
This reform. tax of consequences long-term the evaluate can that model simulation

equilibrium general a describe we 2, section In industries. and sectors, assets,
various

of treatment tax the account

into take they and investments, prospective for

appropriate are measures Our rates. tax effective and costs capital on plans these
of impacts the measuring by

1

section in start We President. the by Congress the to

submitted proposal later the and proposal Treasury original the examine We issues.
important these of all on information provide to framework a develops paper This
contract. or expand to expected be might

sectors and industries which know to like would Observers economy. the of parts
different affect would reform tax how in interest general been has there Finally,
investment.
reduced from resulting losses by offset he might field playing level more a from
gains any capital, from income on taxes total raise does reform tax if Fourth,
sectors. across disparities

worsened or unchanged from efficiency diminished offset to enough be not may
or may gain this Yet land. and inventories, structures, equipment, as such assets

-2-

with world a in investment new a contemplating firm competitive perfectly a consider

(1967), Jorgenson and Hall of that like formula capital of cost user a derive To
Incentives Investment of Model A

1 1.

2.
section in outlined model equilibrium general the for inputs as used then are capital

of costs resulting The (1985). Fullerton on based is incentives investment of
model Our law. current under incentives to them compares and Administration, the by
proposed changes the from arising incentives investment the measures section This
expense.

and income interest and gains, capital dividends, of treatment changed

0

allowances: depreciation of indexation and credit tax investment

the of repeal the including provisions, recovery cost capital revised

O

percent:2 35 and 25, 15,

of brackets three to rates personal of reduction the and percent 33 to 46 from
rate corporate top the of reduction the in evidenced as rates, statutory lower

o

include: These capital. from

income on taxes affect would that provisions on concentrates paper this but code, tax
the to changes pervasive include proposals These respectively. plan," "President's
the and plan" "Treasury the as to referred be will These 1985). (May Simplicity
and Growth, Fairness, for Congress the to Proposals Tax President's The by followed
was It 1984). (November Growth Economic and Simplicity, Fairness, for Reform

Tax entitled President, the to Department Treasury the of report the was first The
reform. tax for proposals of sets two developed has Administration Reagan The
1984-1985 Proposals, Reform Tax Administration 1.

-3-

(2) then rate, discount corresponding and TflC rate, tax marginal personal neurs
entrepre- noncorporate the by replaced are rate discount corporate the and u If
w. and z, k, 8, for value specific

a has asset each but u,

and it,

r, for used are values common below, calculations In
&

—

w + (1—k—uz)

1—u

=

r—rt+6

c

(2)

depreciation:of net but tax of
gross sector, corporate the in return social real the

p',

provides 6 of Subtraction

c/q. rate rental the for solved and integrated be can expressionThis
0

uzq +

. e
(1—u)(c—wq)e f
dt —rt
(yt—6)t

=

q(1—k)

(1)

returns: net of value present the by matched exactly be must outlay net the
then, equilibrium, In uzq.4 is savings of value present the so z, is investment of
dollar per allowances depreciation of value present The r. rate discount after-tax
nominal firm's the at discounted are returns net These u. rate statutory at tax
income corporate the to subject is tax property of net return the and time, in point
any at value asset's the on paid is w rate at tax property Local 6. rate at asset
the of depreciation exponential constant of because decreases and it, rate inflation
constant the at increases c, level at starts asset this on return rental The 1-k). q(
to asset the of cost net the reduces k rate at credit tax investment an but q, is
cost acquisition The asset.3 the resell not does it that and deductions, and credits
associated take to liability tax sufficient has firm the Assume uncertainty. rio

-4-

assume (We issues. share new and earnings, retained debt, -- finance of source and

sector each separately examining involves then rates discount of computation The
(s+lt)/(l--rdf). as (4) equation from sectors all for i calculate and s
on assumption an with start we computations, our In sectors. housing owner-occupied

and noncorporate, corporate, the in return net-of-all-tax the represents s Here,

ltdf)R

=

S

(4)

holdings: debt their on earn could
individuals that return net real the provide must assets all assumption, arbitrage

our under Then, deducted)5. is that interest nominal of (and taxed is that interest
nominal of fraction the is f and rate, tax marginal personal debtholder's the
is

rate, interest nominal the is i Suppose return. of rates net in differences

any away arbitrage they that and sectors, three all by issued equity and debt hold
individuals that assume first we sector, each in discount of rates the compute To

(l_X-rh)w

+

—

r

=

h

housing: owner-occupied to return of rate
social the

h, provides (1) to similar condition equilibrium an and rate discount

homeowner's the of Use taxed. not is return imputed the and

rate tax marginal

personal homeowner's the at deducted is taxes property of X fraction A ances.
allow- depreciation or credit no receives housing owner-occupied Finally, sector.

noncorporate the in return of rate social the

pTIC,

for expression analogous an gives

-5-

eH1_tdU]

+

nd[(1TflCf]

(6)

thus: is rate count
dis- overall Its arbitrage. individual of because taxes, after i(l--rdf) earn must
equity its and

i(l--rf), costs debt firms noncorporate the

of rate tax marginal the represents 'r1, that recall

Then, entrepreneurs.

sector, noncorporate the In

respectively. shares, new and earnings, retained

debt, by financed investment new of proportions the
ns

e(1—t ns c +

1(ltdf)

re
)

treltY

—

(1—'r

re

c +

1(ltdf)

are

and Cre cd, where

i(1—uf)

dc

(5)

rates: discount three these of average weighted

a is rate discount single corporation's The i(l-tdf). = re(l--r5) that such r an
earn must issues share new Thus,

'r. rate at taxes personal to subject

is dividend

This dividends.6 of dollars e as distributed be instead could return corporate-tax

after- of dollar each that assume we shares, new For rate. discount requisite
the provides r for solutionThe i(l-'rdf). = treTtY + r(l-'rre) that such be must
r return the Then gains. nominal taxes it if =0 y and gains, capital real only taxes
system the if I = y let Also,

'tte rate gains capital

personal accrued the at taxed

is appreciation share resulting the and r return net-of-corporate-taxnominal a earns
investment The

i(l-tf). match must return net

nominal individual's the earnings,

retained For [-uf). i( = r return: of rate net-of-corporate-income-tax the simply is
debt for rate discount corporation's The exogenous.) is decision financial the that

-6-

investment. for return of rates gross required higher face also rates tax effective

higher with sectors or industries or

assets

p: with nonlinearly) (but monotonically

varies t economy, the throughout constant s With tax. consumption a of case the
in apply would that rate zero the with or rate, corporate statutory the with compared

be can rate effective the example, For interpreted. easily are they that is rates
tax effective at looking for reason The taxes. to attributable costs capital of

portion the shows It taxes. personal and taxes, property taxes, corporate of impact
combined the reflects rate effective this taxes, all of net return the is s Because
p

t=—return:

(8)

of rate pre-tax the of proportion a as return,

of rates post-tax and pre- the between difference the are rates tax These rates.
tax total effective marginal of terms in results our of many present we p, capital,

of product marginal the by measured properly are incentives investment Although
are
shares.' equity and debt respective the
subject is

income

interest other

of f

only but

he

and

hd

parameters The tax.

deducted, is interest mortgage of

h[i(1_-rdf)]

+

to

All

(7)

hd[i(1_th)]

rate:
discount their provides logic similar a and rate, tax marginal the

is

-rh

homeowners,

For respectively. equity, and debt by financed shares the represent ne and ild where

-7-

companies.
insurance life and organizations nonprofit as such institutions through indirectly
received proportions the and households by directly received income

of proportions

the reflect must rates these Furthermore, taxes. state and federal both include We
income. interest their by weighted rates, marginal debtholders' all of average the
thus is rate tax marginal appropriate The income. interest and debt current their
to proportion in debtholders among distributed be would example, for income, interest
and debt Additional investors. all of holdings the in increase proportionate
equi- an with stocks, capital all in increase equiproportionate an is consideration
under investment marginal The (th). housing owner-occupied for deductions interest
and

income noncorporate (rre), gains capital

(-r),

income dividend

(td),

income interest for: rates tax marginal require we level, personal the to Turning
percent. 37.4 thus is u reforms, these For taxes.
corporate state of deductibility the maintain and .33 of rate federal top a set
would proposals President's and Department Treasury The percent. 49.5 equals which

.46+.0655(l-.46), is u for value appropriate the level, federal the at taxes state of
deductibility the for Accounting 204). p. (1984, Fullerton and King by .0655 be to
estimated been has rates top-bracket states' of average weighted The income. porate
cor- marginal for .46 of rate statutory federal top the use we law, current For
rates tax Statutory 1.2.1
proposals. Administration two the for and law current for framework, that implement
to necessary parameters the for values discuss to proceeds section This gains.
capital and dividends, interest, affecting rules other and provisions, recovery cost
rates, tax statutory of impact net the out sort to useful is framework above The
Laws Tax Alternative 1.2

-8-

rate resulting The 223-226). pages (1984, Fullerton and King in described as banks,
of taxation the for account to adjusted then is interest on rate personal The
deductibility.of repeal the reflect to proposals Administration
the for rates the to added are points percentage Six itemize. who those for level
federal the at taxes state of deductibility the and rates, states' different the

of average

weighted the reflects percentage This law.9 current under rate federal

each to added are points percentage 5 taxes, income state include to order In
percent. 15.8 income, noncorporate
and percent; 20.8 gains, capital percent: 26.2 dividends, percent: .9 21 received,
interest percent; 21.0 deductions, housing be: to calculated were rates marginal
resulting The income. of forms other on rates the than more proportionately gains

capital and dividends on rate average weighted the reduce would they brackets, other
than more proportionately bracket rate top the reduce would plans two these Since
similar. very are plan President's the for brackets three the but plan, Treasury
the for only available are calculations TAXSIM The proposals. Administration the
by reduced be would rates tax personal these of All purposes. tax for losses with
partners and proprietors many of brackets low the reflects rate noncorporate percent
19.5 the and gains, realized of taxation full the reflects rate gains capital percent
1

26. The homeowners. than brackets higher in average on are they that indicate
percent) (33.9 recipients dividend for rate and percent) (27.8 recipients interest
for rates The percent. 25.0 is law current under deductions interest housing

for rate computed The Research.8 Economic of Bureau National the of model TAXSIM
the using Lindsey Lawrence by calculated were rates tax federal households, For

-9-

types 15 and equipment of kinds 20 including study, this in used assets depreciable
35 the lists 2 Table model. the in assets diverse many include to important is it

nonneutralities, these capture to order In allowances. depreciation for categories
few a into assets grouping by simplify to tend codes tax while rates, different

many at depreciate assets different because arises nonneutralities for Potential
recovery cost Capital 1.2.2
1. Table in summarized are rates

tax personal of vectors final The =0). (X taxes property of deductibility eliminate
and .27 to rate personal this reduce would proposals The respectively. .7, and .30
are

X

and

Thus deducted. are taxes property real household of percent 70 about

that indicates model TAXSIM The taxes. state for account to .30 to raised level,
federal the at .25 is deductions interest mortgage for rate average weighted The
1.2.3. section in discussed are respectively) .105,
and (.052 gains capital for rates final The respectively. proposals, the and law
current under

18

.2 and .245 is It institutions.

of holdings any by reduced not but

taxes, state by raised is rate noncorporate The proposals. Administration the under
.242 and law current under .292 is

for value resulting The companies. insurance

and institutions tax-exempt by received dividends the for account to reduced and
taxes state for account to raised similarly is dividends on rate household The

percent. 20.5 is proposals Administration the under average same The percent.
23. is td for estimate final The law. current under reserves for deduction percent

1

20 their and rate statutory percent 46 their reflects rate latter This companies.
insurance life of income interest the for rate .368 a and institutions, profit
non- of income interest the for rate zero a with averaged be then must householdsfor

-

10 -

real a use We deducted. be may basis remaining all which in year "close-out" a
and allowances for rate exponential an has class Each

classes.

7

into assets similar

together group to estimates Hulten-Wykoff the use they (RCRS), System Recovery
Cost Real their for fact, In inflation). for indexed (i.e., depreciation economic

of estimates to possible as closely as

allowances set to proposes Treasury The

211). page (1984, Fullerton and King in shown is formula exact The cost. historical
on based are allowances that fact the for account to z calculating in rate discount
nominal a use We depreciation. economic of that than less be may value present real
their rates, inflation moderate at that so however, terms, nominal in fixed are They
depreciation. economic to relative high are allowances these inflation, zero At
line. straight to
switch optimal an with balance declining of percent 175 on based allowances receive

structures Other credit. tax investment the half by reduced is basis depreciation
The line. straight to time optimal the at switch a with balance declining of percent
150 on based allowances receive utilities public and equipment effect, In law. the
in tables from read be can lifetimes these over Allowances years. 18 over structures

other and years, IS or 10 over structures utility public years, 5 over equipment
other years, 3 over depreciated are Autos (ACRS). System Recovery Cost Accelerated
the under available currently lifetimes the shows 2 Table of column second The
allowances. depreciation any

receive not do they and depreciate, to not assumed are these but study, our in land
and inventories include also We buildings. residential for .015 of low a to autos
for .333 of high a from range These 2. Table of column first the in shown and (1981)
Wykoff and Hulten by estimated are

rates depreciation economic The structures. of

-

Ii

-

corporations. by paid dividends for deduction fractional the
as such features innovative other and these describes subsection This expense. and

income interest index further would plan Treasury The gains. capital index to sions
provi- include proposals both allowances, depreciation indexing to addition In
dividends and interest, gains, capital for Provisions 1.2.3
credits. these repeal would plan

President's the and Treasury the Both 2. Table of 5 column in shown are rates These
buildings. for credit no and structures, utility public for credit percent 10 a ment,
equip- other for credit percent

10

a automobiles, for credit percent 6 a provides law

Current credit. tax investment the is recovery cost capital of aspect other The
Simplicity). and Growth, Fairness, for Congress the to Proposals Tax President's
The of 145 page (see 2 Table of 4 column in years close-out the by indicated are plan

President's the under assets of groupings The rate. discount real a with (1984),
Fullerton and King of 211 page on formula the use calculations Our RCRS. in as
year close-out the in bunched not are Deductions inflation. for indexation and time,
optimal the at line straight to switch a allowances, exponential higher classes,
asset 6 with (CCRS) System Recovery Cost Capital a proposes President The

mismeasured. are rates
tax effective marginal then way, some in mismeasured are

If depreciation. economic

of estimates particular these reflect to designed were allowances that degree the to
misleading be may neutrality near this Moreover, rates. exponential estimated the to
relative accelerated slightly are allowances however, year, close-out the in deducted
is basis remaining all Since depreciation. of rates real estimated the match closely
allowances These Growth). Economic and Simplicity, Fairness, for Reform Tax of
161 page (see 2 Table of 3 column in shown years close-out the by indicated is assets

allowances. of indexing the capture to rate discount

of grouping Treasury's The

-

12

-

expense. or income interest index not would plan

President's The deductible. still is interest mortgage of All (4)-(7). equations
in .6 to set is f and .4, is part excluded the example, for inflation, percent
4 With rt/(.06+rt). as interest nominal the of portion inflationary the estimate can

it outset, the at return real percent 6 a assuming and it, rate inflation the knowing
By effect. same the approximately have to intended is that procedure practical

more a suggests it so and expense, or income interest real measure to trying of
difficulties administrative the recognizes Treasury The income. interest especially

income, index to attempts with experience little very has world the fact, In
one. to set is f so and U.S., the in taxed is currently income interest Nominal

.04. exceeds it if exclusion the to preferred is indexation .04, = s if particular,
In taken. be would option this whether calculates model our rate, inflation given
any For exclusion. the of place in indexation choose can investor the however, 1991,
After percent. 5.6 is 'tre so rates, personal reduced at gains nominal of percent
50 taxes plan President's The (5). equation in seen be can change this of effect The
1).

= y (with

105

.

be would tre institutions, with averaging and deferral, for halving

taxes, state After realized. when gains real tax fully would it but inflation,

for index and rates personal lower would proposal Treasury The =0). (y gains capital
nominal taxes law current hand, other the On companies. insurance and institutions
tax-exempt for accounting after percent 5.2 is it and households, for percent
6 is accruals on rate effective, the taxes, state adding after Even gains. long-term

realized of percent 60 excludes also law Current half.'° by approximately tax of
rate effective the cuts deferral of advantage the gains, capital to respect With

-

13

-

equity. by two-thirds and debt by investments

their of third a finance also homeowners and firms noncorporate that assume we
(1984), Henderson and Fullerton Following shares. new by percent 4.9 and retentions,
by percent 61.4 debt, by percent 33.7 finance corporations that find we 239), p.
(1984, Fullerton and King Following investments. existing as proportions same
the in finance

of sources

have investments new that is assumption initial Our

structures. and land residential for .01837 and utilities, public

for 1550 .0 structures, and land business for .01126 inventories, and equipment for
.00768 of rates indicate (1984) Henderson and Fullerton in data investments, existing
as average on tax property same the pay will investments new that Assuming regimes.
tax three all under parameters same the use we (w), rates tax property local For

data Other 1.2.4
(5)). equation (see saver the to return after-tax required the provide to much
as earn to need not does firm the that is change a such of effect The .039. 1 is

plan, Presidents the under deduction percent

10

e

a With .230. 1 be would e proposal,

Treasury the under deductible dividends of half and u=.374 With lI(l-gu). e= implies
equation This e=1+gue. as simplified e=[l/(l-u)]-u[l/(l-u)-ge],be thus would
dividends for available return after-tax The u[l/(l-u)-gej. equal would payments
tax corporate then retained, being of instead dividends of e amount an in out
paid were earnings these If earnings. before-tax of dollars 1/(1-u) to corresponds

retentions of dollar The tax. corporate the against deductible is dividends of
g fraction a that instead Suppose one. is

e Thus

taxes. personal of gross dividends

of dollar one pay to able is it retentions, of dollar a up gives corporation the
if Currently, paid. dividends of part deduct to firms allowing by taxes corporate
and personal of integration partial introduce proposalsAdministration two The

- 14 -

to solely due are differences remaining Any depreciation. economic to close
are that allowances depreciation provides and credit tax investment the rescinds
It assets. among rates tax in disparities most eliminates plan Treasury The

deductions. depreciation or credits any by reduced not are rates These percent).
(50 land and percent) (48 inventories for those are rates tax highest The credit.
tax investment percent 10 a receive they since structures, other most for those
as high as quite not are that rates tax have I) 27-3 (assets structures utility Public
allowances. depreciation generous less their of because and credit tax investment

the for eligible not are they because percent, 48 and 32 between rates, tax higher
considerably face 32-34) 1-26, 2 (assets Structures depreciation. economic of excess
in allowances depreciationof because and credits tax investment of because rates
tax effective low these has Equipment levels." corporate and personal the both at
taxation including are we that fact the despite percent, +3 to percent -4 from range
rates tax effective These subsidized. even are or rates tax low very have -- ment

equip- of types -- assets 20 first the law, current Under sector. corporate the in
assets 36 for rates tax total effective marginal and allowances presents 3 Table
levels.

sector and industry the at incentives investment reflect to assets aggregate then We
assets. different in invest to incentives the on concentrates first section This
Results Rate Tax Effective .3 1
.
respectively. lOt, or .091 be would i plans, President's

or Treasury the under change not did s If

[04.

.

equals law current for I that find

we I, .23 = -rd and assumptions these with (4) equation Solving percent. 4 be to each
s, return, of rate net-of-all-tax baseline the and n, rate, inflation the take We

-

is

-

assets. individual of rates tax effective among disparities introduce therefore might

It 6. to 10 from assets of classes of number the reduces plan President's the well,
As

land. and inventories to relative assets depreciable of taxation preferential

for provides also depreciation Accelerated structures. than rate effective lower

a at taxed be would Equipment plan. Treasury the to relative assets of treatment
the in disparities some introduce provisions depreciation These depreciation.

economic to relative accelerated be would deductions depreciation but eliminated, be
still would credit tax investment The plan. Treasury the as much as not but assets,
different for rates tax among disparities the reduce would plan President's The
plan. Treasury the under investments debt-financed on rates tax
effective higher for reason another yet is base lower a to rate subsidy the of tion

applica- The interest. real reflects that fraction the only to apply would subsidy
this that so receipts, and deductions interest indexes plan Treasury the Furthermore,
rate). percent 20.5 a at taxed is income interest while rate percent 37.4 a at
made are deductions (interest points percentage 16.9 to plan Treasury the by lowered
is that subsidy percentage-point 26.4 a is percent 1 23. and percent 49.5 between

difference The percent. 1 23. of rate marginal average an at debtholdersof income
taxable in included and rate, percent 49.5 a at corporations by deducted are payments
interest that in subsidized are debt by financed investments Currently, expense.
and income interest of treatment the in changes to also but provisions, recovery
cost capital in changes the to part in due is rates these of level higher generally
The percent. 52 and 39 between lie all sector corporate the in rates tax Effective
treatment. depreciation in variations slight to and taxes property differential

- 16

-

5. Table in lies contradiction apparent this for reason The assets.'3 across rate
tax effective the narrowing at success relative Treasury's the despite industries,

across rates effective among differences the narrowing at successful more is plan
President's the Overall, study. our in industries the half for rates lowers plan
President's the law, current under than lower rate tax effective industry's no had
plan Treasury the Whereas equipment). (transportation percent 39.6 to estate) (real

percent 31.3 from range plan President's the under rates Effective percent. 46 and
37 between are rates industries' other All enterprise. noncorporate of proportion
high the of because percent 35.3 at remains Agriculture treatment. preferential its

of aspects most

retains housing owner-occupied because percent 29.7 at low remains

estate real plan, Treasury the For corporate. heavily are they because average,
than higher are that rates tax effective face industries manufacturing Generally,
credits. tax investment of use extensive make Utilities stock. capital industry's

that of three-quarters about represents which housing, owner-occupied of treatment
favorable the reflects estate real for rate low The equipment. transportation
for percent 42.9 to estate real for percent 27.8 and utilities for percent
25.5 from range rates industry these law, current Under industry.'2 each in used
asset each of stock 1984 the of estimates using aggregated were assets individual
for rates Tax industry. by rates tax effective marginal shows 4 Table Next,
percent. 40 of order the on remain land and inventories for rates tax The percent.
42 to 24 from range rates tax These structures. for fall but equipment for rise

rates tax effective law, current to Compared indexed. longer no is interest because
plan Treasury the in those than lower generally are rates tax 3, Table in Finally,

- 17 -

proposals. reform tax Administration's the of evaluation our affects

that taxes dividend about assumption critical a discuss we however, model, simulation
the to turning Before code. tax the of version each under sectors and industries,
assets, different in invest to incentives the covered has discussion Our
sectors. across

and industries across rates equal more produce taxes sector housing in increase
an with together taxation sector corporate unchanged contrast, by plan, Presidents
the Under taxes. property of deductibility of end the of result a as mainly

points, 2.5 by rises rate tax effective the housing, For partners. and proprietors
of rate tax the in reduction point percentage 3 the by sector noncorporate the
in degree large a to offset is provisions recovery cost generous less of effect The

points. percentage 7.4 by sector corporate the in rate the raise provisions interest
and recovery cost capital generous Less sectors. other the in rates overall the and
sector corporate the in rate tax overall the between spread the increases actually
plan Department Treasury The taxes). property to (attributable housing occupied
owner- on rate percent 23.2 the than higher points 14 and sector, noncorporate the
in rate effective percent 34.7 the than higher points percentage 2.5 only percent,

37.2 is sector corporate the in rate tax effective overall the Interestingly,
sector. corporate the in rate tax total low a generate to deductions interest

nominal with combine provisions recovery cost accelerated law, current Under
land. nonresidential and residential and inventories, property, utility public

structures, nonresidential and residential equipment, assets: aggregated several

for presented are also rates These sectors. housing owner-occupiedand corporate,
non- corporate, the for rates tax effective and costsuser presents5 Table

-

18

-

dividend that concludes view" "old or tradition competing The investment. marginal

the significantly affect not do taxes dividend that 1977) King, and 1981, Bradford,
1979, Auerbach, (of view" "new the with consistent are far so calculations Our
investments. corporate of taxation effective the

on impact small a have tax dividend the in changes corporations, of stock capital the

of percent 5 only finance issues share new Since

investments. existing as way same

the in financed are investments marginal that assume calculations initial Our
5

(5)1 equation in issues share new for rate discount the enter

do parameters tax dividend these asymmetry, this of Because shareholders. to returns
later the affect still g, deducted, dividends of fraction the and

dividends,

on rate tax personal The investment. capital a finances firm the when dividends

foregone no are there hand, other the on issues, share new of case the In later.14
out paid dividend the and initially foregone dividend the symmetrically affect they
since investment, an such on return of rate the affect not do taxes dividend that
shown be may It dividend. a delays necessarily it earnings, retaining by investment
prospective a financing considers firm a When margin. the at incentives on centrate
con- results these that is effect insignificant relatively this for reason The

points.
percentage 2 only by sector corporate the in rate tax effective the lower would
itself by deduction percent 50 a that example, for found, (1985) Fullerton far. so
results our on effect little have changes these Yet percent. 10 be would deduction
the plan, Presidents the Under paid. dividends of percent 50 deduct to allowed

be would firms tax, corporate the of base the calculating in plan, Treasury the Under
dividends. corporate on rate tax effective the lower proposals Administration The
Views "Old" vs. "New"

-

19

Taxes: Dividend 1.4

-

slight This plan. President's the under percent 36.9 and plan, Treasury the under
percent 37.6 law, current under percent 38.2 is rate The law. current from unchanged
virtually be would economy the in rate tax effective overall the that means also

taxation capital sector corporate in reduction The distortions. intersectoral reduce
thus and sector Corporate the in rates tax effective reduce would plans new both
view, old the Under gap. this of one-third about eliminate plans Administration two

The sectors. noncorporate and corporate the in rates tax effective between gap point
13-

a exists currently there assumption, alternative this Under taxation. dividend

of view old the with consistent incentives investment the indicates 6 Table
sector. corporate the in rate tax effective the on impact substantial a
have taxes dividend alternative, this Under .337). to equal still

Cd

with .3315, =

c5

and .3315 = (Cr. shares new and earnings retained between evenly divided is finance
equity that such modified be may (5) equation then investments, marginal finance

to shares new on reliance their increase must and earnings retained of supply limited

a have corporations If

source. same that from entirely investments new tional

addi- finance to possible be not may it earnings, retained by percent 62 financed
are investments existing Although percent. 50 of rate payout a for view, old the
under findings the with consistent is that scenario a construct to possible is It
shareholders.'6 to earnings their of fraction
sizable a distribute to observed are firms because investments for rate tax tive

effec- the lower to significantly tend would payments dividend of deduction partial

a for provisions the theory, this Under 1979). McLure (see dividends as distributed
when again and level firm the at once taxed are profits because corporationsof tion
taxa- double significant is there that and capital, of cost the affect rates payout

-

20

-

view. new the under

than higher be to expected be would gains welfare resulting the Therefore, sectors.
across and assets across disparities reducing in succeed also plans both view, this
Under capital. of cost the raises plan new neither then issues, share new on heavily
more rely therefore must and investments marginal finance to earnings retained using
in limited more are corporations that assumption alternative the adopt we When
distinctions. these all account into take will economy

the on proposals these of effects the of evaluation overall Our assets). across
less (but sectors and industries across disparities these narrowing in effective most
is plan President's the while sector), each (within assets across capital of cost the
in disparities the narrowing in effective most is plan Treasury The uses. its across
efficiently more capital allocate to tend would plans Administration both hand,

other the On formation. capital deter therefore might it and level, current its
from percent 7 almost capital

of cost the

raise would plan Treasury The regimes. two

these under similar are capital) from income on rates tax effective the equivalently

(and capital of costs The whole. a as investment for incentives highest the provide
plan President's the and law current that show then We taxes. dividend of view"

"new the with consistent are results our then investments, existing as manner same
the in financed are investments marginal that assumption the adopt we When reform.
tax fundamental for proposals of aspects multiple emphasized has analysis Our
Reform Tax Under Incentives of Summary .5

1

dividends.17 of
view old the under gains welfare intertemporal about bring may reduction rate overall

- 21

-

formation. capital domestic
finance to foreigners by saving for scope no is there but commodities, in trade
balanced to open is model The flows. capital international to open not is model

the since affected, be can investment which by vehicle only the is saving Domestic
period. previous the in saving of result a as increases stock capital the which
in equilibria of sequence a simulate we reforms, tax alternative evaluating In
18

elasticities.

savings alternative examine We return. of rate net the to respect with elasticity
savings uncompensated the

n, for estimate aggregate specified

exogenously an on based

is consumption future and present between substitution of elasticity The saving. and

consumption present between resources of allocation initial an making by function ity
util- nested a maximize each households these

1,

Figure of part top the in indicated

As production. in use for sold be can that capital and labor of endowments initial
have households income-differentiated Twelve (1985). Whalley and Shoven, Fullerton,

Ballard, in described fully as 1983), (FSW, Whalley and Shoven, Fullerton, of model
equilibrium general the from directly taken is model the of side consumption The
Model the of Description A

1

2.

sectors. and assets
different among simultaneously capital of flow the trace can it formation, capital

on detail the of because Furthermore, output. aggregate on as well as industries,
different by production on reforms tax of effects the simulating of capable is model
This (1986). Henderson and Fullerton in developed model equilibrium general the into
inputs as used are section previous the in measured incentives investment The

Industries and
Sectors, Assets, Among Resources of Allocation with Model Equilibrium General A 2.

- 22 -

production of stages new two add also We margin. the at incentives investment
emphasizing industries, private

18

the of each in capital for demand the determines

formula cost-of-capital type (1967) Hall-Jorgenson a that specify we Instead,
payments. tax observed from costs capital constructs which model FSW the from
depart we however, stage, this In industries. private

18

our across 1.0 to 0.7 from

vary estimates elasticity average These literature. the in estimates econometric

of average an from

chosen is industry each in capital and labor between tution

substi- of elasticity The function. value-added CES a in capital and labor between

substitute can they Second, output. of unit per added value and inputs intermediate

of requirements fixed have producers First,

model. FSW the to similar are stages

two first The stages. of sequence a in factors of use its determines industry each

where 1, Figure of half bottom the in displayed is production of structure The
assets. and sectors, industries, across

capital of allocation endogenous with model equilibrium generalized a provide We
decisions. production of specification the in come model this to amendments Our

factors.'9 or products appropriate of purchases on rates tax valorem ad
as modeled typically are These taxes. local and state, federal, of spectrum entire

the includes model The industries. 18 the of outputs of combination coefficient
fixed- a is good consumer Each nest. subutility Cobb-Douglas a to according
goods consumer 15 among divided then are expenditures consumption Present wage.
net-of-tax the to respect with elasticity supply labor uncompensated the for

of estimate an.aggregate on based
of elasticity The

15

0.

is leisure and consumption between substitution

leisure. for endowment labor own its of some buy to choose can

household a I, Figure of level next the in indicated as resources, present With

- 23 -

prespecified. also is

() capital

noncorporate and corporate between substitution of elasticity The industry. that

of sector each from

stocks capital composite of function CES another is industry each

in Capital exogenously. specified be may (c) assets among substitutionof elasticity

The assets. 38 the of composite (CES) substitutionof elasticity constant different

a is industry each of sector noncorporate the in or sector corporate the in capital
Instead, studies. previous in common form functional Cobb-Douglas the by implied
as assets, among substitutionof elasticity unitary a to limited not is model Our
equilibrium. general a have we well, as clear markets
other when market; capital the in equilibrium have we supply, available total the
equals capital of use total the When endogenously. determined all sectors, of mix
different a as well as sector, each in assets of mix different a has industry Each
industry. that for capital of cost overall the to applies sector noncorporate the and
sector corporate the of composite additional an and industry, given a of sector each
to applies costs those of composite A equilibrium. in determined (s) return of rate
after-tax real the on endogenously depend also costs These specifications. statutory
other and lifetimes, tax rates, credit rates, tax statutory on information from up
built are types asset individual for costs user the 1, 1. section in described As
sector. each in land and inventories, structures,

of types 15 equipment, of types 20 include assets These types. asset different
38 to up for demand determine to used are calculations capital of cost individual

industry, each of sector each within Fourth, sectors. housing owner-occupied
and business, noncorporate corporate, the among division the determine to used are
expressions cost-of-capital separate industry, each for

1

Figure of stage production

third the In (1986). Henderson and Fullerton in detail in described as decisions,

- 24

alternatives. several under also and parameters, of set "standard" a under
taxes dividend of view each for simulations the perform We baseline. the of yield
revenue the restore to order in appropriate) as negative

or (positive

taxes lump-sum

to adjustment an assume simulations our All years. 50 is interval simulation total

our so apart, years 10 are that equilibria 6 of sequence a simulate We simulations.
our describe to necessary is it themselves, results the presenting Before
Sensitivity and Simulation 2.2
increases.

n as larger be therefore

would capital on tax overall the reducing from gain The loss. efficiency measured

greater a in results saving to return net and gross the between wedge tax any rises,
elasticity assumed this As low.

is

n where case the in than response saving higher a

in result would capital from income to return the of taxation reduced then high, is n

If

accumulation. capital aggregate for matters elasticity, savings the ri, of choice

the Finally, sectors. among rates equalizing from gains welfare high in reflected

be would

of values High housing. owner-occupiedand business, noncorporate

corporations, of treatment tax relative the in changes to sensitive quite be would
capital of allocation sectoral the then high, is

If assets. different of treatment

tax the equalize to tends reform a if gains welfare high relatively imply therefore
would c for value high A technology. production firm's the in change significant

more a in result would assets different of treatment tax relative the in changes
then example, for high, is c If reforms. alternative of attractiveness relative the
on therefore and distortions different of size relative the on bearing much have
of as well

as

,

r,

and c of choices the because important are generalizations These

-

25 -

impacts minor have to but plan, Treasury the from losses) reduce (or gains estimated
raise to expected be would

and

a of values Low high. is

c where case the in gains

welfare highest the produce to expected be could proposals Administration two The

factors. intertemporal and intersectoral, interasset, these of importance relative
the to sensitive be therefore might gains welfare The respects. these in neutral

approximately is plan President's the while distortions, intemporal and intersectoral
increases plan Treasury the addition, In distortions. interasset reduce reforms
the of both -- view" "new or -- shares financing existing with case the Under
(1978). Hymans and Howrey of estimate the with accord in
is zero of bound lower our elasticity, savings the For values. parameter these about

uncertainty considerable remains There elasticity. substitution sectoral a measure
to specifically attempt it does Neither model. this in include we assets of number
the consider not does elasticities substitution on work econometric existing 1986),

Henderson, and (Fullerton review literature earlier our in stressed we As 0.4.
and 0 between

r of values and 3, and 0.5 between

a and c of values consider We

cases. view" "old and view" "new
the between differ necessarily parameters of sets these below, discussed As effects.
"unfavorable" relatively produce to likely is that one and effects "favorable"

relatively produce to likely is that parameters of set one of effects the simulate
we taxes, dividend of view each for Thus, reform. tax from effects welfare of range
likely the out point that combinations pick we Instead,

r. and a, c, of combinations

plausible all show to not is alternatives constructing in strategy Our (1978).
Boskin of estimate the with consistent is which =0.4, r plus sectors, and assets
for case Cobb-Douglas the 1, = a and I = c include parameters of set "standard" The

- 26 -

reduce plans the example, important another take To inflation. varying by caused
uncertainties the reducing on not but percent, 4 of rate inflation given our at
incentives investment on indexation of effect the capture We indexing. for proposals
substantial introduce plans both example, For reform. tax fundamentalof aspects all

account into take not do they formation, capital to pertain they as proposals reform
tax the of elements major account into take simulations our although First,
decisions. policy for
results our of usefulness the and behavior: economic of specification the measures:
reform tax of quantification the issues: of types three mention to like would
We studies. such of limitations the however, mind, in bear to necessary always is It

results. detailed highly provide can here perform we as such analysis Simulation
Simulations

0. fl .5, = a .5, =

of Interpretation 2.3

is view old the for case "unfavorable"

relatively the .4: = r =3, a =3, £ is: view old the for case "favorable" The parameters.
standard the to alternatives two under view old the examine we results, these

of sensitivity the analyze To n.

with somewhat rise would gains welfare capital,

of cost overall the lower slightly also would they

Because

a. and c are higher

the gains welfare higher yield would plans these Thus, sectors. of and assets of
taxation differential the lower would plans Administration both view, old the under
that, indicates 6 Table taxes. dividend of view" "old the with consistent results
give that proportions financing using simulations of set second a perform We

=0.4. fl and =3, a =0.5, c is: view new the
for parameters of set "unfavorable" an and =0: n and =0.5, a =3, c is: view new the for
parameters of set "favorable" a Therefore plan. Presidents the of evaluationthe in

- 27 -

judgment. and information additional
appropriate use should reform tax of evaluation overall Any caution. with preted
inter- be necessarily must

3

section in found results various the summary, In

reform. tax assess to which by criteria additional be would goals

these of achievement the in changes Any reports. President's the and Treasurys the
both in important are that concepts "simplicity," or "fairness" on reform tax mental
funda- of effects the consider not do we that emphasized be should it Finally,
markets. financial national to access or liability limited

providing of decisions these on effect the model explicitly not do we but sions,
deci- incorporation on costs capital of impact the capture to attempts parameter
the of use Our complements. are assets some that possibility the omit we production
in another one for substitutes as assets all view finns that implies parameter
c the of use Our decisions. allocation capital to respect with choices specific

made have we Also, change. this reflect to ratios debt-equity firms' alter not
do we yet corporations, for finance debt of cost the raise plans reform The choices.
financial

of specification the is model our to relevant

example One decisionmaking.

economic of aspects some simplifies necessarily model simulation any Second,
costs.21 capital of measures our in changes policy such include not do We tion.

produc- multiperiod of case the in accounting for and subsidies energy for changes
the include Examples industries. particular on influences sizable have could that
features new introduce proposals the well, As changes. these from effects welfare
measure not do We economy.20 underground the in activity decrease and force labor
the in participation increase might that ways in rates tax income marginal personal

-

28 -

a yield parameters standard-case The percent. 0.1 or billion, $112 of loss welfare
a is there parameters, of set "unfavorable" the Under baseline. the in leisure
and income of value present the over percent 0.6 of increase an represents figure
This dollars). (1984 billion $678 is gains welfare of value discounted present the

elasticity, savings low a and parameter, substitution sector low a parameter, tution
substi- asset high a of case "favorable" the Under parameters. of set any for small
relatively are effects efficiency plan, Treasury the to specifically Turning

capital. of cost the
in increase no almost and costs capital the of deviation standard the in reduction
greater achieve would plan President's the that

5

Table in findings the from follow

results These stock. capital the in drop smaller a and gains welfare larger has plan
President's the that find we generally, proposals reform two the comparing In
22

stock.

capital smaller slightly a from output larger achieve to -- indicate simulations

the

as

-- fact in and stock, capital given a from output larger achieve to possible

therefore is It uses. its across capital of allocation better a of effect augmenting
welfare- the by offset generally are plan Treasury the under increase percent

6.8 the even and plan President's the under capital of cost the in increase cent
per- 1.7 slight the of effects welfare-reducing The stock. capital the in decrease

a about bring they if even welfare economic in increase an cause generally proposals
reform tax the there, shown As view." "new the reflects I Panel First, formation.
capital on effects the as well as losses or gains welfare the presents 7 Table
Formation Capital and Output, Welfare,

1

3.

Results Equilibrium General 3.

- 29 -

found is proposals Administration's the by introduced integration partial the because
formation capital and welfare in increases larger produces simulations of set This
percent. 1.3 and 0.7 between rises stock capital the and percent, 1.2 and 0.4 between
estimated are gains welfare the plan, President's the For percent. 1.0 and 0.5
between stock capital the in increases and percent 1.2 and 0.3 between gains welfare

yield shown cases the plan, Treasury the For 6. Table in costs capital of deviation
standard the and level the both on effects similar their from anticipated be might
as similar, are plan President's and Treasury the for findings the Furthermore,

=0). fl .5, = .5, = (c small are elasticities relevant all where case favorable least
the in even gains efficiency produce therefore They distortions. intertemporal and
distortions, intersectoral distortions, interasset reduce proposals the view, old the
Under positive. all are that stock capital the in changes and I, Panel in those than
higher considerably are that gains welfare indicate

11

Panel in results The ment.

treat- gains capital to half and taxation, dividend to subject half are investments
equity marginal where case the dividends, of view" "old the to next turn We
stock. capital the
in decline percent 0.3 to 0.2 a show combinationsparameter other The allocation.

resource efficient more by generated output greater the of out savings of effect"
"income the by offset is capital of cost overall raised slightly

a of

effect" "price

the that indicating stock, capital the in change no is there parameters, of set able
favor- the Under percent). 0.7 to percent 0.2 (or billion $861 to billion $292 from

ranging positive, all are changes welfare indicated the plan, President's the For
percent. -1.9 to -0.5 is stock
capital the in change the for estimates of range The welfare. in increaseslight

-

30 -

assets. different for costs user
relative in changes to reaction in sharply more processes production their change

corporations increases, parameter elasticity asset the As magnitude. in larger
but direction same the in are reallocations these shown), (not c of value higher

a with simulations the In sector. corporate the for rate average the to close rates
at taxed currently are that assets property, utility public and structures of share
same the about use to continue would Firms increase. also would sector corporate

the in land of use The plan. President's the under percent 39.0 and proposal
Treasury the under percent .8 41 for account to estimated are but stock, capital
corporate of percent 34.2 for account currently Inventories plan. Presidents
the under percent 21.8 and plan Treasury the under percent 19.7 to drop would share
This equipment. of form the in is stock capital corporate the of percent 29.5 data,
baseline 1984 our Under

23

sector. business
noncorporate the in place take would
•

reallocations Similar I). equals elasticity, substitution asset the

c, (where

view"

"new the under parameters standard the for sector, corporate the for reallocation
this illustrates

8

Table assets. these for demands relative their alter would firms

result, a As treatments. tax these in differences the narrow plans proposed Both
rates. tax statutory face land and inventories in investments to returns extreme,
other the At depreciation. for lifetimes short very and credit tax investment
the of result a as tax-favored is equipment in investment law, current Under
Sectors and Assets Among Capital of Allocation 3.2

plan. Presidents
the under percent 10 only to opposed as payments, dividend of half deduct would
firms because plan Treasury the of simulations the

in

marked particularly is views

"old" and "new" the between contrast The significantly. capital of cost the lower to

-

31

-

housing. owner-occupiedof stock

the in percent 5 of decline commensurate a and capital, corporate in increase percent
6 a but capital, total in increase percent

1

a yield also would plan Treasury the

in than provisions recovery cost generous more with combination in deduction dividend

percent 10 the plan, President's the Under 2. Figure in illustrated as percent,
5

by rise to stock capital sector corporate the allow capital, total in increase

percent

1

a with together flows, relative These sectors. housing and corporate

non- the in fall and sector corporate the in rise would capital of use Relative
credit. tax investment the of removal the and allowances depreciation generous
less of effects cost-raising the offset than more would plan Treasury the under

deduction dividend percent 50 The sector. corporate the in capital increase would
proposals Administration's the then investment, discourages dividends of taxation
existing the that view old the of conclusion the adopt we When allocation. this

in factor significant a is taxation dividend of effects the about assumption The
capital. of cost corporate the in increase percent 0.3
slight very the given stock, capital corporate the in change no essentially in result

would plan President's The 2). Figure (see sector corporate the in capital of size
the in decrease percent 8 an in result eventually would capital of cost corporate the
in increase percent 13 the plan, Treasury the of case the in Additionally, housing.
owner-occupied from away and sector business noncorporate the toward capital shift
would proposals both view, new the Under economy.24 the of sectors three the among
capital redistributing in reform tax of effect the measure also simulations Our

-

32 -

industries. trade and construction

the in capital of use and output both in increases large be also would There plans.
both under increase, would industries manufacturing corporate heavily the in capital
and decline would industry estate real the in capital shown), (not view old the
adopt we When form. corporate the under business doing of attractiveness the affects
it since results, the for matters taxation dividend of theory the again Once

usage. capital and output in

increases experience would industries more Also,

•26

estate real in decline projected

the for except similar, is plan President's the under pattern industrial The
equipment). of use low the of (because insurance and finance and inventories)

of use high the of (because

industry trade the in rise to projected also is stock

capital The land. on reliance heavy their and status noncorporate largely their
given expected be might as increase, also stocks capital industries These housing.

and agriculture are run long the in output in increase an experience that industries
only the view, new the with proposal Treasury the Under industries.25 private
9 for capital of use and output the in changes eventual the presents 9 Table

capital. and labor for demand of patterns the in changes generates mix output the in
change This industries. different of outputs the for demand in changes indicate also
simulations one, this as such model equilibrium general a In allocations. industry
affect also will allocations sectoral and asset affect that factors the capital,

of costs sector-specific and asset-

from derived are capital of costs industry

our Since contract. would sectors housing owner-occupied and corporate the while
grow would sector business noncorporate the dividends, of view" "new and =0.4), r I, =
1, = (€

parameters standard our under Also, equipment. of expense the at inventories

and land of use productive the expand would reform either indicated, just As
Industries for Results 3.3

- 33 -

of set favorable least the for Even distortions. intertemporal increases longer no
plan Treasury the view, this Under assets. among differences as well as distortions
intersectoral reduce thus They paid. dividends for deductions partial their through

taxation corporate reduce plans both incentives, investment on effect significant

a have taxes dividend that view" "old the Under stock. capital the in declines
slight with even gains welfare net generate reforms both parameters, most for Still,
distortions. intertemporal exacerbate would plan Treasury the but distortions,

intersectoral reduce would plan Presidents the and distortions interasset reduce
would reforms both incentives, investment on effect small a have taxes dividend

that view" "new the Under 1985. May of proposal President's the and 1984, November
of plan reform tax Treasury the law, current compare to used is model The
crucial. is effects multiple these

of consideration simultaneous the proposals, reform tax alternative of evaluation
overall the For welfare. in changes associated and allocations resource alternative
simulate can it system, equilibrium general fully a In incentives. investment
total on impact the evaluate to together these weighs it and industries, and sectors,
assets, individual for capital of costs compare can It gains. capital and interest

of indexation the as such features other and allowances, depreciation credits,
rates, statutory in changesof effects net the measuring of capable is It incomes.
capital on taxes of design the in issues multiple these addresses paper this in
model The distortions. poralintertem and interindustry, intersectoral, interasset,
on emphasis relative their in differ reform tax fundamental for proposals Recent
Conclusions 4.

- 34 -

industries. and sectors, assets, among capital

of allocations

alternative shows paper the Finally, values. baseline their above output of value
real the and stock capital the both raise reforms these case, this in parameters

-

35 -

effects The equity. and debt between arbitrage individuals, than rather firms, that
be might assumption alternative An exogenous. be to choices these take We choices.
financing observed cause that restrictions institutional or uncertainty

of role

the model not do we Here, finance. of mix given a use must firms reason some for
if only justified be can this certainty, perfect of context a In debt. by financed
project same the on than equity by financed project a on product marginal higher

a earn must firm the then equity, and debt from taxes all of net return of rate same
the earn individuals if that is assumption arbitrage our of result obvious One 7.
law. current under .0 I is It taxes). personal of (gross dividends

forgone of terms in retentions of cost opportunity the

is

e parameter The 6.

law. U.S. current under 1.0 is

f fraction The

5.

(1985). Henderson in shown is accounting inventory

FIFO of effect The methods. LIFO assume here calculations but accounting, inventory
FIFO using by taxes unnecessary pay firms Similarly, behavior. minimizing tax assume
here calculations however, regimes, tax across comparability insure to and wedge
tax the on concentrate to order In deductions. possible earliest the taking by taxes

their minimize always not may firms here, captured not reasons of variety a For 4.
(1987). Poterba and Auerbach and (1983) Auerbach
in investigated are offsets loss imperfect and uncertainty

of effects The

3.

capital. on effects their on exclusively concentrate We supply. labor

and income labor on cuts rate these of effects the consider not does paper This 2.
1985. spring

and 1984 fall between proposals the in revisions the of analysis and description
excellent provides (1986) McLure Charles here. bill House the evaluate not do We

1.

- 36 -

sectors. and industries, assets, all for shares financing

identical assumed have we that is statements these to caveat important An 13.
industries. our of each in inventories and land of values

the for projections 1984 our for basis the form also data These data. Jorgenson
the in proportions disaggregate using by structures, of types 15 and equipment

of types 20 all for allocations capital finer the obtain we Finally, industries.
18 the of each in used asset of types four these

of each showing Jorgenson, Dale from

matrix 1977 unpublished an adjust to targets 1984 these with procedure RAS an use
then We formation. capital and growth economic between relationship the of estimate
econometric an using by 1984 to figures stock capital 22 these of each project
We industries. 18 by stocks capital depreciable total for data obtain also We

structures. noncorporate and equipment, noncorporate structures, corporate equipment,
corporate for data 1981 obtain we Business, Current of Survey 1985 July the From 12.
percent. 4 than lower is tax
after .04 = s earn to required

p

of value the subsidy, a Under values. property and

income net on taxes of effects the outweigh they that generous so are allowances tion
deprecia- and credits tax that means rate, tax effective negative or subsidy, A 11.
1-222). 22 pages (1984, Fullerton and King See 10.
(1984). Fullerton and King of 22! page See

9.

model. this of description further for (1985) Navratil and Lindsey See 8.
(1977). Miller in as assets, different in specialize groups
income different in individuals if only framework certainty perfect the in supported

be would view alternative This (1985). Fullerton and (1985), Henderson (1984),
Henderson and Fullerton in explored are rates tax measured on arbitrage firm of

- 37 -

decisions. financial in distortions reduced any from gains
efficiency potential measure to attempt not do We differential. rate this offsets
completely level corporate the at deduction dividend percent 50 the dividends,

for than gains capital for lower are that rates tax personal maintains plan Treasury
the Although 6. and 5 Tables between differ not do sector corporate the in capital

of costs the

is, That shares. new issuing and earnings retaining between choices

firms' to respect with neutral is plan Treasury the that is finding Another 17.
theory. each with associated
problems conceptual some explain also (1985) Summers and Poterba 1985). (1983,
Summers and Poterba in evidence historical with compatible more found was view old
the but (1984), Auerbach by study a in support empirical received view new The 16.

l/(l-gu). e= because enters g parameter The

15.

return. of
rate the of calculation the in denominator and numerator the identically affect these
since g, and

rr parameters the of independent is return This

I-u). r( thus is period

first the in foregone dividends to relative shareholders to return The tax. personal

of net (1--r5)r(l-u)/(1-gu) or r(l-u)/(l-gu), is payout dividend for available

t

income resulting the and r, of return pretax a earns asset the period following the
In income.) dividend on rate tax personalthe

and income, corporate from tible

deduc- dividends of fraction the g rate, corporate statutory the is u that (Recall
tax. personal of net -gu) I )/( -'t1 (1 or tax, personal of gross -gu)I 1I( equal foregone
dividends the 1.2.3, section in shown As payments. dividend reduce necessarily must
firm the dollar, extra an retain To earnings. of dollar additional an retaining by

capital of more $1 in invest to wishes that firm a consider argument, this see To 14.

-

38 -

direction. same the in move
welfare and output Therefore, slightly. only leisure affect simulations the time,
leisure of value the in changes includes gain welfare of measure our Although 22.
incentives. on effects important omit

may it code, tax the of feature every for account cannot capital of cost the because
Yet, capital. of cost the of concept the to turn we that incentives investment

to guide poor a often is revenue tax because is it Indeed, investment. marginal
on tax of value present the affect they than more revenue of timing the affect
would proposals the in provisions Other rate. lower new the to subject income earn
would that and assets of holdings existing their on depreciation accelerated received
that corporations from revenue acquire would example, for proposal, Presidents
the of tax recapture windfall The margin. the at investment affecting out
with- behavior, other or profits, employment, affect may features tax corporate Some

margin. the at investment affect taxation of aspects various which to degree the
about assessments requires capital of cost the for measure a of construction The 21.
(1986). Slemrod by analyzed are effects These 20.
manner. lump-sum a in taxes income changing by

this do We tax. other some (increasing) cutting by (losses) gains revenue resulting
the offset must we income, and output national (lower) raise simulations our

when Therefore, budget. balanced a run government that requires also model The 19.
model. Fullerton-Shoven-Whalley the into expectations foresight

perfect incorporating of effect the examine (1985) Goulder and Ballard myopically.
return of rate the of expectations form households that assumes model Our

- 39

18.

-

indexing). interest no has (which proposal Presidents the does than more

capital housing of cost relative the lowers therefore plan Treasury The 5). Table
(see rate interest nominal the reduces thus and businesses of deductions interest

indexes proposal Treasury the However, payments. interest mortgage of deductibility
full maintain both and taxes property local for deduction the terminate would

both since identically, housing owner-occupiedtreat to appear proposals The 26.
vehicles. motor and equipment: tion

transporta- machinery; and metals glass: and clay, stone, furniture, lumber, rubber:
and chemicals refining; petroleum printing: and paper leather: and apparel, textiles,
tobacco; and food industries: detailed more 9 combines category manufacturing the
while model, our in industries extractive two the combines 2 industry 9, Table In 25.
0.4.= n and I, =

1, = £

with parameters, standard the considers again 2 Figure 24.
sector. a within assets across not sectors, across investment

of costs relative the affects primarily

view new the and view old the between

choice The similar. are view old the for parameters standard under results The 23.

- 40

-

.270

.245
.300

Noncorporate Income
Housing Deductions

deferral.

This rate reflects full taxation of real capital gains after

.218

.052

Capital Gains

1.

.242

.292

Dividends Received

.1051

.205

Administration Plans

.231

1985 Law

Interest Received

Type of Income

1

Personal Tax Rate Parameters

Table

a.
b.

28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35

27

20
21
22
23
24
25
26

17
18
19

10
11
12
13
14
15
16

9

8

7

5
6

4

3

2

1

.110
.092
.079
.163
.097
.172
.165
.123
.103
.123
.273
.165
.118
.254
.333
.183
.075
.066
.150
.150
.036
.025
.019
.019
.023
.045
.018
.033
.030
.030
.045
.024
.056
.029
.015

Economic
Depreciation
Rate

18
5
18
18

18
18
18
18
18
18
15
15
15
10
10

5
5
5

5

5

3

25

.

I,

I

63

38

1

38

63

.L

I

63

12
17

12
25
25

8
5

4'

I

I

10
28

L

4
28
10

28

7

6

7

10

4
6

6
7
6
6
7
7
7
5
6
7
5

10

17

5
5
5
5
5
5
6
5
5
5
5
5
5
12
17
12
12
17
17
17
8
12
17

7
7

17

5

CCRS
Close—out
Year

RCRS
Close-out
Year

ACRS
Tax
Lifetime

.00

.00

.10
.10
.00
.00

.10
.10
.10

.00
.00
.00
.00

.00

.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.00

.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.10
.06

Current Law
Investment
Tax Credit

For the case of 4 percent inflation and a 4 percent net rate of return.
Economic depreciation rates come from Hulten and Wykoff (1981), and for assets 27—31, from Jorgenson and Sullivan (1981).

Furniture and Fixtures
Fabricated Metal Products
Engines and Turbines
Tractors
Agricultural Machinery
Construction Machinery
Mining and Oil Field Machinery
Metalworking Machinery
Special Industry Machinery
General Industrial Equipment
Office and Computing Machinery
Service Industry Machinery
Electrical Machinery
Trucks, Buses, and Trailers
Autos
Aircraft
Ships and Boats
Railroad Equipment
Instruments
Other Equipment
Industrial Buildings
Commercial Buildings
Religious Buildings
Educational Buildings
Hospital Buildings
Other Nonfarm Buildings
Railroads
Telephone and Telegraph
Electrical Light and Power
Gas Facilities
Other Public Utilities
Farm Structures
Mining, Shafts and Wells
Other Nonbuilding Facilities
Residential Structures

2

Tax Parameters for Each Asseta

Table

1

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36

5
6
7
8
9

3
4

2

Furniture and Fixtures
Fabricated Metal Products
Engines and Turbines
Tractors
Agricultural Machinery
Construction Machinery
Mining and Oil Field Machinery
Metalworking Machinery
Special Industry Machinery
General Industrial Equipment
Office and Computing Machinery
Service Industry Machinery
Electrical Machinery
Trucks, Buses, and Trailers
Autos
Aircraft
Ships and Boats
Railroad Equipment
Instruments
Other Equipment
Industrial Buildings
Commercial Buildings
Religious Buildings
Educational Buildings
Hospital Buildings
Other Nonfarm Buildings
Railroads
Telephone and Telegraph
Electric Light and Power
Gas Facilities
Other Public Utilities
Farm.Structures
Mining, Shafts and Wells
Other Nonbuilding Facilities
Inventories
Land
.607
.865
.607

.699

I

.604

4

I

I

I

I

.607

4

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

.812

4.

J

4-

I

.1.

.61]

4.

.436

I
I

I

I

I

4
.855

I

I

4
.571

I

I

I

I

I
I

.617

.769
.436

.834

.891
.920
.891

.855

.685

.920

.685

.891
.891
.891
.939
.920
.891
.939
.952

.920
.920

.891

.855
.920

.891

.891

.834

.877
.915

.834
.769

.877

.769

.769
.769

.834

.769
.685
.834
.769
.834

.769

Present Value of Allowances (z)
Current
President's
Treasury
Law
Plan
Plan

.437
.481
.504

.316

.314
.420

.370
.364
.297

.483
.339

.423
.404
.404
.419

.031
.033
.006
.006
.458

—.029
—.021
—.005

.019
.025
.029
.002
.024
—.001
.001
.015
.022
.015
—.036
.001
.017

.451
.523
.464
.442
.468

.483

.409
.399
.459
.480
.453
.438
.438
.450
.501
.431
.462
.456
.456

.423

.416
.393
.429
.411
.400
.418
.412
.430
.407
.430
.435
.412
.425
.423
.401
.428

.280
.264
.286
.280
.269
.286
.281
.290
.274
.290
.302
.281
.286
.293
.292
.293
.282
.241
.272
.312
.398
.374
.360
.360
.371
.417
.317
.332
.329
.329
.343
.371
.43]
.383
.418
.447

Marginal Effective Total Tax Rates (t)
Current
President's
Treasury
Law
Plan
Plan

Investment Incentives for Each Asset in the Corporate Sector

Table 3

.244

.382

.314
.313

.331

.372

.342

.337
.378
.318
.369
.396
.383
.369
.358
.389

.360
.376
.383
.365
.336

.345
Plan
President's

.297

.278
.358
.255
.349
.429
.394
.363
.329
.413
.338

.431
.442
.445
.443
.435
.434
.454
.435

.410

.369
.410

.435
.442
.405
.463
.417
.353

Plan
Treasury

.385
.397
.366
.348
.294
.353

Total
Services
Estate Real
Insurance and Finance
Trade
Utilities and Communication Transportation,
Vehicles Motor
Equipment Transportation
Machinery and Metals
Glass and Clay Stone, Furniture, Lumber,
Rubber and Chemicals
Refining Petroleum
Printing and Paper
Leather and Apparel Textiles,
Tobacco and Food
Construction
as and Petroleum Crude
Mining
Fisheries and Forestry Agriculture,

Law
Current

18
17
16
15
14
13

12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5

4
—
2
1

Industry

Industry Each for Rates Tax Total Effective Marginal

4

Table

.232

.052

1.

.054

.057
.062
.064
.067
.059
.062
.069
.062

.069
.077
.074
.072
.075
.072

p

.091

.372

008

.064 (+6.8%)

(+3.5%)

(+68.1%)
(÷4.7%)
(÷16.5%)
(+2.5%)
(—2.5%)
(—2.4%)
(—2.1%)
(+2.0%)

(+70.5%)
(+10.8%)
(+20.1%)
(-7.0%)
(-6.8%)
(+12.7%)

change1

Treasury Plan

(p).

.257

.298
.353
.371
.400
.317
.356
.422
.359

.419
.480
.457
.442
.468
.446

t

Numbers in parentheses are percentage changes from current law in the cost of capital

104

.331

Average Overall Tax Rate

Interest Rate

.060
.012

.064
.071
.061

.060

.059
.055
.065

—.181
.322
.267
.386
.334
.371
.434
.347

.010
.423
.348
.481
.504
.372

t

.034

.040
.069
.061
.077
.081
.064

Average Overall Cost of Capital
Standard Deviation

Owner-Occupied Housing

Equipment
Nonresidential Structures
Public Utility Structures
Residential Structures
Inventories
Nonresidential Land
Residential Land
Total

Noncorporate Business Sector

Equipment
Nonresidential Structures
Public Utility Structures
Inventories
Land
Total

Corporate Sector

p1

Current Law

Investment Incentives With New View of Dividend Taxes

Table 5

.056

.052
.058
.058
.064
.058
.062
.069
.061

.056
.066
.060
.068
.072
.064

p

change'

.101

.342

.061 (+1.7%)
.005

(÷7.9%)

(÷53.4%)
(—1.2%)
(+6.2%)
(—1.8%)
(—2.8%)
(—2.8%)
(—2.4%)
(—0.3%)

(÷0.3%)

(--10.4%)

(÷37.9%)
(—4.3%)
(—2.6%)
(-10.9%)

%

President's Plan

.288

.231
.314
.310
.374
.314
.353
.420
.344

.282
.398
.329
.418
.447
.374

t

.347

.232

.061
.052

Noncorporate Business Sector2

Owner-Occupied Housing2

The choice between the old and new view of dividend taxes does not affect the noncorporate sector,
owner-occupied housing, or the overall interest rates.

2.

101
.091

.104

Interest Rate2

Numbers in parentheses are percentage changes from current law in the cost of capital (p).

.369

.376

.382

Average Overall Tax Rate

1.

.063 (—2.0%)
.008

(÷7.9%)

.056

.257

.064 (—1.1%)
.008

(+3.5%)

.054

(—0.3%)

.061

change1!

.359

1%

(+22.1%)
(-10. 0%)
(—9. 7%)
(—18.0%)
(—17.4%)
(-7.9%)

p

.062
.074
.066
.076
.080
.071

.423
.483
.460
.445
.472
.450

t

President's Plan

.065
.016

(+2.0%)

.062

change1

(+36.9%)
(-5.6%)
(+2.2%)
(—22.4%)
(—21.3%)
(-5.6%)

j%

.069
.077
.074
.072
.076
.072

p

Treasury Plan

Average Overall Cost of Capital
Standard Deviation

Total

Land

.448
.570
.586
• 480

.051
.082
.073
.093
.097
.077
.211
.512

t

Equipment
Nonresidential Structures
Public Utility Structures
Inventories

Corporate Sector

p

Current Law

Investment Incentives With Old View of Dividend Taxes

Table 6

.288

.344

.458
.390
.476
.500
.435

354

t

Standard case: c=l, a=1, r=.4
Favorable case: c=3, cT=.5, fl=O
Unfavorable case: c=.5, a=3, fl=.4

$606.4
(0.5%)
(1.2%)
(0.3%)

$692.0
$1,419.0
$423.6

$367.8
$861.3
$291.7

(0.6%)
(1.2%)
(0.4%)

(0.3%)
(0.7%)
(0.2%)

+1.0%
+1.0%
+0.5%

—1.9%
—0.5%
—1.9%

+1.3%
+1.0%
+0.7%

—0.3%

0.0%

—0.2%

Plan

Percent difference from baseline capital stock after fifty years.

$329.2

$1,408.0

(0.1%)
(0.6%)
(—0.1%)

I

I

2.

3,

Standard case: c=1, a=1, fl=.4
Favorable case:
a3, fl=.4
Unfavorable case: e=.5, a=.5, r=0

—$112.1

$678.2

$58.8

Plan

Long-Run Change in
Capital Stock2
President's
Treasury

Welfare gains are measured as the present discounted value of equivalent variations. The numbers in parentheses express
the gains or losses as a percentage of the present discounted value of welfare (consumption plus leisure) in the baseline
sequence.

A.
B.
C.

Old View of Dividend Taxes

B.
C.

A.

New View of Dividend Taxes

I

I

Welfare Gains'
(billions of 1984 dollars)
President's Plan
Treasury Plan

1.

II.

I.

7

Welfare Gains and Capital Formation from Fundamental Tax Reform

Table

Plan
Treasury

Plan
President's

.197

.218

.155

.160

.107

.118

.418

.390

.123

.115

dividends. of view new Assumes

1.

Land

.101
.342
.112
.149
.295

Inventories
Property Utility Public
Structures
Equipment

Baseline

total) of proportion as years, fifty (After

Types Asset Across
Capital Corpoiate of Allocation Eventual

8

Table

Utilities

Trade

Finance and Insurance

Real Estate

Services

5

6

7

8

9

Percentage changes from the baseline, after fifty years,

2.

32,495.4

877.2

10,777.9

565.7

4,389.5

3,272.8

4,616.8

Assumes new view of dividends.

12,622.1

1,685.2

1,109.5

588.0

1,621.9

1,067.5

4,936.4

699.8

1.

Total

Manufacturing

4

630.2

Construction

3

in

1,110.0

196.8

Mining

2

6,186.0

786.7

Agriculture

(Capital Stock

Output

1

Industry

Baseline after fifty years
(billions of 1984 dollars)

—1.9%

—14.8%

+0.1%

+1.5%

+2.6%

—19.8%

—5.9%

—4.1%

—12.0%

+7.4%

ICapital Stock

the private sector only.

—0.3%

—0.6%

+0.2%

—0.3%

—0.1%

—4.8%

-0.2%

—1.5%

—5.8%

+7.4%

Output

Treasury Plan2

Eventual Output and Capital Stock by Industry'

Table 9

+0.4%

-0.0%

—1.4%

+0.3%

+0.9%

—1.4%

+0.8%

—0.5%

—1.3%

+4.2%

Output

—0.2%

—8.4%

—2.1%

÷4.4%

+5.5%

—7.5%

+0.1%

-0.5%

—3.7%

+4.0%

(Capital Stock

President's Plan

owner— of

housing.

function

rental noncorporate and housing occupied
CES a is capital industry, housing the In

—
1/

types. asset 38 the of function
CES a is sector each in capital of Use

Kac capital
noncorporate and
capital corporate of
CES a is industry each in K4 Capital

/ function

K

K. capital and
labor
of function CES a is VAj added Value

L

industry. each for

roducer 19

proportions fixed in goods,
the are inputs

Intermediate

inputs intermediate and VAj added value of
Proportions fixed uses Qj good producer Each

A.

trade). and transportation, metals, (e.g.,
goods roducer 19 the of mix coefficient fixed
a is appliances) (e.g.,
good consumer Each

Q

(j1,l9) Goods Producer

X

X

(m1,15) Goods Consumer

C oods consumer
15 the of comoosite Cobb—Douglas a is K

K
X. good comoosite a and
leisure
function CES a is H consumotion Present
2.

C.

consumption future and H consumption
oresent of function CES a is U Utility

CF

H

Model the of Summary Diagrammatic A
1

Figure

1.

3000

-

6O0O

9000

i2000

isooo

-

=12,114

Baseline

I-

Standard Case Parameters

A
A
S

0
0

9
8
4

I

F

0

L

B

—

I

Treasury
=11,120

F
President's
=12,095

New View

Treasury
=12,725

President's
=12,874

+

Old View

CORPORATE SECTOR AFTER 50 YEARS1

ALLOCATION OF CAPITAL IN THE

FIGURE 2

1655. No. Paper Working NBER Incentives," Investment of Model A
Gains: Capital and Depreciation, Interest, of Indexation "The (1985), Don Fullerton,
129-58.

July, 21, Economics Public of Journal Return," of Rate Pretax the and Rate
Tax Effective "The (1983), Poterba James and Dicks-Mireaux Louis Martin, Feldstein,
Press. Institute Urban The DC: Washington, Capital, from Income of Taxation
the and Inflation Depreciation, ed., Hulten, C.R. in Rates," Tax Effective
of Use and Construction the in "Pitfalls (1981), Fullerton Don and F. David Bradford,
1-23. February, 15, Economics Public of Journal Distributions," Corporate

on Tax a of Effects Allocation and Incidence "The (1981), F. David Bradford,
S3-S27. April, 86, Economy Political

of Journal Interest," of Rate the and Saving, "Taxation, (1978), J. Michael Boskin,
Press. Chicago

of University

Chicago: Evaluation, Policy Tax for Model Equilibrium General

A (1985), Whalley John and Shoven, B. John Fullerton, Don L., Charles Ballard,
Press. University Cambridge

York: New Analysis, Equilbrium General Applied in Developments New eds., Whalley,
John and Piggott John in Analysis," Equilibrium General Computable A Welfare: and

Foresight, Taxes, "Consumption (1985), Goulder H. Lawrence and L. Charles Ballard,
volume. this Incentives," Tax

Corporate and Carryforwards Loss "Tax (1987), Poterba M. James and J. Alan Auerbach,
27-57. pp. February/March, 23, Economics Public of Journal Analysis," Empirical
An Capital: of Cost the and Policy, Financial Firm "Taxes, (1984), J. Alan Auerbach,
References

283-92. 1984, November America of Institute Tax
Tax National the of Conference Annual the of Proceedings Capital?"

of Cost the Lower Inflation Reducing "Does

(1985), Kodrzycki Yolanda Henderson,
Press. University

State Wayne Detroit: Tax, Income Corporationof Effects ed., Krzyzaniak, M.
in Capita!," From Income On Taxes of Effects "Efficiency (1966), C. Arnold Harberger,
391-414. June, 57, Review Economic American
Behavior," Investment and Policy "Tax (1967), Jorgenson W. Dale and Robert Hall,
1-20. March, 35, Journal Tax National Capital," Business from Income of

Taxation the on Revisions Depreciation 1981 the of "Effects (1982), G. Jane Gravelle,
3-23. February,
20, Economics Public of Journal Tax," Consumption Progressive a with Tax
Income U.S. the "Replacing (1983), Whalley John and Shoven B. John Don, Fullerton,
February. 7, No. Paper Occasional
AEI Industries," and Sectors, Assets, Among Distortions Tax the of Model

Equilibrium Disaggregate "A (1986), Henderson Kodrzycki Yolanda and Don Fullerton,
363-72. August,

67, Statistics and Economics of Review The System," Recovery Cost Accelerated
the of Effects "Long-run (1985), Henderson Kodrzycki Yolanda and Don Fullerton,
Press. Institute Urban The DC: Washington,

Growth, Long-Term for Prospects Reaganomics: of Legacy The eds., Sawhill,
I.V. and Hulten C.R. in 1980's," the in Policies Alternative Capital: from Income
on Taxes of Effects "Incentive (1984), Henderson Kodrzycki Yolanda and Don Fullerton,

Irwin. D. Richard IL: Homewood, Finance, Corporate in
Advances Recent eds., Subrahmanyam, G. Marti and Altman I. Edward in Taxation,"
Dividend of Effects Economic "The (1985), Summers H. Lawrence and M. James Poterba,
135-67. (November), 22 Economics Public of Journal

Q," and Investment,

Corporate Taxes, "Dividend (1983), Summers H. Lawrence and M. James Poterba,
1-75. 26 May, 32, Finance of Journal Taxes," and "Debt (1977), Met-ton Miller,
Simplification. Tax

of

Consequences Economic 29, No. Series Conference Boston of Bank Reserve Federal
in Proposals," Treasury the Underlying "Rationale (1986), Jr. E., Charles McLure,
Institution. Brookings DC:

Washington, Twice?, Taxed be Income Corporate Must (1979), Jr. E., Charles McLure,
University. Harvard mimeo, 1982," from Evidence Responses:
Revenue and Reductions "Rate (1985), Navratil F. John and B. Lawrence Lindsey,
Press. Chicago of University

The Chicago: Germany, West and Sweden, U.K., U.S., the of Study Comparative
A Capital: from Income of Taxation The (1984) eds. Fullerton, Don and A. Mervyn King,

Hall. and Chapman London: Corporation, the and Policy Public (1977), A. Mervyn King,
Press. Institute Urban The DC: Washington, Capital, from Income

of Taxation the and Inflation, Depreciation, ed., Hulten, C.R. in Recovery,"
Capital Corporate and "Inflation (1981), Sullivan A. Martin and W. Dale Jorgenson,
Press. Institute Urban The DC: Washington, Capital, from Income

of Taxation the and Inflation, Depreciation, ed.,

Hulten,

CR. in Depreciation,"

Economic of Measurement "The I), (198 Wykoff C. Frank and R. Charles Hulten,
655-685. Activity, Economic on Papers Brookings Saving," Funds Loanable

of Determination and Measurement "The (1978), Hymans H. Saul and Philip E. Howry,

-

R-3 -

DC. Washington, Secretary, the of Office Growth,

Economic and Simplicity, Fairness, for Reform Tax (1984), Department Treasury U.S.
Simplification.
Tax of Consequences Economic 29, No. Series Conference Boston of Bank
Reserve Federal in Households," on Reform Tax of Impact "The (1986), Joel Slemrod,
(1985).
Simplicity and Growth, Fairness, for Congress the to Proposals Tax Presidents The

-

R-4

