                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    A MICROECONOMIC FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING ENERGY EFFICIENCY
                  REBOUND AND SOME IMPLICATIONS

                                          Severin Borenstein

                                         Working Paper 19044
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19044


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




I benefited from discussions with Carl Blumstein, Lucas Davis, Paul Joskow, Chris Knittel, David
Rapson, Alan Sanstad, Catherine Wolfram and seminar participants at U.C. Berkeley's Energy \&
Resources Group colloquium and the 18th annual POWER conference. Patrick Baylis provided excellent
research assistance, as well as valuable comments. This research was supported in part under a research
contract from the California Energy Commission to the Energy Institute at Haas. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Severin Borenstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
A Microeconomic Framework for Evaluating Energy Efficiency Rebound And Some Implications
Severin Borenstein
NBER Working Paper No. 19044
May 2013
JEL No. Q4,Q41,Q48,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

Improving the efficiency with which we use energy is often said to be the most cost-effective way
to reduce energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. Yet, such improvements usually lower the cost
of using energy-intensive goods and may create wealth from the energy savings, both of which lead
to increased energy use, a "rebound'' effect. Disagreements about the magnitude of energy efficiency
rebound are immense and play a central role in debates over the role energy efficiency can play in
combating climate change. But these differing views seem to stem as much from the lack of a common
framework for the analysis as from different estimates of key parameters. I present a theoretical framework
that parses rebound into economic income and substitution effects. The framework captures the wide
range of rebound effects that have been termed direct, indirect, re-spending, and transformational rebound,
among others. It does not capture economy-wide impacts, such as the potential for a macroeconomic
multiplier or the impact on energy prices, which I discuss separately. I then explore the implications
of this framework for measurement of rebound, examining rebound from improved auto fuel economy
and lighting efficiency. The illustrative calculations I carry out suggest that rebound that more than
offsets the savings from energy efficiency investments (known as "backfire") is unlikely, but rebound
is likely to significantly reduce the net savings from at least these energy efficiency improvements.


Severin Borenstein
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
borenste@haas.berkeley.edu
    In policy discussions of combating climate change, the most cost-effective response is often
    said to be energy efficiency: improving devices to provide the same services using less
    energy, and thus causing fewer greenhouse gas emissions. The impact of energy efficiency
    on total energy use is controversial, however, because reducing the energy that a device
    consumes generally lowers the marginal cost of using the device and may raise the wealth of
    consumers and producers. Thus, an energy efficiency improvement can lead to greater use
    of the energy efficient device and increased spending on other goods that were previously
    not affordable. This phenomenon is known as “rebound” or “takeback” in the energy
    efficiency literature.

    Because rebound is a reoptimization in response to price and income changes, in standard
    economic analysis it would be seen as welfare enhancing. Nonetheless, in measuring the
    energy savings from an efficiency upgrade, rebound is an offset to the direct measurement
    of energy saved from a device providing the same services using less energy. The extent of
    rebound is the subject of hot debate and has lead to a wide variation of views on the role
    that energy efficiency can play in addressing climate change.

    A great deal has been written on the rebound effect, but much of it seems to be either
    too narrowly focused – covering just the increased use of the good that has become more
    energy efficient – or makes claims much broader than the evidence can support – attributing
    most increases in societal energy consumption over time to the correlation of energy use
    and increased efficiency of its use. In this paper, I venture to provide a microeconomic
    framework that effectively captures the energy consumption effects that result from an
    energy efficiency improvement.

    My focus here is on quantitative measurement of energy efficiency rebound and the net
    energy saved. This is not an analysis of the welfare benefits of energy efficiency and
    rebound, which is itself an important topic, but distinct from the quantity measurement
    issue. The quantitative rebound issue is obviously not the whole story, but it is a primary
    focus of debates about energy efficiency.2 Research measuring rebound comes to widely
    divergent conclusions about both the appropriate measurement method and the implied



2   Energy efficiency research seems to have three major thrusts, two positive and one normative. A large,
    mostly engineering, literature focuses on measuring the direct energy savings that results from a given
    investment. A second literature, which has existed for decades, but has grown in prominence over the
    last few years, is concerned with measuring the magnitude of rebound effects. My analysis is intended to
    contribute to this strand. The third literature attempts to estimate the welfare impacts of the quantitative
    changes found in the other two lines of research.


                                                         2
    size of rebound.3

    I focus on the microeconomics of rebound following an energy efficiency upgrade at the
    end-use consumer level. This differs from much of the rebound literature in that I do
    not focus on producer-side energy efficiency and do not use a production function (or
    cost function, the dual) approach to analyzing the behavioral response to an improvement
    in energy efficiency. Instead, I disaggregate the impact of an end-user energy efficiency
    upgrade using microeconomic tools that permit a more broad and rigorous analysis than
    I have found in the existing literature. This approach yields significant insights into the
    overall impact of end-use energy efficiency improvements. The approach I take has the
    potential weakness of falling into a fallacy of composition when extrapolated to the whole
    economy – inferring an aggregate effect by scaling up the effect from a microeconomic level
    – though I attempt to address this concern.

    After a very brief review of the economic research on rebound in section I, section II presents
    a model of the change in consumption choices in the presence of an energy efficiency
    improvement, recognizing the consumer’s budget constraint. I show how this approach
    can help to parse the rebound effect into income and substitution effects and that the
    income and substitution effects operate independently. Section III addresses many other
    factors that are raised in studies of rebound – such as time constraints on consumption and
    responsiveness of supply and innovation – and discusses how they fit into the framework.
    Section IV uses the framework to do back-of-the-envelope calculations of rebound and
    illustrates the approach with examples from auto fuel efficiency and lighting power usage.
    I conclude and suggest next steps in section V.



    I. A Very Brief History of Rebound Analysis
    There is a surprisingly large literature on energy efficiency rebound. Numerous papers
    have reviewed this literature, with Greening, Greene and Difiglio (2000) being the most
    widely referenced, and more recent contributions from Sorrell (2009), Jenkins, Nordhaus
    and Shellenberger (2011), and Azevedo, Sonnberger, Thomas, Morgan, and Renn (2012).
    I do not attempt to present such a review here, but do use those overviews to place my
    analysis within the literature.


3   Gillingham, Kotchen, Rapson and Wagner (2013) present a brief review of the quantitative measurement
    issues and, in particular, the pitfall of causal inference from the time-series correlation of energy efficiency
    and total energy use.


                                                           3
    While the first contribution is attributed to Jevons (1865), the field is generally considered
    to have lain dormant until revived by Khazzoum (1980) and Brookes (1990, 1992, 1993).
    Much of the literature is theoretical and simulation-based analyses of the implications of
    different macroeconomic growth models, and accompanying debate about which functional
    forms for production can potentially yield rebound in excess of 100% (known as “backfire”).

    This paper contributes to the microeconomic literature on rebound. These analyses start
    from an energy efficiency improvement of a single actor or sector in the economy, though
    many still incorporates economy-wide implications. Khazzoum (1980) takes this perspec-
    tive. My contribution here is most closely related to the works of Binswanger (2000),
    Berkhout, Muskens and Velthuijsen (2000) and, more recently, Thomas and Azevedo
    (2013), in that they use a standard microeconomic frame and decompose energy use
    changes from an energy efficiency upgrade into income and substitution effects. Implicitly,
    at least, they also suggest that the substitution effect must include a reduction in con-
    sumption of some other good in order to increase consumption of a good as it becomes
    more energy efficient. I contribute to this literature by extending the theoretical discussion
    and by recognizing some implications of the framework that seem to have been previously
    overlooked. In particular, I show that non-marginal cost pricing, which is commonplace
    in utility pricing, can greatly change rebound due to income effects, and point out the
    implications of income and substitution effects when sub-optimizing behavior yields an
    “energy efficiency gap.”




    II. Basic Model

    An individual consumes an appliance service in quantity q0 at a marginal price of p0 per
    unit of service. For now, all goods in the economy are produced in perfectly competitive
    markets, so price reflects the marginal cost of production. Below, I consider non-marginal-
    cost pricing. I assume the consumer already owns the appliance and, for now, that she has
    no elasticity with respect to the number of such appliances she buys.4 She also consumes
    a set of N other goods in quantities q1 ...qN at prices p1 ...pN .

    To simplify notation, assume that the nominal and real interest rate is zero. The NPV of


4   The analysis is unchanged if the consumer is about to purchase one unit of the appliance and is choosing
    between more and less energy efficient models.


                                                       4
    the consumer’s lifetime income is I, so the lifetime balanced budget constraint is

                                                           X
                                                           N
                                           I = p0 · q0 +         pn qn .
                                                           n=1



    The goods also have embodied (or life-cycle) energy consumption per unit, e0 for the
    appliance service and en for each of the other N goods, such that total energy use is

                                                           X
                                                           N
                                          E = e0 · q0 +          en qn .
                                                           n=1



    The individual has an income elasticity of demand for each good such that all change of
                                                                PN
    income is absorbed in changes of consumption of these goods, n=0 ∂q
                                                                      ∂I pn = 1. Define EI
                                                                       n


    as the associated change in the individual’s total energy use when she adjusts consumption
                                  PN
    to a change in income, EI = n=0 ∂q   ∂I en .
                                           n




    There is an upgrade, U, to the appliance that reduces its energy use and cost per unit
    of service without otherwise changing its service attributes. U has a cost of pU and
    the upgrade itself has embodied energy eU . The improvement is a binary choice, not a
    continuous variable. If the improvement is made, p0 is reduced to p̃0 and e0 is reduced to
    ẽ0 .

    If the consumer makes the investment in U and lowers p0 , then even if the compensated
    price elasticity of demand for the appliance service is zero, the investment will change the
    consumer’s lifetime income available to spend on goods by ∆I = q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) − pU . As a
                                                                 ∂qn
    result consumption of each good n will change by              ∂I ∆I.

    In addition, if the change from p0 to p̃0 causes the consumer to increase consumption
    of the appliance service, then she will substitute away from other goods as she moves
    along the compensated demand curve for the appliance service. As a result, even if there
    is no income change (i.e., q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) = pU ) consumption of each good n will change by
    ∂c qn                                   PN ∂c qn                  ∂c q0
     ∂p0 (p̃0 − p0 ), such that (p̃0 − p0 )  n=1 ∂p0 pn = −(p̃0 − p0 ) ∂p0 p̃0 in order to maintain the
    budget constraint, where ∂c designates the compensated (or Hicksian) demand derivative.5


5
    Because the change in p0 is discrete, not marginal, this use of income and substitution effects differs
    slightly from the standard economic usage. Since my focus is on consumption quantities rather than
    welfare, however, this slightly non-standard terminology serves to simplify notation rather than confuse
    welfare analysis.


                                                       5
    Separating the income and substitution effects on consumption of both the appliance and
    all other goods, the change in energy consumption can then be written to correspond
    closely to standard discussions of rebound.

                                              X
                                              N
                                                         ∂qn
             ∆E = [eU − q0 (e0 − ẽ0 )] +           en       [q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) − pU ]
                                              n=1
                                                         ∂I
                                                                                                           [1]
                        ∂q0                               ∂c q0                XN
                                                                                      ∂c qn
                  + ẽ0     [q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) − pU ] + [ẽ0       (p̃0 − p0 )] +    [en       (p̃0 − p0 )]
                        ∂I                                ∂p0                  n=1
                                                                                      ∂p  0



    The first term in [1] is the direct energy efficiency effect, reduced energy use from current
    consumption of the appliance net of the embodied energy of U.

    The second term is what is generally called “indirect rebound,” the effect of consuming
    more of other goods due to the savings on consuming good 0. It might be called “income
    effect rebound,” though that phrase more accurately describes the sum of the second and
    third term, as the third term measures the change in consumption of good 0 due to the
    income effect.6 If U costs the same amount as the cost of the energy saved at q0 , then
    the second and third terms are zero. But if purchasing U is part of addressing the energy
    efficiency gap, then the sum of these two terms is almost surely positive. The consumer
    is simply richer and spends that money on more of whatever she buys as she gets richer,
    and that increases energy use.7

    The third and fourth terms are income and substitution effects in consuming good 0 due
    to an investment in U. The sum of these terms are generally called “direct rebound.”

    The last term, the compensated cross-elasticities, accounts for the fact that in order to
    consume more of the appliance service – holding income constant – she has to consume
    less of something else. That substitution-driven consumption change is not the same as
    when income changes – which is captured in the second term – because it is a response to
    p0 declining relative to other prices. This effect seems to be absent from most discussions
    of rebound, which implicitly assume that the expenditures on expanding use of good 0 are
    taken from goods that have no energy content.8 The sum of the terms in the second line

6   As suggested in the previous footnote, this doesn’t correspond exactly to the standard economic use of
    income effect because the change in p0 is non-marginal.

7   I’m assuming that the source of new wealth is irrelevant to how it is spent.

8   Brennan (2013) makes the interesting point that backfire must occur at a sufficiently high energy price as


                                                            6
     of [1] might be called “net direct rebound” since rebound should also account for whatever
     the additional expenditures on good 0 are taking money away from.

     It seems that income effect rebound is frequently confused with the last term of compen-
     sated cross-elasticities, but conceptually they are quite distinct. In the case of q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) =
     pU , so there is no income effect rebound, the second and third terms in [1] would be zero.
     Yet, there would still be the need to account for net direct rebound, recognizing the nec-
     essary reduction in expenditures on other goods.

     Income effect rebound will almost always be positive when the investment is a net monetary
     savings (q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) > pU ) as would be the case in addressing an energy efficiency gap.9
     Income effect rebound depends on EI , the energy intensity of the goods bought with an
     additional dollar of income, and on the amount by which the monetary value of the energy
     savings exceeds the monetary cost of the upgrade.10

     Net direct rebound, the sum of the terms in the second line of [1], will always be smaller
     (less positive) than direct rebound, because the last term will always be negative. In fact,
     net direct rebound will be negative if the energy intensity of the bundle the consumer
     substitutes away from when p0 declines is greater than the energy intensity of good 0 per
     dollar spent on good 0 after the investment in U. That suggests the possibility of total
     rebound being negative, which I discuss below.11


     EE raises the marginal value of energy (i.e., getting more energy services for a given amount of energy)
     so increasing EE will cause an increase in quantity of energy demanded. While this argument is correct in
     the market affected by the EE, it fails to account for the compensated cross-elasticity effect, substitution
     away from some other energy-using expenditure. Accounting for this, the net direct rebound need not
     result in an increase in total energy use even at high prices.

9    If energy intensive goods were inferior goods, then the increase in income could shift consumption away
     from those energy-intensive goods and the income effect could be negative. This seems very unlikely.
     On the other hand, there seems to be a preoccupation among some energy efficiency researchers with
     the notion that consumers would spend marginal income on international travel. An inordinate share of
     examples of the income effect suggest the savings might be spent on energy-intensive vacation travel to
     exotic locales. In all of the literature I have reviewed, I have not found an argument for why the energy
     intensity of marginal income expenditures would differ from the economy-wide average energy intensity of
     GDP. It may, in fact, be higher or lower, but there seems to be little or no evidence on this.

10   The budget framework presented in this section does not allow for changes in labor income, which could
     occur as a result of changing labor hours. The change, however, could be positive or negative. To the
     extent that leisure is a normal good, increased energy efficiency that increases income would mean taking
     more leisure. But energy efficiency lowers the relative price of an energy-using activity which may increase
     or decrease leisure depending on whether consuming the good could is a complement or substitute to
     leisure.

11   Saunders (2008) refers to this possibility as “super-conservation.”


                                                          7
     A. Rebound Under Non-Marginal-Cost Pricing

     Thus far, I have assumed that all prices in the economy reflect marginal cost, but that is
     not always the case, especially in the areas of utility-delivered energy. While retail gasoline
     prices probably reflect long-run marginal cost fairly well, electricity and natural gas prices
     from utilities generally are set on a long-run break-even basis with the potential for large
     departures from marginal cost. For energy efficiency rebound, this is important because
     pricing above marginal cost means that only some of the savings from reducing energy
     use is creating new income, while the rest is a transfer of income from the ratepayers (or
     shareholders) who must cover the utility’s lost quasi-rents to the consumer investing in
     EE.

     For example, if a customer is paying her utility $10 per MMBTU for natural gas, but
     the utility’s actual marginal cost of supplying additional gas is $6 per MMBTU, then the
     customer investing in EE saves $10 by reducing gas use, but only $6 is net savings, or
     income creation. The other $4 is a transfer of the obligation to cover the utility’s fixed
     costs from that customer to ratepayers (or shareholders) more generally. One would expect
     the $6 to generate income-effect rebound, but the net impact of the $4 income transfer is
     likely to be small and of ambiguous sign. As a result income effect rebound is likely to be
     smaller than would be inferred from a simple calculation using retail price.

     The natural gas example is especially clear because the retail price of natural gas for
     residential consumers is nearly always substantially above the marginal cost.12 Retail
     electricity prices can be higher or lower than long-run marginal cost. While substantial
     fixed infrastructure costs tend to push price above LRMC, in some areas, such as the
     Northwest U.S., marginal energy generation (from gas-fired or coal-fired thermal plants)
     has a much higher cost than inframarginal, hydroelectric, for which the fixed costs were
     borne largely by the federal government so are not priced into rates. If the retail price
     is below LRMC, then the income-effect rebound from EE will be larger than a simple
     calculation using the retail price would suggest.

     Discussion of the private versus economy-wide marginal cost also raises the issue of exter-
     nalities, which turn out to be less straightforward to incorporate. Say that the marginal
     cost of supplying natural gas is $6 per MMBTU and the consumer faces that price, but
     burning the gas also creates a negative externality that imposes a social cost of $1 per


12   See Davis and Muehlegger (2011) and Borenstein and Davis (2012).


                                                      8
MMBTU. The negative externality affects energy consumption, but not as simply nega-
tive income. Instead, the externality is a forced change in the consumption bundles of
consumers affected by the externality – the addition of pollution, for instance – which
causes the consumers to reoptimize over all of the goods in their consumption bundle. The
impact of the externality depends on whether it is a complement or substitute to energy
consumption. The answer to that question seems likely to be specific to the type and
location of the externality. For instance, bad air quality due to particulate emissions could
force people to stay inside and engage in relatively low-energy-intensive activities, or it
could lead to more people driving out of the area to get away from the smog.

B. Illustration of the Potential for Negative Rebound

This approach to decomposing rebound suggests that rebound can be “negative,” i.e., that
total energy reduction could be greater than the direct energy savings from the improved
EE. To illustrate this idea:

A consumer is replacing her gas furnace and considering upgrading to a more energy
efficient model. The more efficient furnace (which, to keep things simple, uses no extra
energy to produce) costs more, but also saves energy. If the customer buys the more-
efficient furnace, it will cost less to increase the temperature in the house by one degree,
so she will tend to keep the house at a higher temperature.

The simplest example of negative rebound occurs if the substitution-effect (usage) rebound
is zero or very small and the income-effect rebound is negative. This could happen if the
consumer is bad at math (or the consumer puts intrinsic value on consuming less energy)
and upgrades even though his net savings are negative, but it could also happen if the
marginal price of gas is higher than the marginal cost of supplying gas to the customer.
In that case, the upgrade could be privately optimal to the consumer, but the overall
impact on societal income could be negative, lowering total energy consumption through
the income elasticity.

A less obvious form of negative rebound results if the lifetime savings in gas use exactly
offset the additional cost of the furnace, holding constant the temperature setting – so
there is no income-effect rebound – but, because it is now cheaper (on the margin) to heat
the house, she moves the thermostat to a warmer setting. The expenditures for gas to
increase the house temperature, however, takes away from expenditures on other things.
In particular, because it is now cheaper to heat with gas, she substitutes away from using
the electric space heater that she had been using to augment the lower-efficiency furnace.

                                             9
     The substitution could actually lower total energy use if the energy intensity per marginal
     retail dollar spent on electricity were higher than the energy intensity per dollar of gas
     delivered. In the real world, of course, the substitution to consume more gas would likely
     come from spending less on many different goods, not just electric heat – and most of those
     would likely have lower energy intensity per dollar than running a natural gas furnace –
     which is why negative rebound due to the substitution effect is probably not common,
     but the illustration shows why it is important to account carefully for the full substitution
     behavior.

     The illustration also highlights another factor that is widely understood, but sometimes
     obscured in discussions of energy efficiency: the goal of energy efficiency policy is almost
     never actually to use less generic energy, regardless of its source or impact. It is generally to
     produce less greenhouse gas, to emit lower criteria pollutants, to reduce use of a specific fuel
     that presents national security problems, or to relieve a bottleneck in some production or
     transmission facility. Losing sight of the actual goal will, of course, lead to mismeasurement
     of success. For instance, in the furnace-replacement illustration if electricity is generated
     from coal-fired plants, then there could be negative “GHG reduction rebound” with the
     more energy-efficient gas furnace even if there is not negative energy efficiency rebound.

     C. The Tension Between Rebound and the Energy Efficiency Gap

     Much of the policy focus on energy efficiency is due to the widespread view that there is an
     energy efficiency gap, which is generally defined as neglected opportunities for individuals
     (or companies) to save money by improving energy efficiency. In some cases the gap is at-
     tributed to principal-agent problems and in others to information failures.13 To the extent
     that agency or information barriers prevent investment in an energy efficiency upgrade, it
     seems likely that they would also reduce or eliminate rebound.

     For instance, if a car buyer were myopic about the trade-off between purchase price and
     fuel costs, because they do not pay much attention to the cost of gasoline, it seems likely
     they would also be less responsive to a change in fuel economy that effectively lowers their
     fuel cost per mile. Or, if a landlord puts an energy inefficient refrigerator in an apartment
     because the tenant pays the energy costs, it seems unlikely that a regulation forcing the
     landlord to buy a more energy-efficient refrigerator will lead him also to buy a larger one.

13
     Some examples of an energy efficiency gap are attributed to transaction costs or credit constraints. It is
     more difficult to argue that these represent real gaps to the extent that the transaction costs are real (such
     as the time to meet with contractors and define the parameters of an energy efficiency renovation project)
     or the credit constraints reflect real risk of default by the borrower.


                                                          10
     In lighting, if people fail to purchase CFLs because they do not recognize the impact of
     lighting costs on their electricity bill, then they are less likely to respond to lower marginal
     lighting costs by leaving the lights on more. One can surely come up with examples that
     preserve inefficient energy efficiency choices in the appliance while still finding optimizing
     responses to lower incremental energy cost, but those may be more the exception than the
     rule.

     Recognizing this potential inconsistency also points out a possible bias in using market-
     wide estimates of demand elasticity to calculate substitution-effect rebound. Estimates of
     demand elasticity are in reality estimates of the mean of a distribution of elasticities across
     customers. That wouldn’t be a problem if the distribution were uncorrelated with those
     who would be affected by a regulation – a minimum efficiency standard, for instance – so
     the mean of the affected group is about the same as the mean of the population. But that
     is unlikely to be the case if those who are affected by the regulation are disproportionately
     customers who pay less attention to energy costs and as a result fail to make cost-saving
     efficiency investments. In that case, the market-wide estimates of demand elasticity would
     overstate the response of the customers who would be affected by the regulation and lead
     to over-estimates of rebound.

     Conversely, if one takes the position that consumers are very good optimizers, then it is
     hard to argue that energy efficiency regulation creates much of an income-effect rebound.
     If consumers have already taken all money-saving actions on energy efficiency and new
     regulations force them to take actions that are not cost effective, then those actions make
     them poorer and reduce their energy use. Of course, just as with the impact of externalities
     discussed above, if the energy efficiency regulation adds non-monetary costs (e.g., less-
     attractive lighting or poor vehicle acceleration), but still leaves the consumer better off
     in monetary terms, then one would also have to analyze the degree to which those non-
     monetary utility changes are substitutes or complements to energy usage.14

     If customers are very good optimizers there is still a possible bias in using market-wide
     estimates of demand elasticity to calculate substitution-effect rebound. For any given level
     of quantity demanded before the efficiency upgrade, a customer with higher elasticity gets
     more utility from the investment as they know it will have a larger marginal impact on their
     use. Thus, if customers are completely rational, then the ones who have not adopted the

14   For instance, forcing consumers to install illumination that produces annoying, though more energy effi-
     cient, light might lead them to put in brighter lights, a positive rebound, or might lead them to just leave
     the lights off more, a negative rebound.


                                                         11
     upgrade are systematically ones with lower demand elasticity. Again, using a market-wide
     estimate of demand elasticity is likely to lead to over-estimation of potential rebound.


     III. Other Considerations in Evaluating Energy Efficiency Rebound

     A. Demand and Supply Complementarities

     Time constraints are often discussed as a limit to rebound effects. Expansion of appliance
     use (where the term “appliance” could include a car, for instance) may require time as a
     complementary input. Time is, of course, just one complementary input that the appliance
     service may require.15 Constraints on complementary goods are part of what is in the
     demand curve.16 Thus, this may be a valid concern about estimation of demand elasticities
     in general, but it is not clear that it is any more relevant in this area of policy analysis
     than in many others.

     A related issue is on the supply side. Every energy-using good is a bundle of attributes,
     the demands for which interact with one another. Thus, if a car is more fuel-efficient, the
     customer may anticipate using it more, which will change the demand for complimentary
     attributes, such as a good stereo or heated seats in the car. If transactions are at the level
     of the auto – rather than broken down by components such as car stereos and heated seats
     – then this will show up as the income effect of the fuel-efficiency upgrade being smaller
     than one might expect. As the illustrations below demonstrate, it is important in general
     to account for the full bundle that is affected when rebound occurs, particularly the energy
     share of the price of using the appliance.

     B. Technological Change

     Closely related, energy efficiency improvements are likely correlated with technological
     change in other attributes of a good, a correlation from which causality might be improperly
     inferred. The technological improvement makes the good more attractive and increase
     its consumption, which will make the demand for the good (as a bundle of attributes)
     appear more elastic to the price of energy if those other attributes are not controlled for
     separately. For instance, as personal computers have become more energy efficient, many

15   And time may not be an important complimentary input in some cases, such as buying a larger refrigerator
     or brighter lighting when they become more energy efficient.

16   This is no different than the fact that the demand for airline tickets reflects, in part, the constraint people
     have on the amount of time they are willing to devote to traveling, regardless of how cheap the ticket is.


                                                           12
     other attributes – and societal interest in using PCs – have changed so that demand for
     PCs has strongly increased. The vast majority of this has nothing to do with energy
     efficiency and would not be correctly attributed to rebound.

     Much of the discussion of large rebound effects revolve around technological change. Jevons
     (1865) and later analyses argue that society will find more applications for a more efficient
     appliance, which will increase energy use. These arguments combine, and frequently con-
     fuse, income effects and substitution effects, but both are potentially important. They also
     focus on the fact that energy efficiency innovations are so often accompanied by other at-
     tribute improvements. While these are likely positive outcomes in terms of social welfare,
     they can mean that use of the entire good as a bundle of attributes – and its energy use –
     increases due to these improvements. In some cases, this argument is compelling, such as
     when research on redesigning a good to improve energy efficiency has spillover effects that
     improve other attributes. Jevons’ discussion of steam engines falls in this category: design
     improvements increased the efficiency of the engines and also made them more compact
     and mobile, vastly increasing their value in many uses. But in other instances, the energy
     efficiency improvement is less likely to lead to other attribute innovations, such as with
     programs to improve insulation in low-income houses.

     Claims of large rebound effects also often appeal to an idea that is true of innovation in
     general: specific breakthroughs can have enormous income effects, because the innovation
     has low cost of replication once the idea is developed.17 This is true of successful R&D
     and does suggest that “indirect rebound” may be significant. However, it fails to recognize
     that much of the costly R&D that is done – including energy efficiency R&D – fails to
     discover improvements and ends up reducing income. The full effect of energy efficiency
     innovation must include both impacts on income.18 Still, the net effect seems likely to be
     strongly positive as technological progress in energy efficiency seems to have been a major
     driver of economic growth as it has been in other areas of innovation.

     Both finding more uses for an appliance as it become less expensive and making greater
     use of the appliance as one become wealthier are captured in the framework expressed in
     equation [1] in so far as the demand functions for each good is for an indefinite period of


17   See Sorrell (2009) and Saunders (2000) for syntheses of much of this work.

18   As stated in the introduction, I’m evaluating energy efficiency impacts on energy consumption, not social
     welfare. Obviously, big income gains due to energy efficiency breakthroughs that can be replicated at low
     cost have very positive welfare consequences.


                                                        13
time. The income and substitution effects of the future that result from an energy efficiency
innovation today are part of ∆E. Equation [1] could be written out as a multi-period
demand function and changes in energy efficiency that result from multi-period investments
in various efficiency upgrades. Of course, as one includes more distant periods, the analysis
becomes more speculative. Nonetheless, it is worth recognizing that the last term in [1],
the compensated cross-elasticities, also will be present in a multi-period analysis. That is,
to the extent that the consumer expands use of the good with improved energy efficiency,
the expenditures for that change – holding income constant – must come from other goods.
The net direct rebound must also account for that substitution (about which there is also
less certainty further in the future).



C. Economy-Wide Rebound

The terms “economy-wide rebound” or “macroeconomic rebound” are used widely in the
rebound literature, though there seems to be some inconsistency in meaning across uses. In
the context of improved energy efficiency among end uses of energy, there are two different
effects that seem to fall under this category:

Macroeconomic Multiplier: The first meaning appeals to the idea of a macroeconomic
multiplier, suggesting that whatever income gains are associated with energy efficiency
improvements will impact total energy use by more than the direct income gain, because
the economy will expand by more than the private income gain enjoyed by the owner of the
upgraded appliance. Thus, income effect rebound will be larger economy-wide than would
be inferred from evaluating only the direct income gain from the end user’s transaction.
The magnitude of a macroeconomic multiplier for government expenditures is quite contro-
versial, though recent studies seem to suggest that it is probably not much above 1, except
in times of very high unemployment. The multiplier in this case is somewhat different,
however, because it does not rely on expanding government expenditures and (generally
associated) government debt. This would be more akin to the macroeconomic multiplier
that might result following a new discovery of a natural resource deposit. A literature
search and queries to a few leading macroeconomists did not uncover any work that bears
directly on this question. To the extent that there is a macroeconomic multiplier above
one, it would multiply the income effect rebound, and therefore is dependent on the size of
the income effect rebound directly attributable to the energy efficiency upgrade. Likewise,
if the income effect is negative for any of the reasons discussed earlier, the macroeconomic
multiplier would also scale up that negative effect.

                                             14
                       Figure 1: Hypothetical Oil Supply and Demand Functions



     Energy Price Effect: The second meaning focuses on the effect of energy efficiency im-
     provements on the equilibrium price of energy. Improved energy efficiency shifts in the
     demand for that energy source, or all energy sources to the extent they are substitutable.
     As demand shifts in, if the supply of the energy resource is less than perfectly elastic, the
     reduced demand due to EE will manifest in a reduced price for the energy resource.19 If
     demand is not completely inelastic, the price drop will then induce a rebound increase
     in energy consumption that will partially offset the EE savings. The size of this energy-
     price driven rebound will depend on the elasticity of supply and demand.20 Very inelastic
     demand or very elastic supply will result in almost no energy price effect rebound, while
     more elastic demand or inelastic supply will result in much larger rebound.



19   Gillingham, Kotchen, Rapson and Wagner (2013) refer to this as the macroeconomic price effect.

20   Some microeconomic studies of rebound argue that they can ignore this effect, because the demand change
     is small relative to the market for the energy source. A small demand change, however, does not imply
     that the relative impact of this energy price effect rebound is small. There’s no reason a priori that this
     form of rebound will be a smaller share of a small energy efficiency gain than of a large energy efficiency
     gain.


                                                         15
                                               Demand Elasticity
                                           -0.2       -0.4        -0.6
                Supply          0.2        51%        68%         76%
             Elasticity         0.6        26%        41%         51%
                                1.0        17%        30%         39%

        Table 1: Illustrative Calculations of Energy Price Effect Rebound for Oil


Unfortunately, the relevant elasticities are long-run measures and very difficult to estimate.
This argument is most frequently made for crude oil, due to the perceived inelasticity of
supply. To get an idea of the potential magnitude of this effect I assume constant elasticities
of demand and supply of varying plausible magnitudes. Both supply and demand are
anchored by the point P = 110 (dollars/barrel) and Q = 90 (million barrels/day). The
approach is illustrated in figure 1.

In each case, I calculate the impact of a leftward shift of demand by 1 and then derive
rebound as the percentage by which the net decrease in quantity is less than 1. The results
are shown in table 1 for a variety of elasticities. A linear supply curve through the origin
has an elasticity of one everywhere. Given that there is known to be a large supply of
inframarginal oil with marginal cost below $30 per barrel, the supply curve seems unlikely
to have an elasticity above 1. Estimates of the long-run elasticity of demand for oil are
hard to pin down, but shorter run elasticities are often cited as being in the range of -0.2,
so long-run elasticities are most likely larger in absolute value. The potential for energy
price effect rebound is very real in the case of oil. Even with a linear supply from the origin
and demand with constant elasticity of -0.2, energy price effect rebound is 17%. Raising
the demand elasticity to -0.4, which may be a more reasonable long-run figure, nearly
doubles this rebound to 30%. If supply is actually less elastic around the current price and
quantity, as many argue that it is, then energy price effect rebound could very well be 50%
or higher. Long-run supply elasticity depends in large part on the price-responsiveness of
the development of new extraction technologies. The last decade of technological progress
in gas and oil production suggests that supply elasticities may be rather high.


Energy price effect rebound is likely to be a much smaller factor in electricity and natural
gas consumption. In general, supply elasticities for coal and natural gas are thought to be
quite high, which would imply very low energy price effect rebound. Nonetheless, long-run
coal and natural gas supplies are certainly not perfectly elastic – particularly accounting

                                              16
     for the long-run elasticities of research and development expenditures with respect to the
     price of the energy – so there will be some energy price effect rebound even in these sectors.


     IV. Implications for Measurement of Energy Efficiency Rebound
     Equation [1] suggests that some components of energy efficiency rebound may be easier to
     estimate or approximate than others. The second and third terms of [1], the full income
     effect, will depend on the investment made to achieve the energy efficiency improvement
     relative to the energy cost savings. Once that is calculated or estimated, these terms will
     depend on the energy intensity of the goods for which the marginal dollar of income is
     spent. While it is difficult to know the energy intensity of the marginal consumption, we
     do know that the U.S. primary energy consumption in 2011 was 97.70 quadrillion BTU21
     on a GDP of $15.094 trillion and emitted 6708 million metric tonnes of CO2e.22 So, the
     average energy intensity is about 6472 BTUs per dollar of GDP and the average GHG
     intensity is 0.000444 metric tonnes of GHG per dollar of GDP.

     An interesting and important question is by how much the energy and GHG intensity of
     marginal consumption differs from the average, and how that is impacted by the distribu-
     tion of marginal income among people of differing socio-economic status. Marginal might
     be higher or lower than average, but average is a reasonable starting point, particularly
     given that end use energy efficiency improvements are likely to affect consumers across a
     broad range of the income distribution.

     For a rough calculation of the primary energy and GHG emissions embodied in one dollar
     of gasoline, I start from 113,996 BTU of energy and 0.0111 metric tonnes of GHG per gallon
     of gasoline burned. Based on Murphy and Hall (2010), I then assume that there is a 1.25
     multiplier from energy and GHG content to lifecycle energy and GHG.23 Finally, assuming
     a long-run marginal cost of $3.00 per gallon (excluding taxes which are a transfer), yields
     47,498 BTUs and 0.004625 metric tonnes of GHG per dollar of gasoline.

     I base a similar calculation for natural gas on the assumption of a 1.15 lifecycle multiplier
     (National Energy Technology Lab, 2011) and 0.074 metric tonnes of GHG per MMBTU

21   U.S. EIA Annual Energy Outlook

22   Draft Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks: 1990-2011, U.S.E.P.A.

23   Implicitly, this assumes that all energy used for extraction and processing of crude oil to gasoline has the
     GHG intensity of gasoline.


                                                         17
     of natural gas.24 At a LRMC of $5.00/MMBTU, this implies 230,000 lifecycle BTU and
     0.01702 metric tonnes of GHG per dollar of natural gas.

     Electricity is a more difficult calculation, because the marginal generation serving incre-
     mental demand can come from very different sources across time and location, as explored
     by Graff-Zivin, Kotchen and Mansur (2012). For this illustration, I assume that the
     marginal source is a natural gas generation plant that (from EIA) uses 8152 BTU/kWh.25
     Using the same multiplier and GHG content as in the previous paragraph, and assuming
     the LRMC of this generation delivered to the end-user is $0.08/kWh, this implies 117,185
     lifecycle BTU and 0.0087 metric tonnes of GHG per dollar of electricity.

     Assume, for a moment, that the EE upgrade costs nothing and uses no energy, and
     that the elasticity of demand for the appliance service is zero. From these figures, a
     good first-order estimate of income effect energy rebound is about 13.6% for gasoline
     (6472/47, 498 = 0.136), 5.5% for electricity (6472/117, 185 = 0.055) and about 2.8% for
     natural gas (6472/230, 000 = 0.028). The particularly low income-effect rebound from
     energy efficiency that reduces natural gas is relevant for discussions of home insulation
     improvement in the approximately 60% of U.S. households that heat with natural gas.
     Similar calculations for income effect GHG rebound yield: 9.6% for gasoline, 5.1% for
     electricity and 2.6% for natural gas.

     What if the EE upgrade costs money, embodies energy and causes GHG emissions? In
     that case, and continuing to assume that the (compensated) elasticity for the appliance
     service is zero, [1] can be rewritten as


                            ∆E = [eU − q0 (e0 − ẽ0 )] + EI [q0 (p0 − p̃0 ) − pU ]                 [2a]
                                                                              eU
                                = −q0 (e0 − ẽ0 ) + EI [q0 (p0 − p̃0 )] + [      − EI ]pU           [2b]
                                                                              pU

     In [2b], the first term is the straight EE savings and the second term is the income effect
     rebound if the upgrade is costless (in both income and energy). The bracketed part of
     the last term is the difference between the energy per dollar spent on the upgrade and the
     energy per dollar spent from new income. If the energy intensity of the upgrade is equal

24   The GHG figure is controversial, because it depends on assumptions about fugitive methane emissions
     from production.

25   http://www.eia.gov/tools/faqs/faq.cfm?id=667&t=2 .


                                                     18
to the energy intensity of purchases from new income, then the last term is zero and the
net energy savings from the upgrade is independent of the share of savings spent on the
upgrade itself. If the upgrade is more energy intensive (per dollar) than purchases from
new income then energy savings are smaller than they otherwise would be and if it is less
energy intensive, then savings are larger. As a first cut analysis, however, ignoring the
embodied energy in the efficiency upgrade may not be a large source of error as long as
one also ignores the cost of the efficiency upgrade when calculating income-effect rebound.

The sum of the fourth and fifth terms of [1], the net direct rebound effect, depends on the
energy intensity of the marginal dollar spent on the appliance versus the energy intensity
of whatever that marginal dollar is taken from. Whether it is driving a car more when it
gets greater fuel efficiency or buying a bigger refrigerator when it is better insulated, the
marginal expenditure on the appliance does not all go to energy. Consuming more of the
appliance service requires an array of inputs of varying energy intensity, and presumably
a smaller share goes to energy after the energy efficiency upgrade. The fourth term must
be analyzed accounting for all of the inputs that go into marginal consumption of the
appliance.

Likewise, the fifth term must be analyzed accounting for the energy intensity of the
marginal dollar removed from expenditures on substitute (by the economic definition)
goods. It seems likely – though not necessarily the case – that such substitute goods are
also more energy intensive than average. The new furnace illustration above is such an
example. In any case, the energy intensity of substitutes almost certainly is not zero and
may significantly offset the compensated direct rebound effect.



A. First Illustrative Calculation – Auto Fuel Economy

Fuel economy is one of the central area of contention in disagreements about rebound. I
parse fuel economy rebound using the framework presented here.

Consider a new mid-sized sedan that is upgraded to meet fuel economy standards, so that
rather than getting 25 MPG it gets 50 MPG, approximately the change for the average
vehicle under the Obama administration’s CAFE standards. The upgrade is not costless;
assume that it adds manufacturing costs of $3000 to the vehicle, which is the industry’s
guess at the impact of the change on the cost of the vehicle. If the car were driven 12,000
miles per year for 15 years, over the life of the car it would save the owner 3600 gallons of
gas, or 240 gallons/year, and would reduce energy use by 513 MMBTU in total over the

                                             19
     15 years.26 By a similar calculation, the improved fuel economy over the life of the vehicle
     would reduce GHG emissions by 50 metric tonnes.27

     Using a real discount rate of 3% and assuming that the real LRMC of gas is constant
     over this period at $3 per gallon, the societal NPV income gain from the fuel savings is
     about $8723. If there were no usage elasticity with respect to fuel economy, then the only
     rebound would come from the net income gain of $5723 plus the energy intensity of the
     $3000 spent on the upgrade. If each was at the average energy intensity of the economy as
     a whole, income effect rebound plus the energy used in manufacturing the upgrade would
     be 56 MMBTU. Thus, the net reduction in energy use would be 457 MMBTUs (=513
     MMBTU - 56 MMBTU). Similarly, the income effect rebound plus the upgrade would
     increase GHG emissions by slightly under 4 tonnes if each had the GHG intensity of the
     economy as a whole, leaving a net GHG reduction of about 46 tonnes.

     Analyzing substitution-effect rebound requires considering the marginal cost of driving
     additional miles and the energy intensity of those expenditures. I examine the 2012 Ford
     Fusion, which is rated at 25 MPG for combined city and highway driving. Data from
     Edmunds.com website on the total cost of ownership of the Ford Fusion sedan suggest that
     the non-fuel marginal cost of driving this vehicle is about $0.190 per mile.28 Assuming
     that the non-fuel marginal cost of driving has an energy intensity of the economy as a
     whole – 6472 BTU per dollar – this is 1230 BTU per mile. Likewise, assuming the non-fuel
     marginal cost of driving has the GHG intensity of the economy as a whole, this would be
     0.000084 tonnes of GHG per mile.

     After the energy efficiency improvement, the fuel marginal cost is $0.060 per mile, assuming
     LRMC of $3 per gallon and 50 MPG, or 2850 BTU per mile.29 The marginal GHG
     per mile from fuel is 0.000278 tonnes. Thus, at 50 MPG, the total marginal cost of
     driving an addition mile is $0.250 with a total energy use of 4080 BTU and a total GHG
     emissions of 0.000362 tonnes. So, one additional dollar spent on increased vehicle miles uses

26   3600 gallons · 113, 996 BT U/gallon · 1.25 lifecycle multiplier = 512, 982, 000.

27   3600 gallons · 0.0111 GHG tonnes/gallon · 1.25 lifecycle multiplier = 49.95.

28   I arrive at this number by including, for the first 5 years of ownership of a 2012 Ford Fusion, half of the
     depreciation, none of the taxes and fees, none of the financing cost, one-quarter of insurance cost, and all
     of maintenance and all of repairs, for a total of $14,085, and then dividing the total by the 75,000 miles
     that Edmunds assumes for the 5 years of driving. See
     http://www.edmunds.com/ford/fusion/2012/tco.html?style=101386786 .

29   113, 996 · 1.25/50 = 2850 .


                                                         20
     about 16,320 BTU (= 4080/0.250) and creates about 0.001448 tonnes of GHGs.30 If each
     dollar used to increase expenditure on driving were taken from the national average energy
     intensity expenditure, then the net substitution-effect rebound would be 9848 BTU (=
     16, 320−6472) per dollar or 2462 BTU per rebound mile driven.31 Likewise, if expenditures
     were taken from national average GHG intensity goods, then the net substitution effect
     increase in GHGs would be 0.001004 tonnes (= 0.001448 − 0.000444).

     So, doubling the fuel efficiency of a Ford Fusion creates a direct energy savings of 513
     MMBTU, of which income-effect rebound offsets 56 MMBTU (inclusive of the embodied
     energy in the efficiency improvement) for a net reduction of 457 MMBTU. Each additional
     mile driven due to the greater fuel efficiency uses an additional 2462 BTU, so 100% rebound
     would occur if the doubling of the fuel efficiency caused the car to be driven an additional
     185,621 miles over the 15 years, or an extra 12,375 miles per year. This would be slightly
     more than a doubling of the vehicle miles traveled, which seems implausible.32 By similar
     calculation, the net GHG savings before substitution rebound is 46 tonnes which would
     require an extra 166,030 miles to fully offset.


     A more direct calculation of rebound requires an assumed elasticity of vehicle miles with
     respect to the cost of fuel. Parry and Small (2004) survey many empirical studies and find
     that this elasticity is “mostly ranging between 0.1 and 0.3 but sometimes larger.” For this
     illustration, assume that the elasticity is 0.2 – actually -0.2 to be more precise about the
     sign.33 With a constant elasticity of -0.2 and effective 50% decline in the cost of fuel, VMT
     would be expected to increase by about 15%34 or 26,640 miles over the 15 year life of the

30   At 25 MPG, the fuel marginal cost is $0.120 per mile, again assuming $3 per gallon, so the total marginal
     cost per mile is $0.310 and the total energy use is 6930 BTU. So, energy use is 22,355 BTU per dollar
     marginal dollar spent on driving and GHG released is 0.002063.

31   As discussed earlier, it seems likely that the substitution to such an energy-intensive activity would likely
     on average be from other goods with higher than average energy intensity, in which case this estimate of
     the net substitution rebound is too high. In this case, the obvious candidate would be substitution from
     a lower MPG vehicle owned by the same family, which could lead to negative rebound.

32   The fuel efficiency improvement would lower the tax-inclusive price per mile driven (fuel plus non-fuel
     cost, assuming taxes of $0.50 per gallon) from $0.33 to $0.26, a 21% decline. Assuming constant elasticity
     demand, that mileage change would require a price elasticity of about −3.

33   It appears that all of the studies Parry and Small cite estimate a Marshallian elasticity rather than the
     compensated elasticity one would want to use for this calculation. Assuming that VMT is a normal
     good, the compensated elasticity would be smaller (in absolute value) and therefore the substitution-effect
     rebound would be smaller than calculated here.

34   If Q = AP  , then for a change from P1 to P2 , Q2 /Q1 = (P2 /P1 ) = (1/2)−0.2 = 1.148.


                                                          21
         ASSUMPTIONS
         Life of Auto (years)     15            Non-fuel LRMC/mile            $0.19
         Miles per year       12,000            Discount Rate                   3%
         Pre-Upgrade MPG          25            Retail Gasoline Price         $3.50
         Post-Upgrade MPG         50            Gasoline LRMC                 $3.00
         Cost of Upgrade      $3,000
         REBOUND                                  Energy            GHG
         Income-Effect                              11%               8%
         Substitution-Effect,  = −0.1               6%               9%
         Substitution-Effect,  = −0.2              13%              19%
         Substitution-Effect,  = −0.3              20%              30%
         Substitution-Effect,  = −0.4              28%              41%

    Table 2: Illustrative Calculation of Rebound from Doubling Auto Fuel Economy


car. This extra mileage would consume an additional 66 MMBTU and emit an extra 9.64
tonnes of GHGs, counting both the fuel and non-fuel incremental energy use.

Thus, an illustrative, but realistic, calculation of rebound from doubling fuel economy
would be about 56 MMBTU from income-effect rebound and 66 MMBTU from substitu-
tion-effect rebound for a total of 122 MMBTU rebound offsetting the 513 MMBTU gain
from the efficiency improvement, a total rebound of about 24%. The direct GHG reduction
from the fuel efficiency improvement would be 50 tonnes of which about 4 tonnes would
be offset by income-effect rebound and about 10 tonnes by substitution-effect rebound, a
total GHG rebound of about 27%. The calculations, as well as calculations for alternate
VMT elasticity assumptions, are summarized in table 2.

Obviously, many assumptions in this calculation could be altered or improved upon with
new empirical estimation of the relevant parameters. I have not attempted to include
economy-wide rebound effects, which are much more difficult to calculate, as discussed
earlier, but could be very important. I have also taken prior demand elasticity estimates as
guidance for the calculation of substitution-effect rebound despite the fact that they likely
overstate the elasticity of those who would be affected by the fuel economy improvement,
as discussed in section II.C. Nonetheless, this framework provides the basis for a coherent
and transparent analysis.

B. Second Illustrative Calculation – Lighting

A similar calculation for lighting yields a smaller income-effect rebound, but potentially
a larger substitution-effect rebound, and overall a larger rebound. For this illustration, I

                                             22
ASSUMPTIONS
                       LED       CFL Incandescent
Price/Bulb            $15.00    $1.25  $0.60             Discount Rate                      3%
Hours/Bulb            25,000     5000   1250             Retail Electricity Price     $0.11/kWh
kWh/hour               0.011    0.013  0.060             LRMC Eectricity              $0.08/kWh
                                                         Hours Used/Day                      3
REBOUND                                 Energy Energy                  GHG      GHG
                                          LED    CFL                   LED      CFL
Income-Effect                              6%     6%                     3%       4%
Substitution-Effect,  = −0.4              6%     6%                     3%       4%
Substitution-Effect,  = −0.6             14%    19%                    10%      14%
Substitution-Effect,  = −0.8             37%    53%                    27%      39%

       Table 3: Illustrative Calculation of Rebound from Energy Efficient Lighting


compare incandescent lighting with CFLs and LEDs. LED lights are very new and prices
are coming down quickly, so these calculations will change, but the light quality seems to
be more comparable to traditional incandescent than are compact fluorescent bulbs.


Table 3 shows the calculations based on parameters taken from retail websites. In order
to do this comparison, I calculate the annual cost of using each type of 60-watt-equivalent
bulb in a given light socket, assuming the same electricity price and baseline usage level
(before substitution effects). I assume that the real retail price of electricity is constant at
$0.11/kWh and the real marginal cost is constant at $0.08/kWh over the life of all bulbs
analyzed. I also assume that each bulb is used three hours per day and lasts to specified
lifetime hours. For any lifetime hours and cost of a bulb, one can then calculate the energy
use and cost per year, as well as the GHG per year. I do this for all three bulb types using
the parameters shown in table 3 and then calculate income-effect rebound based on the
savings from using each type of more-efficient bulb relative to incandescent. Calculating
substitution-effect rebound requires an assumption about the long-run compensated elas-
ticity. Using vector error-correction models, Fouquet and Pearson (2011) estimate long-run
uncompensated demand elasticity for lighting by decade over the last 250 years, with the
most recent estimates for 2000-2010. The estimates change quite a bit (and the paper
doesn’t report standard errors), but the estimate for the most recent period is -0.6. I
present results for -0.4 and -0.8 as well. For this illustration, I assume throughout that
any expenditures not on electricity – lightbulb, expenditures of new income, and reduced
expenditures on other goods when consumption substitutes towards lighting – carry the
economy wide average energy and GHG intensity.

                                              23
The results suggest that income-effect rebound is quite small in the case of lighting, around
6% for energy for both types of bulbs and 3%-4% for GHG. Savings from LEDs and CFLs
are substantial, but the energy intensity of expenditures on lighting is so much higher than
for the economy as whole that the “respending” of those savings on other goods generates
little rebound.

Substitution-effect rebound, however, is substantially larger and very sensitive to the elas-
ticity of demand that is assumed. Still, even in the high case of -0.8 elasticity, the implied
total (income plus substitution) rebound is about 43% for energy with an LED, and 30%
for GHGs. Again, these calculations do not include economy-wide rebound. In this case,
however, energy price-driven rebound is probably not as large a concern as with vehicle
fuel efficiency, because the supply of the relevant fuel is probably much more price elastic.
Also as with the fuel economy illustration, I use an estimate of market-wide elasticity for
calculating substitution-effect rebound, which likely overstates the elasticity of customers
who would be most affected by regulation to improve lighting efficiency.


V. Conclusion
I have presented a framework that may be helpful in organizing the measurement of energy
efficiency rebound from end-user efficiency upgrades. Decomposing rebound into substi-
tution and income effects allows one to more directly map changes to measures of the
economy-wide energy (or GHG) intensity and estimates of demand elasticity, and to ac-
count explicitly for the net substitution effect. The results of this approach applied to
auto fuel economy and lighting suggest that rebound in these cases is a substantial factor
which, if ignored, would lead to significant overstatement of energy savings. In these two
cases, however, it also appears that “backfire” – rebound in excess of 100% of the direct
energy efficiency gain – is unlikely.

These calculations do not include factors that generally fall under the heading of economy-
wide rebound. I discussed two manifestations of economy-wide rebound – macroeconomic
multipliers and energy price effect rebound. Due to the relatively small size of income-
effect rebound I found in the two cases studied, a macroeconomic multiplier of the ranges
frequently discussed seems unlikely to substantially change the analysis. Supply-driven
rebound, however, may be quite large in the case of oil-saving energy efficiency, though
probably less significant for technologies that rely on natural gas and coal. Both economy-
wide rebound effects are in need of further research.

While I have focused entirely on quantification of rebound, it is important to remember the

                                             24
welfare implications. When rebound does occur, it reflects the creation of economic value
as consumers are able to re-optimize in response to a change in relative prices. In that
normative sense, rebound should be celebrated, not bemoaned. Still, for policy purposes,
it is important to understand how energy efficiency will change societies’ consumption of
energy, which requires quantification of rebound.




                                           25
                                    REFERENCES

Allcott, Blake. 2004. “Jevons’ Paradox,” Ecological Economics, 54, pp. 9-21.
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. 2012. “Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?”,
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1), pp. 3-28.
Azevedo, Inês L., Marco Sonnberger, Brinda A. Thomas, Granger Morgan, and Ortwin
    Renn. 2012. “Developing robust energy efficiency policies while accounting for con-
    sumer behavior,” International Risk Governance Council (IRGC) report.
Berkhout, Peter H.G., Jos C. Muskens, Jan W. Velthuijsen. 2000. “Defining the rebound
    effect,” Energy Policy, 28, pp. 425-432.
Binswanger, Mathias. 2001. “Technological progress and sustainable development: what
    about the rebound effect?” Ecological Economics 36, pp. 119132.
Borenstein, Severin and Lucas W. Davis. 2012. “The Equity and Efficiency of Two-Part
    Tariffs in U.S. Natural Gas Markets,” Journal of Law and Economics, 55(1), February.
Bränlund, Runar, Tarek Ghalwash and Jonas Nordström. 2007. “Increased energy effi-
     ciency and the rebound effect: Effects on consumption and emissions,” Energy Eco-
     nomics 29, pp. 1 17.
Brennan, Timothy J. 2013. “Energy Efficiency Policy Puzzles,” Energy Journal, 34(2),
    pp. 1-25.
Brookes, Leonard G. 1990. “The greenhouse effect: the fallacies in the energy efficiency
    solution,” Energy Policy, 18(2), pp. 199-201.
Brookes, Leonard G. 1992. “Energy efficiency and economic fallacies: a reply,” Energy
    Policy, 20(5), pp. 390-392.
Brookes, Leonard G. 1993. “Energy efficiency fallacies: the debate concluded,” Energy
    Policy, 21(4), pp. 346-347.
Davis, Lucas. 2008. “Durable Goods and Residential Demand for Energy and Water:
    Evidence from a Field Trial,” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(2), pp. 530-546.
Davis, Lucas W. and Erich Muehlegger. 2011. “Do Americans Consume Too Little Natural
    Gas? An Empirical Test of Marginal Cost Pricing,” RAND Journal of Economics,
    41(4), pp. 791-810.
Fouquet, Roger and Peter J.G. Pearson. 2006. “Seven Centuries of Energy Services: The
    Price and Use of Light in the United Kingdom (1300-2000),” Energy Journal, 27(1),
    pp. 139-177.
Fouquet, Roger and Peter J.G. Pearson. 2011. “The Long Run Demand for Lighting: Elas-
    ticities and Rebound Effects in Different Phases of Economic Development,” Basque
    Centre for Climate Change Working Paper 2011-06, July.
Gillingham, Kenneth, Matthew Kotchen, David Rapson and Gernot Wagner. 2013 “The
     Rebound Effect is Overplayed,” Nature 493, pp. 475-476.

                                          26
Gillingham, Kenneth, Richard G. Newell, and Karen Palmer. 2009. “Energy Efficiency
     Economics and Policy,” Annual Review of Resource Economics, 1, 597-619.
Graff Zivin, Joshua, Matthew J. Kotchen and Erin T. Mansur. 2012. “Spatial and Tem-
    poral Heterogeneity of Marginal Emissions: Implications for Electric Cars and Other
    Electricity-Shifting Policies,” University of California Center for Energy and Environ-
    mental Economics Working Paper WP-047, October.
Greening, Lorna A., David L. Greene, and Carmen Difiglio. 2000. “Energy Efficiency and
    Consumption – The Rebound Effect – A Survey,” Energy Policy, 28, pp. 389-401.
Jenkins, Jesse, Ted Nordhaus, and Michael Shellenberger. 2011. “Energy Emergence:
    Rebound and Backfire as Emergent Phenomena, A Review of the Literature,” Break-
    through Institute white paper.
    Available at http://thebreakthrough.org/blog/Energy Emergence.pdf.
Jevons, William Stanley. 1865. The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning the Progress
    of the Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of our Coal Mines, Third Edition, Revised
    1906. New York: Macmillan & Co.
Khazzoum, Daniel J. 1980. “Implications of Mandated Efficiency in Standards for House-
   hold Appliances,” Energy Journal, 1(4), October, pp. 21-40.
Laitner, John A. “Skip”. 2000. “Energy effciency: rebounding to a sound analytical
    perspective,” Energy Policy, 28, pp. 471-475.
Murphy, David J. and Charles A.S. Hall. 2010. “Year in review – EROI or energy return
   on (energy) invested,” Annals of the New York Academy of Science, pp. 102-118
Parry, Ian W.H. and Kenneth A. Small. (revised) 2004. “Does Britain or the United States
    Have the Right Gasoline Tax?”, Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 02-12 rev.
Saunders, Harry D. 2000. “A view from the macro side: rebound, backfire and Khazzoum-
    Brookes,” Energy Policy, 28, pp. 439-449.
Saunders, Harry D. 2008. “Fuel conserving (and using) production functions,” Energy
    Economics, 30, pp. 2184-2235.
Small, Kenneth A. and Kurt Van Dender. 2007. “Fuel Efficiency and Motor Vehicle Travel:
   The Declining Rebound Effect,” Energy Journal, 28, pp. 25-51.
Sorrell, Steve. 2009. “Jevons’ Paradox revisited: The evidence for backfire from improved
    energy efficiency,” Energy Policy, 37, 1456-1469.
Thomas, Brinda A. and Inês L. Azevedo. 2013. “Estimating direct and indirect rebound
   effects for U.S. households with inputoutput analysis Part 1: Theoretical framework,”
   Ecological Economics.




                                            27
