NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN TRADE AND INVESTMENT:
FIRM-LEVEL PERSPECTIVES
Elhanan Helpman
Working Paper 19057
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19057

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

I thank Gene Grossman, Marc Melitz and Stephen Redding for comments, the National Science Foundation
for financial support, and Jane Trahan for editorial assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Foreign Trade and Investment: Firm-Level Perspectives
Elhanan Helpman
NBER Working Paper No. 19057
May 2013
JEL No. F12,F16,J64
ABSTRACT
This Economica Coase Lecture reviews research that has revolutionized the field of international trade
and foreign direct investment. It explains the motivation behind the development of new analytical
frameworks, the nature of these frameworks, and the empirical studies that sprouted from them.

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1875 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu

1

Background

The …eld of international trade is as old as economics itself. Adam Smith discussed it in
The Wealth of Nations (published in 1776), as did many classical economists. Yet David
Ricardo is credited with the development of the …rst theory of foreign trade, based on sectoral
comparative advantage. It postulates that the relative productivity of sectors or industries
varies across countries, and this variation determines trade ‡ows: a country exports products
from sectors in which it is relatively more productive. Despite the fact that Ricardo’s analysis
in chapter 7 of his Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation (published in 1817) was
designed to illustrate why countries gain from trade (as part of his campaign to abolish the
Corn Laws), his insights molded scholarly thinking about trade patterns for many years to
come.
Although Ricardo’s notion of comparative advantage dominated the intellectual discourse
on trade issues until it was replaced by the Heckscher-Ohlin theory, it had proved to be too
di¢ cult for empirical analysis. In particular, it was hard to derive from it predictions that
could be tested with data. As a result, initial attempts at empirical analysis— such as MacDougall (1951, 1952) and Stern (1962)— were abandoned, and seriously renewed only in
2002 with the publication of Eaton and Kortum’s stochastic approach to Ricardian comparative advantage. Unlike earlier articulations, their approach is well suited for quantitative
explorations.
In 1919 Eli Heckscher published his famous paper “The E¤ect of Foreign Trade on the
Distribution of Income,”which became available to English-language readers in its full form
only in 1991 (see Heckscher 1919). On top of providing an elegant and deep verbal analysis
of the e¤ects of trade on factor rewards, Heckscher’s contribution laid the foundations for
the factor proportions theory. In a doctoral dissertation, his former student Bertil Ohlin
integrated these insights into a Walrasian equilibrium system (see Ohlin 1924), and further
elaborated the theory in a pathbreaking book Interregional and International Trade (see
Ohlin 1933). According to this view, countries that have access to the same technologies,
1

and therefore the same sectoral productivity levels, trade with each other as a result of
di¤erences in factor endowments: a country exports products that are relatively intensive
in inputs with which it is relatively well endowed. Land-rich countries export land-intensive
products, capital-rich countries export capital-intensive products, and labor-rich countries
export labor-intensive products. Similarly to Ricardo, the Heckscher-Ohlin approach focuses
on sectors. Some sectors, such as chemicals, are capital intensive; other sectors, such as
agriculture, are land intensive; and still other sectors, such as clothing, are labor intensive.
Following its elaboration by Samuelson (1948), Jones (1965) and others, this theory
dominated the thinking on trade issues for most of the 20th century. Nevertheless, many
years passed before empirical studies that carefully built on the theory emerged. Leontief
(1953) triggered a controversy that stimulated “tests” of the Heckscher-Ohlin theory, while
Leamer (2004) provided the …rst comprehensive analysis of sectoral trade ‡ows for a large
number of countries, multiple sectors and multiple inputs, using insights from the theory. Yet
only in 1987 did Bowen, Leamer and Sveikauskos develop proper tests of the theory, using
measures of its three essential elements: sectoral trade ‡ows, sectoral factor intensities, and
factor endowments. These tests were based on Vanek’s (1968) derivation of the theory’s
implications for the factor content of sectoral trade ‡ows, and the news was not good:
the data rejected the theory. More charitable evaluations of Eli Heckscher’s and Bertil
Ohlin’s insights were later provided by Tre‡er (1995), while improvements and elaborations
of Tre‡er’s approach were further developed by Davis and Weinstein (2001). As a result, the
belief that factor proportions are important in shaping world trade has been restored.
The 1987 empirical challenge to the Heckscher-Ohlin theory was preceded by another
empirical challenge that changed trade theory forever. In 1975, Herbert Grubel and Peter Lloyd published a book entitled Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and Measurement of
International Trade in Di¤erentiated Products, in which they pointed out that the phenomenon of intraindustry trade is widespread, where intraindustry trade refers to the exchange
of products within the same sectors. France, for example, exported chemical products to

2

Germany and imported chemical products from Germany; France also exported clothing to
Germany and imported clothing from Germany; and so on across most manufacturing industries. Grubel and Lloyd devised an index to measure the share of intraindustry trade,
and reported that in most industrial countries this share exceeded one half. That is, the
majority of trade in manufactures was intraindustry, while the dominant theory of the time—
Heckscher-Ohlin— was about intersectoral trade ‡ows, e.g., exports of chemical products in
exchange for clothing. This …nding has not changed over the years. In 2002 the OECD
reported that the average share of intraindustry trade in 1996-2000 was 77.5% in France,
72% in Germany, and 68.5% in the United States. In Australia it was smaller, only 30%, yet
large enough to shed doubt on the pure intersectoral view of foreign trade.
Another observation that triggered a rethinking of the intersectoral view of trade was that
much of trade took place among countries at similar levels of development, and particularly
among the rich countries. Both Ricardo and Heckscher and Ohlin emphasized cross-country
di¤erences as drivers of trade ‡ows, while trade appeared to be predominately among countries that di¤ered relatively little from each other. This too has not changed over time.
In 2006 the WTO reported that out of close to 1.5 trillion dollars worth of manufacturing
exports from North America in 2005, more than 800 billion were to North America and more
than 200 billion were to Europe. At the same time European countries exported more than
4 trillion dollars worth of manufactures, more than 3 trillion dollars of which were to Europe
and close to 400 billion to North America.
These observations, together with theoretical developments in the analysis of monopolistic
competition, brought about a revolution in trade theory. New models of foreign trade were
developed, with the explicit aim of incorporating intraindustry trade and large trade volumes
among similar countries. Lancaster (1979, ch. 10) and Krugman (1979) were the …rst to
develop such models, in which industries are populated by …rms that produce di¤erentiated
products, each …rm has its own variety, and …rms sell their brands in both domestic and
foreign markets. Because variety is desirable in every country, specialization in di¤erent

3

brands of the same good leads to intraindustry trade and to trade among countries that
are similar to each other. These formal models used building blocks that were informally
discussed in Balassa (1967), who studied the European Common Market and tried to provide
a rationale for why much of the adjustment to the integration process took place within rather
than across industries.
While the initial models of trade and monopolistic competition disregarded traditional
forces of comparative advantage, subsequent research integrated the factor proportions view
of intersectoral trade with the monopolistic competition view of intraindustry trade (see
particularly Dixit and Norman 1980, Lancaster 1980, Helpman 1981 and Krugman 1981).
The resulting theory is rich (see Helpman and Krugman 1985), it found many applications
(including in endogenous growth theory; see Grossman and Helpman 1991), and it has
rami…cations that were empirically examined (see Helpman 2011, ch. 4, for a review). All
in all it was a big success, yet a new challenge was quick to emerge.

2

Challenge and Response

Models of international trade under monopolistic competition, in contrast to neoclassical
trade models, designated a central role to individual …rms. Firms made decisions to enter an
industry, invested in R&D in order to develop new products, acquired subsidiaries in foreign
countries, and priced their products as pro…tably as they could. These decisions determined
variety choice, trade patterns, trade volumes, shares of intraindustry trade, and the dynamic
evolution of industries (see Helpman and Krugman 1985, and Grossman and Helpman 1991).
Yet despite these tremendous advances, the theory retained a focus on sectoral outcomes.
Within a sector, …rms were treated symmetrically: they had the same technologies (even
when they produced di¤erent brands), they employed the same composition of inputs, and
they priced their products similarly. As a result, sectoral outcomes were a manifold of …rmlevel outcomes, with the exception of some studies of multinational corporations in which

4

domestic …rms coexisted with multinationals in the same industry (e.g., Helpman 1984).
Led by Bernard and Jensen (1995, 1999), the examination of new data sets that became
available in the 1990s posed a challenge to the symmetry assumption within sectors, with
wide-reaching consequences. In models of monopolistic competition that were developed in
the 1980s, the symmetry assumption was used for convenience, because heterogeneity within
sectors was not essential for addressing the main questions for which those models were
designed. What the new data sets revealed, however, was that the lens of a “representative
…rm”was more restrictive than previously appreciated. In particular, it turned out that in a
typical industry only a small fraction of …rms export and that these …rms do not constitute
a random sample. Exporters are larger and more productive than nonexporters, foreign
markets are disproportionately served by large exporters, and exporters pay higher wages.
In other words, there is a systematic relationship between the characteristics of …rms and
their engagement in foreign trade. According to the WTO (2008), 18% of U.S. …rms in the
manufacturing sector exported in 2002, 17.6% exported in France in 1986, and 20% exported
in Japan in 2000. In U.S. manufacturing, the top 10% of …rms by size contributed 96% of
the exports in 2002, in France the top 10% contributed 84% of the exports in 2003, and in
the U.K. the top 10% contributed 80% of the exports in 2003.
Similarly to Balassa (1967), studies of the new data sets found substantial reallocations
within sectors in response to trade liberalization. Two of the responses are particularly
striking. On one hand, some of the least productive …rms leave their industries (see Clerides,
Lach and Tybout 1998 for Colombia, Mexico and Morocco; Bernard and Jensen 1999 for the
U.S.; and Aw, Chung and Roberts 2000 for Taiwan). On the other hand, market shares are
reallocated from less to more productive …rms (see Pavcnik 2002 for Chile; Tre‡er 2004 for
Canada; and Bernard, Jensen and Schott 2006 for the U.S.). Evidently, international trade
and …rm heterogeneity are intimately related. What drives this relationship? And what are
its consequences?
Melitz (2003) started a revolution in trade theory by designing an analytical framework

5

with heterogeneous …rms (an extension of the basic one-sector model of monopolistic competition) that is consistent with most of the empirical regularities outlined above. Although
Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum (2003) also proposed a model with the same aim in
mind, the Melitz model proved to be more durable and more useful for addressing a host of
issues (to be discussed below).
In the Melitz model …rms produce varieties of a di¤erentiated product. Unlike Krugman
(1979) and Lancaster (1979), however, a …rm that enters an industry does not know the
total factor productivity (TFP) of its technology. Instead, similarly to Hopenhayn (1992), it
knows the distribution from which its productivity draw will be realized. After sinking the
entry cost, a …rm learns its productivity level. Since it has to bear a …xed cost of operation,
a …rm stays in business only if its operating pro…ts are high enough to cover this …xed cost.
Entry proceeds until expected pro…ts cover the entry cost, so that ex-ante all entrants break
even.
In an open economy a …rm can derive pro…ts from domestic and foreign sales, but it
faces variable and destination-speci…c …xed costs of exporting. As a result, a …rm exports
only if operating pro…ts in a destination market are large enough to cover the …xed cost
of exporting. In equilibrium some …rms remain in the industry, serving only the domestic
market, while other …rms sell at home and abroad. The model provides a characterization
of …rms that sort into each one of these organizational forms: that is, …rms that stay in the
industry after sinking the entry cost, and, among those who stay, …rms that export. Since
…rms vary by realized TFP only, the result is that the least productive …rms do not stay
in business, while the most productive …rms export. Firms with intermediate productivity
serve only the domestic market, while exporters serve the domestic market too.
A remarkable property of this analytical framework is that it replicates the pattern of
response to trade liberalization observed in the data. That is, a multilateral reduction
in trade costs drives some of the least productive …rms out of the industry and leads to
a reallocation of market shares from less to more productive …rms (exporters), consistent

6

with the evidence. By weeding out the least productive …rms and raising the weight of highproductivity …rms in the industry, trade liberalization raises the sector’s average productivity.
Can these productivity gains be substantial? The answer is that they can be and they
were in Canada after the implementation of its free trade agreement with the United State
in 1989. Tre‡er (2004) and Lileeva and Tre‡er (2010) provide estimates that are summarized
in Melitz and Tre‡er (2012). According to these estimates, market share reallocations raised
manufacturing productivity by 4.1%, while exit of the least productive plants raised productivity by an additional 4.3%. In other words, the e¢ ciency of Canadian manufacturing
improved by 8.4% on account of these adjustments. An additional gain of 4.9% was realized
through productivity-enhancing investments (a mechanism that also played an important
role in Argentina after the formation of MERCOSUR in 1991, a free trade agreement between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela; see Bustos 2011). In Canada,
3.5% out of the 4.9% was attained as a result of productivity-enhancing investments by new
exporters, i.e., …rms that did not export prior to the free trade agreement but started to
export after its implementation. And 1.4% was attained as a result of investments of existing exporters. Bustos (2011) showed analytically that in the Melitz model the incentive to
invest in better technologies is largest among the most productive nonexporters, who …nd it
pro…table to become exporters in the aftermath of trade liberalization.
The extent to which productivity gains from exit of the least productive …rms and market
share reallocations towards more productive …rms shape welfare gains from trade liberalization has been the subject of a recent controversy. Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare
(2012) have argued that one can disregard these productivity changes. To justify this claim
they show that in a class of models— which includes the basic Melitz model with Pareto distributed productivity— the percentage increase in welfare as a result of changes in variable
trade costs equals the percentage decline in the share of a country’s spending on its own
goods raised to a positive power that equals the elasticity of trade with respect to variable
trade costs. According to this view, all we need are estimates of the trade elasticity and the

7

percentage decline (rise) in the share of spending on own goods in order to gauge welfare
changes, because the same formula applies to economies with or without …rm heterogeneity.
For this reason details of the within-industry reallocations that change productivity are not
relevant for welfare analysis. Finally, an extension of the argument to many sectors brings
out the need to also assess the response of intersectoral resource allocation to trade liberalization, and whether inputs move into sectors with large or small declines in the share of
spending on own goods and sectors with large or small elasticities of substitution.
While the analysis of Arkolakis, Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare is elegant and useful,
their interpretation of the welfare formula is quite misleading. The reason is that the response of the share of spending on own goods to trade liberalization depends on whether
the economy is of the Melitz type or whether …rms within the sectors are all alike. This is
particularly relevant for attempts to quantify welfare changes by means of calibration, where
the choice of parameters has to place alternative economic environments on the same footing. For example, if one calibrates two models— one model with and the other without …rm
heterogeneity— to data of a country that is already engaged in foreign trade, then to match
the same data the required parameters will di¤er across models. Under these circumstances,
comparisons across models are not very instructive. Melitz and Redding (2013a) provide a
detailed discussion of the shortcomings of this type of analysis. They show, for example, that
if one calibrates these two models— one with …rm heterogeneity and the other without it— to
generate the same outcomes in autarky, including the same average productivity within the
sector, then the opening of trade always yields higher welfare gains in the environment with
…rm heterogeneity, in which average productivity rises with trade, than in the environment
with symmetric …rms, in which productivity does not change.
A particularly interesting quantitative analysis that sheds light on these issues is provided
by Balistreri, Hillberry and Rutherford (2011). They use a computable general equilibrium
model of the world economy, consisting of 12 countries (some of which are regions), to assess
the impact of a halving of tari¤s on manufactures. Since tari¤s on manufactures are low,

8

this entails a reduction of about 5% in variable trade costs. In carrying out the analysis,
Balistreri, Hillberry and Rutherford consider two alternative versions of the manufacturing
sector: in one version …rms are symmetric, in the other they are heterogeneous. But in
both cases the average productivity of manufactures is the same. What they …nd is that the
unweighted mean of the welfare gain from cutting tari¤s by half is about four times higher
(in percentage terms) when …rms are heterogeneous. Evidently, economic structure makes a
big di¤erence for policy analysis.
Bernard, Redding and Schott (2007) point out an important implication of an extended
version of the Melitz model. They construct a two-country, two-sector, two-factor version,
in line with the Heckscher-Ohlin view of factor proportions. Allowing for heterogeneity in
both sectors, they show that trade raises productivity in each of them. However, productivity rises relatively more in the sector with comparative advantage; namely, in the sector
that uses relatively intensively the input with which the country is well endowed. Under
the circumstances trade raises productivity relatively more in the labor-intensive sector in
the country that has relatively more workers, and it raises productivity relatively more in
the capital-intensive sector in the country that has relatively more capital. Since the former country exports labor-intensive products on net and the latter exports capital-intensive
products on net (while both countries export varieties of both types of goods), it follows
that productivity rises proportionately more in the export sector. The implication is that
factor proportions induce (endogenously) Ricardian-type comparative advantage, leading to
a structure of trade that combines Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin forces.
Firm heterogeneity has also been used by Helpman, Melitz and Rubinstein (2008) to
devise an estimation method that achieves three objectives: (i) accounts for the lack of trade
among many country pairs; (ii) enables separate estimation of the intensive and extensive
margins of trade; and (iii) corrects for selection bias. To achieve these aims, Helpman, Melitz
and Rubinstein construct a many-country version of the Melitz model, allowing for a variety
of asymmetries across countries, such as di¤erences in …xed and variable trade costs. They

9

use this analytical model to derive a generalized gravity equation for trade ‡ows, as well
as an equation for trade participation. Since trade participation depends on the …xed cost
of exporting, while the volume of exports— conditional on exporting— does not, the system
provides a natural way to correct for selection bias in estimating trade ‡ows. This bias
emanates from the fact that only the most productive …rms select into exporting. Moreover,
the participation equation can be used to identify the extensive margin of trade, which results
from variation in the number of …rms that choose to export. Finally, this equation accounts
in a natural way for the lack of exports from a country to some potential trade partners for
which the …xed trade cost may be too high to make such exports pro…table. Many of the
issues discussed in this section are further elaborated in Melitz and Redding (2013b).

3

Unemployment and Inequality

Labor market frictions are widespread. They di¤er across countries as a result of di¤erences
in hiring and …ring practices, the e¤ectiveness of labor markets, and government policies such
as unemployment insurance. As a result, rates of unemployment vary across countries and
in a trading world they are interdependent. In particular, a country’s rate of unemployment
depends on the labor market frictions of its trade partners in addition to its own labor
market frictions. Because such frictions make room for rent-sharing between employers and
employees, they also impact wages and inequality of earnings.

3.1

Unemployment

Past research on trade and unemployment focused on minimum wage constraints as frictions in the labor market (see Brecher 1974 and Davis 1998), although other frictions— such
as e¢ ciency wages (see Copeland 1989) and search and matching (see Davidson, Martin
and Matusz 1999)— were also analyzed. Apart from these frictions, those studies employed
neoclassical frameworks to examine the impact of trade on unemployment. More recently,

10

trade and unemployment have been jointly studied for economies with …rm heterogeneity
and monopolistic competition.
Helpman and Itskhoki (2010) developed a framework in which there is a traditional homogeneous sector and a sector that produces varieties of a di¤erentiated product. The former
sector is competitive in the product market, the latter engages in monopolistic competition.
In both sectors there is search and matching in the labor market.
In the general equilibrium of a two-country world, Helpman and Itskhoki show how
di¤erences in labor market frictions generate comparative advantage. In particular, the
country that has lower labor market frictions in the di¤erentiated sector relative to the
homogeneous sector exports di¤erentiated products on net. A su¢ cient statistic for these
frictions is the resulting cost of hiring, which can di¤er across sectors and countries. They
also show that both countries gain from trade, independently of the impact of trade on
unemployment.
Tracing the impact of trade on unemployment reveals complicated patterns. Trade may,
for example, increase or reduce the level of unemployment. And moreover, reductions of
variable trade costs can impact unemployment in a nonmonotonic fashion. Particularly
important is the …nding that a reduction in one country’s labor market frictions in the
di¤erentiated sector raises its welfare but hurts the trade partner. On the other hand, there
exist coordinated reductions in labor market frictions in both countries that bene…t both.
Due to multiple distortions, multiple policies are needed to raise welfare substantially or
to attain constrained Pareto e¢ ciency. For example, using unemployment insurance as a
single policy tool is bene…cial in some circumstances but harmful in others (see Helpman,
Itskhoki and Redding 2011). And when unemployment insurance is bene…cial, there exists
an optimal level that maximizes welfare.
Unemployment insurance may or may not be part of a policy package that achieves constrained Pareto e¢ ciency. To be sure, some intervention in the labor market is needed to
secure the Hosios (1990) condition (for the relationship between the elasticities of the match-

11

ing function and the relative bargaining power of workers), which has to be satis…ed in a
constrained Pareto-e¢ cient equilibrium. Yet this cannot always be achieved with unemployment insurance, because in some circumstances a tax rather than a subsidy to hiring costs is
required. Other policies to achieve this e¢ ciency include subsidizing the output of di¤erentiated products (to correct for markup pricing) and subsidizing equally (in percentage terms)
the …xed costs of operating and exporting. As a rule, optimal policies do not discriminate
between exporting and domestic activities.

3.2

Inequality

Research concerning the impact of trade on wage inequality was traditionally focused on the
relative wages of workers with di¤erent skills or workers employed in di¤erent sectors and
occupations. Much of this work resorted to di¤erences in factor intensities across sectors
to transmit international prices into factor rewards. As a result, when the college wage
premium almost doubled in the United Sates between the late 1970s and the early 1990s,
scholars …rst examined whether this development could be explained by globalization, and
in particular by the increased participation of less developed countries in world trade (see
Helpman 2004, ch. 6, for a summary of this literature and for references). The tentative
answer was that trade can explain a fraction of the increased gap in relative wages, but that
most of it was due to skill-biased technical change. This conclusion was strengthened by
studies that showed rising relative wages of skilled workers across the board, in developed
and less developing countries alike (see also Goldberg and Pavcnik 2007).
While wage inequality across skill groups has increased to some extent, changes in the
return to observed skills— such as education— account for a small fraction of the rise in
overall wage inequality. The majority of the rise in wage inequality was due to the rise in
residual wage inequality, which represents di¤erences in the wages of workers with similar
characteristics. In addition, wage dispersion across …rms and plants has been identi…ed as
an important source of wage variation (see Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding 2013).
12

To illustrate, in 1994 residual wage inequality accounted for 59% of the overall inequality
of wages in Brazilian manufacturing, with 89% of this variation due to di¤erences in wages
within sector-occupation cells (see Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding 2013, Table
4). In Sweden residual wage inequality accounted for 70% of the overall wage inequality
in manufacturing in 2001, with 83% of the variation due to wage di¤erences within sectoroccupation cells (see Akerman, Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding 2013, Table 3).
Evidently, residual wage inequality is large in both these countries, which di¤er greatly
from each other in other dimensions. Moreover, in each of them the contribution of worker
observable characteristics to wage inequality is smaller than the contribution within sectors
of …rm-speci…c components of wage variation (although the latter is signi…cantly smaller in
Sweden than in Brazil).
Helpman, Itskhoki and Redding (2010) developed a theoretical model in which residual
wage inequality is a¤ected by foreign trade. In their model heterogeneous …rms select into
exporting on the basis of total factor productivity. Workers search for jobs and …rms post
vacancies. But while workers are ex-ante identical, a worker’s match with a job generates a
random productivity outcome. This outcome is not observable, yet …rms can invest in screening to identify workers with a productivity level above an endogeneously chosen threshold.
Since screening is costly, involving a …xed cost that rises with the threshold’s level, more
productive …rms screen to a higher productivity cuto¤ and therefore employ a better composition of workers. As a result, wage bargaining leads to higher wages being paid by more
productive …rms. Under the circumstances more productive …rms are larger, employ better
workers, pay higher wages, and the most productive among them export, all in line with the
evidence.
A major implication of this model is that lowering trade costs raises residual wage inequality when trade costs are high and reduces residual wage inequality when trade costs
are low. In other words, the relationship between trade frictions and wage inequality has an
inverted-U shape.

13

Adding heterogeneity to screening costs and …xed export costs, Helpman, Itskhoki,
Muendler and Redding (2013) show how this analytical framework can be used to derive
an econometric model that consists of three equations: for employment, wages, and selection
into exporting. Assuming a joint log normal distribution of the three sources of …rm heterogeneity yields a likelihood function. Using this likelihood function, they estimate the econometric model on a large matched employer-employee data set from Brazilian manufacturing.
The estimated model generates …rst and second moments of the distribution of employment
and wages (where the latter consists of …rm-speci…c components) that closely approximate
moments in the data. In addition, the estimated model generates an inverted-U-shaped
relationship between trade frictions and wage inequality, as predicted by the theory.
In this framework trade a¤ects residual wage inequality. To gauge how large these e¤ects
might be, Helpman, Itskhoki, Muendler and Redding examine counterfactual scenarios. They
…nd, for example, that in 1994 Brazilian wage inequality due to …rm-speci…c components—
where wage inequality is measured by the standard deviation of log wages— was about 7.6%
higher than it would have been in autarky. This is roughly the largest gap in inequality that
trade can generate when …xed export costs vary between zero and in…nity.

4

Multinational Corporations

By refocusing the analysis from sectors to …rms, recent research has also improved our
understanding of the role of multinational corporations (MNCs) in global supply chains.
These companies are very large and they play dominant roles in production, employment
and foreign trade. To illustrate, according to the most recent benchmark survey of the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), in 2009 the combined value added of U.S. parents
of multinationals and their majority-owned a¢ liates exceeded 3.5 trillion dollars and they
employed close to 40 million workers (see Barefoot and Mataloni 2011). MNC-associated
U.S. exports of goods were 578 billion dollars, close to 55% of total U.S. exports of goods.

14

Of these exports, 209 billion were intra…rm (i.e., intra-MNC). At the same time, MNCassociated imports were 703 billion dollars, accounting for 45% of U.S. imports, of which 222
billion were intra…rm. In the manufacturing sector, foreign a¢ liates of these companies sold
large fractions of output in the host countries, but they also exported some of it to the U.S.
and to other countries. In 2009 host-country sales amounted to 55% of total sales, 11% were
to the U.S., and 34% were to other foreign countries.
A¢ liates of foreign multinationals are important enterprises in the economies of many
countries. Because they are bigger than domestic …rms, their shares in employment, sales
and exports far exceed their relative number. According to the OECD (2010), in 2006-2007
the share of foreign a¢ liates in manufacturing employment exceeded 40% in Ireland, the
Slovak Republic, the Czech Republic, Estonia and Luxembourg. But even in countries with
low employment shares, such as the U.S., Switzerland and Israel, these shares were in excess
of 10%. Moreover, foreign a¢ liates in Poland, Sweden, Finland, Israel and Estonia exported
more than half of their turnover (a measure of revenue). And in countries with low export
propensities, this share remained signi…cant: 10.5% in the U.S., 25.3% in Japan, 36.3% in
Italy, and 38.2% in France. Antràs and Yeaple (2013) provide more evidence on the sway of
multinational corporations in the world economy.
Dunning (1977) developed the “OLI” approach to multinational corporations, arguing
that in order to acquire foreign subsidiaries …rms need three types of advantages: in Ownership, Location, and Internalization. This informal approach was later replaced with more
detailed modelling of MNCs, including their decisions to engage in horizontal FDI, vertical FDI, and complex integration strategies. In this classi…cation, horizontal FDI concerns
situations in which a …rm acquires a foreign subsidiary in order to serve the host country
market; vertical FDI concerns situations in which a …rm acquires a foreign subsidiary in order
to produce intermediate inputs for its own use; and complex integration strategies concern
situations in which decisions to serve a foreign market via subsidiary sales are reliant on vertical FDI (possibly in a di¤erent country) that imparts cheap inputs. The latter may involve

15

platform FDI, where these inputs are exported to multiple subsidiaries, the parent …rm, or at
arm’s-length to nona¢ liated parties. As pointed out above, U.S. manufacturing subsidiaries
tend to sell a substantial share of their output in the host country’s market, but they also
export to other countries and to the U.S. (see Yeaple 2003; Grossman, Helpman and Szeidl
2006; Ekholm, Forslid and Markusen 2007; and Helpman 2011, ch. 6, for a discussion of
these issues).
Pure horizontal FDI is considered to arise from a tradeo¤ between proximity and concentration. A …rm that serves a foreign market with exports bears export costs, but saves the
cost of acquiring a subsidiary abroad. On the other side, a …rm that serves a foreign market
with subsidiary sales bears the cost of the subsidiary, but saves on export costs. Hence the
proximity-concentration tradeo¤ (see Markusen 1984). Brainard (1997) provides evidence in
support of this tradeo¤.
Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple (2004) introduced …rm heterogeneity into the proximityconcentration tradeo¤ framework. They show that, in line with the evidence, this model
implies that among …rms that stay in an industry the least productive serve only the domestic market, the most productive serve foreign markets via subsidiary sales, and …rms
with intermediate productivity levels serve foreign markets with exports. In 1996, the labor
productivity of U.S. multinationals was about 15% larger than the labor productivity of exporters, which was in turn about 40% larger than the labor productivity of purely domestic
…rms. But this pecking order was also found in other countries: in Japan (see Head and
Ries 2003, and Tomiura 2007), Ireland (see Girma, Görg and Strobl 2004), and the U.K. (see
Girma, Kneller and Pisu 2005). Moreover, Helpman, Melitz and Yeaple show analytically
that in this case the ratio of exports to subsidiary sales depends not only on the tradeo¤
between proximity and concentration, but also on the degree of …rm heterogeneity. Using
U.S. …rm-level data they con…rm the model’s predictions: exports relative to subsidiary
sales are higher in sectors with lower trade costs and higher …xed costs of FDI, and they
are lower in sectors with more productivity dispersion. Furthermore, all these e¤ects are

16

quantitatively of comparable size. Evidently, …rm heterogeneity is a signi…cant source of
comparative advantage. These …ndings are further con…rmed by Yeaple (2009) with a more
detailed analysis.
Pure vertical FDI lowers the cost of producing intermediate inputs, mostly due to low
wages in the host country (see Helpman 1984). Availability of sites with low manufacturing
costs encourages vertical FDI, but only in situations in which the cost of fragmentation of
production is not too high. Developments in computer-aided design and computer-aided
manufacturing, as well as other IT technologies, have substantially reduced the cost of fragmentation since 1980, leading to rapid expansion of cross-country vertical links, both at
arm’s-length and via integration (see Antràs and Yeaple 2013). These developments raised
again the question posed by Coase (1937): What are the boundaries of the …rm? Except that
in this context the relevant boundaries include multinationality. To understand the complex
supply chains that have emerged in the decades since 1980, it is necessary to understand
the tradeo¤s between outsourcing and integration on one hand, and between domestic and
o¤shore sourcing on the other.
Although a number of alternative approaches to the organization of …rms have been
examined in the literature (e.g., Grossman and Helpman 2004, Marin and Verdier 2012),
the theory of incomplete contracts— as developed by Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart
and Moore (1990)— has yielded the most durable insights about the endogenous choice concerning the make-or-buy decision (in the older literature on multinationals this choice was
exogeneous). In a seminal paper, Antràs (2003) developed a model of international trade
in which incomplete contracts govern the tradeo¤ between outsourcing and integration. Because incomplete contracts lead to underinvestment by the …nal good producer and the supplier of intermediate inputs, his model predicts that …nal good producers choose integration
in headquarter-intensive sectors (in which underinvestment in headquarters is particularly
important) and outsourcing in component-intensive sectors (in which underinvestment in
components is particularly important). Since integration includes FDI, the model predicts

17

intra…rm foreign trade in headquarter-intensive sectors and arms’-length trade in componentintensive sectors. Assuming that capital intensity is synonymous with headquarter intensity,
he …nds in U.S. data a positive correlation across sectors between the fraction of intra…rm
trade and headquarter intensity. He also …nds a positive correlation between an exporting
country’s capital abundance and its share of intra…rm exports to the U.S., in line with the
model’s prediction.
Antràs and Helpman (2004) introduced …rm heterogeneity into a trade model with incomplete contracts. In this framework …rms sort into alternative organizational forms based
on total factor productivity. Among the …rms that stay in an industry, the most productive
o¤shore while the least productive serve the home market only. Among the domestic …rms
the most productive integrate while the least productive outsource. And similarly, among
…rms that serve foreign markets the most productive integrate (i.e., acquire subsidiaries to
produce intermediate inputs) while the least productive outsource (i.e., purchase intermediates from nona¢ liated foreign companies). This pecking order is based on the assumption
that …xed costs of operating abroad are higher than …xed costs of operating at home and
…xed costs of integration are higher than …xed costs of outsourcing. Firm-level evidence from
Japan, France and Spain is consistent with the prediction that multinationals are more productive than …rms that outsource intermediate inputs o¤shore (see Tomiura 2007; Corcos,
Irac, Mion and Verdier 2013; and Kohler and Smolka 2012; respectively). But the evidence
from Spain is inconsistent with the prediction that the latter-type …rms are more productive
than domestic integrated companies.
The model also predicts that the share of intra…rm trade should be larger in sectors with
higher headquarter intensity and larger productivity dispersion. For the former prediction
there is evidence from the U.S., using capital intensity, R&D intensity, and specialized equipment intensity as proxies for headquarter intensity (see Yeaple 2006, Nunn and Tre‡er 2008,
and Nunn and Tre‡er 2013). For the latter prediction there is also evidence from the U.S.,
using a variety of measures of productivity dispersion (see Yeaple 2006, Nunn and Tre‡er

18

2008, and Nunn and Tre‡er 2013). Additional tests of predictions from Antràs and Helpman
(2004, 2008) concerning variation in contractibility across sectors and countries are discussed
in Antràs and Yeaple (2013).

5

Concluding Comments

The …eld of international trade has undergone two major revolutions in the last three decades:
…rst by integrating product di¤erentiation and monopolistic competition into its mainstream,
second by expanding the integrated framework to accommodate …rm heterogeneity. As a
result, the focus has shifted from a sectoral view of trade and foreign direct investment to a
…rm-based perspective. This has greatly enriched the analytical framework, making it both
more suitable for addressing a host of questions that became paramount for understanding
globalization and also more suitable for empirical analysis with the newly available rich data
sets. We now have better tools for studying the complex web of trade ‡ows and foreign
direct investment, including the boundaries of international …rms and global supply chains.
And we have better tools for studying the impact of international trade on unemployment
and inequality, two facets of globalization that have raised many concerns.

19

References
[1] Akerman, Anders, Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, Marc-Andreas Muendler and
Stephen J. Redding (2013) “Sources of Wage Inequality,” forthcoming in the American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings).
[2] Antràs, Pol (2003) “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 1375-1418.
[3] Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman (2004) “Global Sourcing,”Journal of Political Economy, 112, 552-580.
[4] Antràs, Pol and Elhanan Helpman (2008) “Contractual Frictions and Global Sourcing,”
in Helpman, Elhanan, Dalia Marin and Thierry Verdier (eds.) The Organization of
Firms in a Global Economy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press).
[5] Antràs, Pol and Stephen R. Yeaple (2013) “Multinational Firms and the Structure of
International Trade,” forthcoming in Gopinath, Gita, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth
Rogo¤ (eds.), Handbook of International Economics (New York: Elsevier).
[6] Arkolakis, Costas, Arnaud Costinot and Andres Rodrìguez-Clare (2012) “New Trade
Models, Same Old Gains?”American Economic Review, 102, 94-130.
[7] Aw, Bee-Yan, Sukkyun Chung and Mark J. Roberts (2000) “Productivity and Turnover
in the Export Market: Micro-level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan
(China),”World Bank Economic Review, 14, 65-90.
[8] Balassa, Béla (1967) Trade Liberalization Among Industrial Countries (New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company).
[9] Balistreri, Edward J., Russell H. Hillberry and Thomas F. Rutherford (2011) “Structural
Estimation and Solution of International Trade Models with Heterogeneous Firms,”
Journal of International Economics, 83, 95-108.
20

[10] Barefoot, Kevin and Raymond Mataloni (2011) “Operations of U.S. Multinational Companies in the United States and Abroad: Preliminary Results from the 2009 Benchmark
Survey,”Survey of Current Business, November, 29-48.
[11] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1995) “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in US
Manufacturing: 1976-87,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics,
67-112.
[12] Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen (1999) “Exceptional Exporter Performance:
Cause, E¤ect, or Both?”Journal of International Economics, 47, 1-25.
[13] Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott (2006) “Survival of the
Best Fit: Exposure to Low-Wage Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants,”Journal of International Economics, 68, 219-237.
[14] Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel S. Kortum
(2003) “Plants and Productivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review,
93, 1268-1290.
[15] Bernard, Andrew B., Stephen J. Redding and Peter K. Schott (2007) “Comparative
Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms,”Review of Economic Studies, 73, 31-66.
[16] Bowen, Harry P., Edward E. Leamer and Leo Sveikauskas (1987) “Multicountry, Multifactor Tests of the Factor Abundance Theory,”American Economic Review, 77, 791-809.
[17] Brainard, Lael S. (1997) “An Empirical Assessment of Proximity-Concentration Tradeo¤
between Multinational Sales and Trade,”American Economic Review, 87, 520-544.
[18] Brecher, Richard (1974) “Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of International
Trade,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88, 98-116.

21

[19] Bustos, Paula (2011) “Trade Liberalization, Exports, and Technology Upgrading: Evidence on the Impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian Firms,” American Economic Review, 101, 304–340.
[20] Clerides, Sofronis K., Saul Lach and James R. Tybout (1998) “Is Learning by Exporting
Important? Micro-Dynamic Evidence form Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco,”Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 113, 903-947.
[21] Coase, Ronald H. (1937) “The Nature of the Firm,”Economica, 4, 386-405.
[22] Copeland, Brian (1989) “E¢ ciency Wages in a Ricardian Model of International Trade,”
Journal of International Economics, 27, 221-244.
[23] Corcos, Gregory, Delphine M. Irac, Giordano Mion and Thierry Verdier (2013) “The
Determinants of Intra…rm Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” forthcoming in the
Review of Economics and Statistics.
[24] Davidson, Carl, Lawrence Martin and Steven Matusz (1999) “Trade and Search Generated Unemployment,”Journal of International Economics, 48, 271-299.
[25] Davis, Donald R. (1998) “Does European Unemployment Prop Up American Wages?
National Labor Markets and Global Trade,”American Economic Review, 88, 478-494.
[26] Davis, Donald R. and David W. Weinstein (2001) “An Account of Global Factor Trade,”
American Economic Review, 91, 1423-1453.
[27] Dixit, Avinash and Victor Norman (1980) Theory of International Trade (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press).
[28] Dunning, John H. (1977) “Trade, Location of Economic Activity and the MNE: A Search
for an Eclectic Approach,”in B. Ohlin, P.-O. Hesselborn and P.M. Wijkman (eds.), The
International Allocation of Economic Activity: Proceedings of a Nobel Symposium Held
at Stockholm (London: Macmillan).
22

[29] Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2002) “Technology, Geography, and Trade,”
Econometrica, 70, 1741-1779.
[30] Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid and James R. Markusen (2007) “Export-Platform
Foreign Direct Investment,”Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 776-795.
[31] Girma, Sourafel, Holger Görg and Eric Strobl (2004) “Exports, International Investment, and Plant Performance; Evidence from a Non-Parametric Test,”Economics Letters, 83, 317-324.
[32] Girma, Sourafel, Richard Kneller and Mauro Pisu (2005) “Exports versus FDI: An
Empirical Test,”Review of World Economics, 141, 193-218.
[33] Goldberg, Pinelopi and Nina Pavcnik (2007) “Distributional E¤ects of Globalization in
Developing Countries,”Journal of Economic Literature, 45(1), 39-82.
[34] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, (1991) Innovation and Growth in the Global
Economy (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).
[35] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (2004) “Managerial Incentives and the International Organization of Production,”Journal of International Economics, 63, 237-262.
[36] Grossman, Gene M., Elhanan Helpman and Adam Szeidl (2006) “Optimal Integration
Strategies for the Multinational Firm,” Journal of International Economics, 70, 216–
238.
[37] Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart (1986) “The Costs and Bene…ts of Ownership:
A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94, 691719.
[38] Grubel, Herbert G. and Peter J. Lloyd. (1975) Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and
Measurement of International Trade in Di¤erentiated Products (London: Macmillan).

23

[39] Hart, Oliver D. and John Moore (1990) “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1119-1158.
[40] Head, Keith and John Ries (2003) “Heterogeneity and the FDI versus Export Decision
of Japanese Manufacturers,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economy, 17,
448-467.
[41] Heckscher, Eli F. (1919) “The E¤ect of Foreign Trade on the Distribution of Income,”
Economisk Tidskrift, in E. F. Heckscher and B. Ohlin, Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press), 1991 (translated, edited and introduced by Harry
Flam and M. June Flanders).
[42] Helpman, Elhanan (1981) “International Trade in the Presence of Product Di¤erentiation, Economies of Scale, and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin–Heckscher–
Ohlin Model,”Journal of International Economics, 11, 305–340.
[43] Helpman, Elhanan (1984) “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
Corporations,”Journal of Political Economy, 92, 451-471.
[44] Helpman, Elhanan (2004) The Mystery of Economic Growth (Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press).
[45] Helpman, Elhanan (2011) Understanding Global Trade (Cambridge, MA: The Belknap
Press of Harvard University Press).
[46] Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki (2010) “Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment,”Review of Economic Studies, 77, 1100–1137.
[47] Helpman,

Elhanan,

Oleg Itskhoki,

Marc-Andreas Muendler and Stephen J.

Redding (2013) “Trade and Inequality:

From Theory to Estimation,” mimeo,

http://scholar.harvard.edu/…les/helpman/…les/trade_and_inequality_paper_041313.pdf

24

[48] Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen J. Redding (2010) “Inequality and Unemployment in a Global Economy,”Econometrica, 78 (4), 1239–1283.
[49] Helpman, Elhanan, Oleg Itskhoki and Stephen J. Redding (2011) “Trade and Labor
Market Outcomes,”forthcoming in Acemoglu, Daron, Manuel Arellano and Eddie Dekel
(eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Tenth
World Congress of the Econometric Society.
[50] Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman (1985) Market Structure and Foreign Trade
(Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press).
[51] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz and Yona Rubinstein (2008) “Estimating Trade
Flows: Trading Partners and Trading Volumes” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123,
441-487.
[52] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004) “Export versus FDI
with Heterogeneous Firms,”American Economic Review, 94, 300-316.
[53] Hopenhayn, Hugo A. (1992) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,”Econometrica, 60, 1127–1150.
[54] Hosios, Arthur J. (1990) “On the E¢ ciency of Matching and Related Models of Search
and Unemployment,”Review of Economic Studies, 57, 279-298.
[55] Jones, Ronald W. (1965) “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models,”Journal of Political Economy, 73(6), 557-72.
[56] Kohler, Wilhelm and Marcel Smolka (2012) “Global Sourcing Decisions and Firm Productivity: Evidence from Spain,”forthcoming in Stern, R. M. (ed.), Quantitative Analysis of Newly Evolving Patterns of International Trade: Fragmentation; O¤shoring of
Activities; and Vertical Intra-Industry Trade (World Scienti…c Studies in International
Economics).
25

[57] Krugman, Paul R. (1979) “Increasing Returns, Monopolistic competition, and International Trade,“ Journal of International Economics, 9, 469-479.
[58] Krugman, Paul R. (1981) “Intraindustry Specialization and the Gains from Trade,”
Journal of Political Economy, 89, 959-973.
[59] Lancaster, Kelvin (1979) Variety, Equity, and E¢ ciency (New York: Columbia University Press).
[60] Lancaster, Kelvin (1980) “Intra-industry Trade under Perfect Monopolistic Competition,”Journal of International Economics, 10, 151-175.
[61] Leamer, Edward E (1984) Sources of International Comparative Advantage (Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press).
[62] Leontief, Wassily (1953) “Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital Position Re-Examined,”Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 97, 332349.
[63] Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Tre‡er (2010) “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises
Plant-level Productivity ... For Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125,
1051–1099.
[64] MacDougall, G. D. A. (1951) “British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by
the Theory of Comparative Costs, Part I.”Economic Journal, 61, 697-724.
[65] MacDougall, G. D. A. (1952) “British and American Exports: A Study Suggested by
the Theory of Comparative Costs, Part II.”Economic Journal, 62, 487-521.
[66] Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier (2012), “Globalization and the Empowerment of Talent,”Journal of International Economics, 86, 209–223.
[67] Markusen, James R. (1984) “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies and the Gain from
Trade,”Journal of International Economics, 16, 205-216.
26

[68] Melitz, Marc J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity,”Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725.
[69] Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding (2013a) “Firm Heterogeneity and Aggregate
Welfare,”NBER Working Paper No. 18919.
[70] Melitz, Marc J. and Stephen J. Redding (2013b) “Heterogeneous Firms and Trade,”
forthcoming in Gopinath, Gita, Elhanan Helpman and Kenneth Rogo¤ (eds.), Handbook
of International Economics (New York: Elsevier).
[71] Melitz, Marc J. and Daniel Tre‡er (2012) “Gains from Trade when Firms Matter,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26, 91–118.
[72] Nunn, Nathan and Daniel Tre‡er (2008) “The Boundaries of the Multinational Firm:
An Empirical Analysis,” in Elhanan Helpman, Dalia Marin and Tierry Verdier (eds.).
The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press).
[73] Nunn, Nathan and Daniel Tre‡er (2013) “Incomplete Contracts and the Boundaries of
the Multinational Firm,”forthcoming, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization.
[74] Ohlin, Bertil (1924) “The Theory of Trade,”in E. F. Heckscher and B. Ohlin, HeckscherOhlin Trade Theory (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press), 1991 (translated, edited and
introduced by Harry Flam and M. June Flanders).
[75] Ohlin, Bertil (1933) Interregional and International Trade (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press).
[76] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2002) OECD Economic Outlook 71 (Paris: OECD).
[77] Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2010) Measuring Globalization: OECD Economic Globalization Indicators (Paris: OECD).
27

[78] Pavcnik, Nina (2002) “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvement: Evidence from Chilean Plants,”Review of Economic Studies, 69, 245-76.
[79] Ricardo, David (1817) On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (London:
John Murray).
[80] Samuelson, Paul A. (1948) “International Trade and the Equalization of Factor Prices,”
Economic Journal, 58, 163-84.
[81] Smith, Adam (1937) The Wealth of Nations (New York: The Modern Library [original
edition, 1776]).
[82] Stern, Robert M. (1962) “British and American Productivity and Comparative Costs
in International Trade,”Oxford Economic Papers, 14, 275-296.
[83] Tomiura, Eiichi (2007) “Foreign Outsourcing, Exporting, and FDI: A Productivity Comparison at the Firm Level,”Journal of International Economics, 72, 113-127.
[84] Tre‡er, Daniel (1995) “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries,”American
Economic Review, 85, 1029-1046.
[85] Tre‡er, Daniel (2004) “The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement,”
American Economic Review, 94, 870-895.
[86] World Trade Organization (2006) International Trade Statistics 2006 (Geneva: World
Trade Organization).
[87] World Trade Organization (2008) World Trade Report: Trade in a Globalizing World
(Geneva: World Trade Organization).
[88] Vanek, Jaroslav (1968) “The Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case,”Kyklos,
21, 749-754.

28

[89] Yeaple, Stephen R. (2003). “The Complex Integration Strategies of Multinationals and
Cross Country Dependencies in the Structure of Foreign Direct Investment,”Journal of
International Economics, 60, 293-314.
[90] Yeaple, Stephen R. (2006) “O¤shoring, Foreign Direct Investment, and the Structure of
U.S. Trade,”Journal of the European Economic Association (Papers and Proceedings),
4, 602-611.
[91] Yeaple, Stephen R. (2009) “Firm Heterogeneity and the Structure of U.S. Multinational
Activity,”Journal of International Economics, 78, 206-215.

29

