                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       LOAN OFFICER INCENTIVES AND THE LIMITS OF HARD INFORMATION

                                             Tobias Berg
                                              Manju Puri
                                             Jorg Rocholl

                                        Working Paper 19051
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19051


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We thank Sumit Agarwal, Matthew Bothner, Alejandro Drexler, Andre Güttler, Rainer Haselmann,
Nadya Jahn, Adam Kolasinski, Alexander Libman, Jeff Ngene, Lars Norden, Felix Noth, Nick Souleles,
Andrew Winton, the participants of the FIRS 2012 conference in Minneapolis, 2012 Winter Workshop
in Oberjoch, 2012 Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition in Chicago, 2012 Banking
Workshop in Münster, 2012 EFA meetings in Copenhagen, 2012 ISB conference in Hyderabad, 2012
DGF meeting, 2012 FMA meetings in Atlanta, 2012 Carefin-Bocconi conference, 2013 AFA meetings
in San Diego, as well as participants of research seminars at University of British Columbia, Cheung
Kong Graduate School of Business, Beijing, University of Cologne, Duke University, ESMT, Frankfurt
School of Finance and Management. Humboldt University, Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance,
New York Fed and the World Bank. Berg acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Tobias Berg, Manju Puri, and Jorg Rocholl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Loan officer Incentives and the Limits of Hard Information
Tobias Berg, Manju Puri, and Jorg Rocholl
NBER Working Paper No. 19051
May 2013
JEL No. G01,G2,G21,G3

                                              ABSTRACT

Poor loan quality is often attributed to loan officers exercising poor judgment. A potential solution
is to base loans on hard information alone. However, we find other consequences of bypassing discretion
stemming from loan officer incentives and limits of hard information verifiability. Using unique data
where loans are based on hard information, and loan officers are volume-incentivized, we find loan
officers increasingly use multiple trials to move loans over the cut-off, both in a regression-discontinuity
design and when the cut-off changes. Additional trials positively predict default suggesting strategic
manipulation of information even when loans are based on hard information alone.


Tobias Berg                                          Jorg Rocholl
Humboldt Unviersity of Berlin                        European School of Management and Technology
tobias.berg@hu-berlin.de                             Schlossplatz 1
                                                     D-10178 Berlin
Manju Puri                                           rocholl@esmt.org
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
1 Towerview Drive, Box 90120
Durham, NC 27708-0120
and NBER
mpuri@duke.edu
1. Introduction
       Understanding how banks make loans is important. One of the questions at
the forefront of the current financial crisis is how should the process of loan
making by banks be regulated to minimize risks? Many have argued that part of
the reason for the current financial crisis is the poor quality of loans made when
loan officers were allowed to exercise their discretion or arbitrarily use their
judgment. One potential solution is to automate the loan making process, basing it
solely on hard information. By taking out discretion or ambiguous soft
information, and relying solely on hard information, the argument is that better
decisions and loans would be made.
       However, it is unclear if a system where loans are made solely by hard
information will yield better quality loans. There are other effects that need to be
taken into account. In particular, what are the incentives of loan officers and how
might this affect the kinds of loans being made? While the common wisdom is
that basing loans on hard information makes the loan making process “objective”
and does away with cronyism and other dark aspects of discretion, are there
unintended consequences of taking judgment out of loan-making?
        In this paper we are able to empirically address the effect of loan officer
incentives in a pure credit scoring model based on hard information alone, where
officers are incentivized by loan volume, by accessing a unique data set from a
major European bank. This bank uses only hard information. This information is
collected and inputted into the system by loan officers. With this data we are able
to address the following research questions. Do loan officers strategically
manipulate hard information? Does this change the kind of loans that are made? If
so, does this result in better or lower quality loans; in particular, what are the
implications for default rates?



                                         2
       We are able to access data on the universe of 242,011 consumer loan
applications at a major European bank from May 2008 to June 2010. This data is
unique with some distinct features particularly suited to address the questions at
hand. An important feature is that, here, loans are made solely based on hard
information. The hard information is fed into the system and an accept/reject
decision is made based on whether the loan is above the cut-off or not. If the
decision comes up as reject, the loan officer cannot override the decision or add
soft information.   However the loan officer can alter or update the information
and do another scoring trial which will bring up a new decision. We are able to
see how many times the loan officer does a scoring trial and also what kind of
information is added to each scoring trial. In particular we are able to see whether
the number of scoring trials for loans that are near the cut-off are different from
other loans. We conduct two kinds of analysis. First, we take advantage of an
exogenous change in the cut-off to see if loan officer behavior (number of scoring
trials) around the cut-off changes when the cut-off is changed. Second, we run a
regression discontinuity analysis in both regimes with different cut-offs to see if
loan officer behavior of attempting more scoring trials changes at the cut-off.
       We find there are more scoring trials for loan applications that do not pass
in the initial trial. The number of scoring trials increases as one gets closer to the
cut-off boundary, and jumps at the cut-off boundary. Interestingly, when the cut-
off is changed, then the jump in scoring trials moves to the new cut-off point. The
number of scoring trials is also related to loan officer characteristics, e.g., more
scoring trials for more experienced loan officers and when loan officers have been
unsuccessful in making loans over the previous few months.
       One question that arises is whether the additional information in
successive scoring trials simply reflects more precision and accuracy in
information, or whether it is manipulation to get the loan over the cut-off. To
assess this we examine default rates. We find that the number of scoring trials


                                          3
positively predicts default rates. A one standard deviation increase in the number
of scoring trials leads to a 10-15% increase in default rates after controlling for
loan, customer and loan officer characteristics. This holds, in particular, around
the cut-off where the manipulation of information by the loan officer can move
loans from below to above the cut-off. We hypothesize that when new scoring
trials are done quickly, say in a matter of minutes as opposed to days, that there is
more likely to be manipulation, which should reflect in higher default rates. We
run tests accordingly and find that default rates are negatively related to the time a
loan officer uses for each scoring trial, consistent with information manipulation.
Finally, default rates are positively related to a reduction in costs and liabilities,
which are easier to manipulate than an increase in assets and income.
       Our results suggest that when loan decisions are made on hard information
and credit scoring alone, loan officers' incentives can cause strategic manipulation
of information. These changes in hard information are often very subtle, making it
almost impossible to verify or detect manipulation. Further, loan officers with
more experience and who have not had good success in making loans over the last
few months are more likely to engage in such manipulations. Finally, this
manipulation leads to the making of loans with higher default rates.
       Our paper relates to different strands of the literature. First, we contribute
to the literature on agency problems within banks. Udell (1989) provides evidence
that the purpose of the loan review function in a bank is to reduce agency
problems between the bank and its loan officers. Hertzberg, Liberti, and
Paravisini (2010) show that a rotation policy affects loan officers' reporting
behavior. Agarwal and Ben-David (2012) analyze incentive schemes within a
bank. Cole, Kanz and Klapper (2012) use a laboratory experiment with loan
officers in India to analyze the effects of different incentive schemes on loan
officer effort. We show that – in the presence of internal agency problems – loan
officers manipulate hard information whenever truthful reporting is incompatible


                                          4
with their personal incentives. Second, our paper relates to the literature that
identifies hard information as a potential solution for internal agency problems.
Stein (2002) argues that large banks should rely on hard information to reduce
loan officer agency problems. Consistently, Berger, Miller, Petersen, Rajan, and
Stein (2005) find that large banks are less willing to engage in informationally
difficult loans for which soft information is more important. Similarly, Liberti and
Mian (2009), Agarwal and Hauswald (2010) find borrower proximity is related to
the use of soft information. We provide evidence that, contrary to conventional
wisdom, agency problems still matter even if lending is solely based on hard
information. In particular, our evidence suggests the limits of hard information –
even hard information is subject to manipulation by delegated monitors at the
margin.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our
dataset and provides descriptive statistics. Section 3 explains our empirical
strategy. Section 4 presents the empirical results and section 5 provides robustness
tests. Section 6 concludes.

2. Data and descriptive statistics

A. Data and loan process
       We obtain data on consumer loan applications and subsequent default
rates from a major European bank. These data comprise detailed information on
242,011 loan applications at more than 1,000 branches of the bank between May
2008 and June 2010. From these 242,011 loan applications, 116,969 materialize
and data on the performance and defaults of these 116,969 loans are available
until May 2011. Loans are granted to both existing and new customers. During
the loan application process, each customer is assigned an internal rating. The
internal rating ranges from 1 (best rating) to 24 (worst rating) and is solely based



                                         5
on hard information. It consists of five parts: First, an external score, which is
similar to a FICO score; second, a socio-demographic score, which is based on
parameters such as age and sex; third, an account score if the customer has a
savings account with the bank; fourth, a loan score if the customer already has a
loan relationship with the bank; fifth a financial score which aggregates income
data, expenses, assets, and liabilities. Finally, these five parts are aggregated into
an overall internal rating.
        The loan application proceeds in the following way: First, the loan officer
enters all the necessary data into the system. If the loan is given, the written
documentation, such as a copy of the identification card and a salary certificate,
has to be archived together with the loan agreement. The bank's risk management
function periodically checks the validity of this documentation based on a random
sample selection. If loan officers manipulate customer data, they thus face a risk
of being caught later on. However, no loan-by-loan checks are conducted when
the loans are granted.
        Second, the loan officer requests a score from the internal rating system.
This score determines whether a loan shall be given and the interest rate charged
for this loan. Loan applications with an internal rating worse than the cut-off
rating are automatically rejected by the system and receive the status
'automatically rejected'. Loan applications with an internal rating better or equal
to the cut-off rating receive the status 'open', and the risk-based pricing scheme
applies. The cut-off criterion is equal to a rating of 14 until 31 December 2008.
This means that all loan applications with a rating of 14 or better can be accepted.
This cut-off criterion is changed to 11 on 1 January 2009. To put these ratings into
perspective, a rating of 14 is comparable to a B rating based on the Standard &
Poor's rating scale; a rating of 11 is comparable to a BB rating. The cut-off
criterion is changed as a result of growing concern about the status of the
European economy in the wake of the financial crisis. The management of the


                                          6
bank decides to follow a prudent strategy and tighten lending standards in order to
preserve the risk profile of the loan portfolio.
       Third, the loan officer decides on how to proceed. She can either proceed
with the application as entered into the system if the status is not 'automatically
rejected', abort the loan application, or change any of the input parameters and
request a new internal rating, i.e. initiate a new scoring trial. There are 442,255
unique scoring trials for the 242,011 loan applications ─ an average of 1.83
scoring trials per loan application. Only the results of the last scoring trial are
recorded in the official systems of the bank, while all former trials are deleted.
The only exception is one specific risk management system used in this paper that
archives each scoring trial separately. Loan officers are in general not aware that
all scoring trials are recorded in this system, and also the bank's risk management
function has rarely used it so far.
       There are five major advantages of our setup: First, each separate scoring
trial is recorded in the database. Second, loan officers are subject to a random
review process. Therefore, they have an incentive to report truthfully as long as
truthful reporting is not incompatible with their personal incentives. Third, we
have information on individual loan officers which gives us the possibility to
analyze incentives across individual loan officers. Fourth, the cut-off rating was
changed during our sample period without any other change in the rating or
incentive system. This gives us the unique opportunity to analyze the effect of
tighter lending standards on loan officers' behavior. Fifth and finally, our dataset
contains default information which enables us to link loan officer incentives and
lending standards to actual defaults.




                                           7
B. Loan officer incentives
       Loan officers receive a fixed salary and a bonus. The bonus is
performance-based and can make up to 25 percent of the fixed salary. It depends
on the volume of the loans that a loan officer generates in a given year and the
conditions at which these loans are granted, but not on the default rates of these
loans. In particular, loan officers receive a fee for each successful loan
application. This fee increases in the interest rate charged for the loan and the
creditworthiness of the customer, which is determined by the internal rating.
Thus, a loan officer benefits from a better rating for a loan applicant for two
reasons: First, a higher rating increases the likelihood of a loan application being
successful. Second, a better rating results in a higher fee for a successful loan
application. The average fee for a successful loan application is approximately 20
times larger than the fee increase for a one-notch higher rating. Thus, the first-
order incentive effect comes from ensuring that the rating meets the minimum-
creditworthiness condition, while further rating improvements have a second-
order effect. At the same time, there is a significant psychological pressure to
perform well. Each week, or even during each week, 'run lists' are compiled to
rank each individual loan officer.
       While lending standards are tightened in January 2009, the performance
targets that are given to individual loan officers remain unchanged. This means
that loan officers are faced with the same targets but a much smaller customer
base that can make the cut-off rating after the change. This provides an incentive
to loan officers to manipulate customer information to achieve their targets.
       After origination, the loan is transferred to an internal portfolio
management unit, and the loan officer is no longer responsible for the
performance of the loan. The compensation of the loan officer does therefore not
depend on whether the loan defaults.



                                         8
C. Descriptive statistics
       Table 2 presents descriptive statistics on loan application level (Panel A),
scoring trial level (Panel B) and loan officer level (Panel C). All variables are
explained in Table 1. The information on the loan application level in Panel A is
based on the last scoring trial per loan application. This is the only information
that is available in the systems of the bank, apart from the single risk management
system used for the analysis in this paper that tracks every trial. 13 percent of the
loan applications have a rating below the cut-off and are therefore automatically
rejected. On average, loan officers use the scoring system 1.83 times per loan
application. The average acceptance rate is 48 percent, i.e. 48 percent of the loan
applications are accepted by both bank and customer. The average loan amount is
EUR 13,700, the average number of borrowers per loan application is 1.34, the
average age of a borrower is 45.24 years, and his average net income per month is
EUR 2,665. If a loan application has several borrowers, e.g., husband and wife,
then parameters such as net income per month are aggregates over both borrowers
with the only exception being the age, where the average age is reported. 63
percent of the customers are relationship customers who have either an existing
account or another loan with the bank. The information about the internal rating,
which ranges from 1 (best) to 24 (worst), shows that the average rating amounts
to 8.40. The cut-off rating was set at 14 between May 2008 and December 2008
and at 11 between January 2009 and June 2010. 28 percent of our observations
come from the earlier period, while 72 percent come from the latter period. Panel
B shows that 20 percent of the scoring trials result in a rating below the cut-off.
This is significantly higher than the 13 percent from the last trial, as shown in
Panel A, and indicates that internal ratings are on average moved upwards with
further trials. There is an unconditional likelihood of 45 percent of observing
another subsequent scoring trial for the same loan application. Panel C shows that
the 242,011 loan applications in our sample are arranged by 5,634 loan officers.


                                         9
During our sample period, an average loan officer uses the scoring system 78.50
times for 42.96 different loan applications of which 20.78 loans materialize, i.e.
are finally accepted by both bank and customer.
       Table 3 provides a concrete example on the workings of the different
scoring trials. In this example, on 4 May 2009, a loan officer enters an application
for a consumer loan of EUR 4,000 and records, among other parameters, existing
liabilities of the customer of EUR 23,000 and a monthly net income of EUR
1,900. The resulting internal rating of 12 is worse than the cut-off rating of 11,
therefore the loan application is automatically rejected by the system. The loan
officer subsequently increases the income to EUR 1,950 and decreases the
liabilities to EUR 10,000. These two changes result in a new rating of 11 so that
the loan application can be accepted. However, the loan officer then decides to
manually reject the loan application and corrects the liability amount to EUR
19,000. As this change results again in a rating below the cut-off, the loan officer
reverses the liabilities back to EUR 10,000 and books the loan into the system.
This loan application provides a particular striking example of a manipulation
around the cut-off as the final amount for the liabilities of EUR 10,000 is clearly
not a correction of a previously misspecified value. This is the type of behavior
that we would like to analyze more thoroughly in this paper.

3. Empirical strategy

A. Loan officer incentives and the number of scoring trials
       The cut-off rating substantially affects loan officer incentives, as only loan
applications with ratings better than or equal to the cut-off rating can generate fee
income. The change of the cut-off rating during our sample period provides us
with a clear identification strategy. We estimate the following regression:

       NumberOfTrialsi,j,t = β1 CutOffDummyi,t + δ Xi,j,t + Aj + Bt + εi,j,t    (1)



                                         10
        where NumberOfTrialsi,j,t is the number of scoring trials for the loan
application from customer i at time t arranged by loan officer j and
CutOffDummyi,t is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the rating from the first scoring
trial of the loan application from customer i at time t is worse than the cut-off
rating, i.e. worse than rating 14 between May 2009 and December 2009 and
worse than rating 11 between January 2009 and June 2010. Xi,j,t is a set of control
variables taken from the first scoring trial including loan, customer and loan
officer characteristics and Aj and Bt are loan officer and time-fixed effects.
Finally, εi,j,t is an error term. The estimation method will be discussed in more
detail in the results section.

B. A closer review of multiple scoring trials
        In regression (1) the number of scoring trials acts as a proxy for changes in
customer information during the loan application process. Here, we take a closer
look at which parameters loan officers do actually change during the loan
application process. We do so by using a difference-in-difference approach. First,
we determine the difference between a certain parameter in the first scoring trial
and the last scoring trial for the same loan application:

        Deltaki,j,t := Xki,j,t,N - Xki,j,t,1                                        (2)
        where Xki,j,t,N and Xki,j,t,1 are the parameter values for parameter k (such as
income, age or assets of the loan applicant) for the loan application from customer
i at time t arranged by loan officer j in the last and first scoring trial, respectively.
Second, we group the loan applications into two categories: First, all loan
applications that pass the cut-off rating with the first scoring trial, i.e. where no
information manipulation is necessary to generate a fee. Second, all loan
applications that do not pass the cut-off rating with the first scoring trial, i.e.
where a fee can only be generated if any of the input parameters is changed. We



                                               11
apply a difference-in-difference approach to analyze differences in changes to
customer information between these two groups.

C. Loan officer incentives and default rates
       Multiple scoring trials for a single loan application can be due to loan
officers honestly correcting a false entry from a former trial (information
correction hypothesis) or loan officers manipulating information they have about
the customer in order to increase their fee income (information manipulation
hypothesis). To distinguish between these two interpretations we estimate the
effect of multiple scoring trials on the default rate. If the information correction
hypothesis is correct, we would not expect a systematic effect of the number of
scoring trials on default rates. The opposite applies for the information
manipulation hypothesis. We therefore estimate the following regression:

DefaultDummyi,j,t,T = f(β1, NumberOfTrialsi,j,t, δ Xi,j,t, Aj, Bt, εi,j,t,T) (3)
       where DefaultDummyi,j,t,T is a dummy variable equal to one if the loan to
customer i originated by loan officer j at time t defaults within the first T months
after origination, NumberOfTrialsi,j,t is the number of scoring trials for this loan,
Xi,j,t is a set of control variables taken from the last scoring trial of the loan (i.e.
the 'official' scoring trial which enters the bank's systems) and Aj and Bt are loan
officer and time fixed effects. The function f is a link function such as the logistic
function. Again, details on the estimation method are discussed in section 4.

4. Empirical results

A. Loan officer incentives and the number of scoring trials

A1. Univariate results
        We compare the average number of scoring trials before and after the
change in the cut-off rating. Figure 1 shows the results for the comparison of the


                                          12
accepted loans, while figure 2 shows the respective results for all loan
applications. In figure 1, we conduct the comparison based on the rating class in
which a loan is finally accepted. The figure shows that the number of scoring
trials is quite similar before and after the change in the cut-off rating for rating
classes 1 to 10. Also, as the cut-off rating is decreased to 11 in January 2009,
there are no more loans in rating classes 12 to 14 after this change. The most
striking result is the significant increase in the number of scoring trials after
January 2009 for the loans that are finally accepted in rating class 11. This
evidence suggests that loan officers try much harder, by using more scoring trials,
to move loans above the cut-off rating after the change. A similar pattern can be
found in figure 2. Here we conduct the comparison based on the initial rating that
a loan application receives. Here, loan applications with an initial rating between
1 and 11 do not exhibit different patterns before and after the change in the cut-off
rating. In strict contrast, there are significantly more scoring trials for loan
applications with an initial rating between 12 and 14 after the change, i.e. for
those loan applications that fall just below the cut-off rating, but which the loan
officer can potentially move above the cut-off rating with additional scoring trials.
For the remaining rating classes 15 to 24, the number of scoring trials decreases
after the change. These rating classes are now more remote from the cut-off rating
so that the incentives for the loan officer to use more scoring trials are reduced.
       We test the results in figure 2 more formally by running a t-test for the
difference, and the results are reported in table 4. Consistent with the results from
the figure, there are barely any differences in rating classes 1 to 11, in particular
from an economic standpoint. The differences are positive and highly statistically
and economically significant for rating classes 12 to 14, while they are negative
and mostly significant for rating classes 15 to 24. In particular, a loan application
with an initial rating of 12 has on average 0.83 more scoring trials after than
before the change. We also observe a significant increase in the number of scoring


                                         13
trials at the cut-off boundary both before and after the change in the cut-off rating.
Before the change, the number of scoring trials is 2.09 for the cut-off rating of 14
and it jumps to 3.23 for a rating of 15. After the change, the number of scoring
trials increases from 1.93 at the cut-off rating of 11 to 2.76 for a rating of 12.

A2. Multivariate results
       We now estimate a multivariate model (regression (1)) to control for other
factors that may drive our results. These control factors comprise loan, customer
and loan officer characteristics. In particular, we use a dummy to control for the
effect of being a relationship customer, the logarithm of the customer's age, the
logarithm of his income, and rating fixed effects to control for the
creditworthiness of the customer. On the loan side, we control for the size of the
loan, which can be regarded as a proxy for the fee potential, and for the number of
borrowers. On the loan officer level, we control for the past average number of
trials per loan application and the past absolute number of trials. Both measures
are averaged over the previous three months and transformed on a log-scale. As a
third control variable on the loan officer level, we use the prior 3-months success
rate of the loan officer, measured as the ratio of successful loan applications, i.e.
loan applications that are accepted by bank and customer, and total loan
applications. All variables are explained in table 1. Finally, we add fixed effects
for year, month-of-the-year, branch, and loan officer. Loan officers are assigned
to exactly one branch so that loan officer fixed effects implicitly capture branch
fixed effects as well. Using both branch and loan officer fixed effects thus results
in perfect collinearity and we therefore either use branch fixed effects or loan
officer fixed effects but not both at the same time. To account for possible
autocorrelation at the branch level, we cluster standard errors accordingly.
       We use a count variable (Number of scoring trials) as dependent variable.
Both a Poisson regression and a negative binomial regression are well suited to


                                          14
cope with count data. The Poisson regression forces the conditional variance to be
equal to the mean. A test for overdispersion yields a statistically significant
positive overdispersion of 0.05, i.e. conditional variances are larger than means.
We therefore use a negative binomial model which is well suited to cope with
overdispersion. Finally, we control for a large number of fixed effects which may
give rise to an incidental parameter problem (Neyman and Scott (1948)). Allison
and Waterman (2002) argue based on simulations that there does not appear to be
any incidental parameter bias in the negative binomial model.1 We therefore
present the results for a negative binomial model in the first place and provide
estimates from a Poisson model and a linear model as robustness checks in
section 5. We estimate the negative binomial model in the form of the more
common NB2 model, i.e. the mean µ and the variance σ2 are related by the
overdispersion parameter k via σ2 = µ + k µ 2 (Cameron and Trivedi (1998)).
          Table 5 shows the results for regression (1). We start in column (1) by
regressing the number of scoring trials on a dummy variable that takes a value of
1 if the initial rating is worse than the cut-off rating and a value of 0 if the initial
rating is better or equal to the cut-off rating. A rating worse than the cut-off rating
in the first scoring trial is associated with 48 percent more scoring trials, which is
statistically significant at the 1 percent level. Columns (2) and (3) add customer,
loan and loan officer characteristics. The results for the cut-off-dummy remain
economically and statistically highly significant in all specifications, ranging from
0.275 to 0.313 (i.e. an increase of 27.5-31.3 percent). The loan amount is highly
statistically and economically significant with a coefficient estimate between


1
    Hausmann, Hall, and Griliches (1984) have proposed to use a conditional maximum likelihood
estimate to circumvent the incidental parameter problem for a negative binomial model. However,
Allison and Waterman (2002) have criticized this approach for not providing additional leverage
compared to the Poisson model for dealing with overdispersion.



                                              15
0.157 and 0.164. An increase in the loan amount from the median loan amount of
EUR 10,000 by one standard deviation (EUR 10,665) to EUR 20,665 therefore
leads    to    an    increase    in    the     number     of    scoring     trials   by
ln(20,665/10,000)·0.164=11.9 percent. The results here are consistent with the
notion that loan officers move the ratings in particular for larger loans, as they
receive a fee that is proportional to the loan amount. Finally, less scoring trials are
used for relationship customers. For relationship customers, a much larger
proportion of the internal rating is determined by parameters that the loan officer
cannot manipulate such as the account activity. For these customers, the chances
for a loan officer to push these loan applications above the cut-off rating by
changing parameters that the loan officer can manipulate, such as income or
assets, is much lower.

B. A closer review of multiple scoring trials
        The analysis so far has centered on the number of scoring trials as an
aggregate statistic for changes to customer information. Now we analyze in more
detail the changes to customer information. In particular, we look at which
parameters are actually changed during the loan application process. Table 6
provides a difference-in-difference analysis for the internal rating and the main
parameters which enter the calculation of the internal rating. We observe that the
internal rating only slightly improves by 0.023 notches between the initial scoring
trial and the last scoring trial for the subset of loan applications where the initial
scoring trial already results in a rating better or equal to the cut-off rating. This
increase is also only marginally significant. On the contrary, the internal rating
improves by 0.608 notches for the subset of loans where the initial scoring trial
results in a rating worse than the cut-off rating. This increase is significant at the 1
percent level. Looking at individual parameters which enter the calculation of the
internal rating, we observe that changes are significant for the financial score,


                                          16
which is rather easy to manipulate, but not for the socio-demographic score, the
Schufa score, the account or loan score, all of which are less susceptible to
manipulation. The financial score changes on average by a marginal 0.0029 for
the subset of loans where the first scoring trial results in a rating better or equal to
the cut-off and by 0.188 for the subset of loans where the first scoring trial results
in a rating worse than the cut-off rating. The Diff-in-Diff estimate is highly
significant at the 1 percent level. A higher financial score implies a better internal
rating, thus the financial score systematically improves between the initial and the
last scoring trial and this improvement is significantly higher for loan applications
that do not pass the cut-off rating in the initial scoring trial compared to loan
applications that pass the cut-off rating in the initial scoring trial.2 We further
observe that the ratio “Assets/Liabilities”, one of the key ratios that enters the
calculation of the financial score, is increased by 7.8% for loan applications where
the initial rating is better or equal to the cut-off rating and by 16.9% for loan
applications where the initial rating is worse than the cut-off rating. Again, the
Diff-in-Diff estimate is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The second
key ratio, “(Income - Costs)/Liabilities”, increases by 0.3% from the initial to the
last scoring trial for loan applications where the initial rating is better or equal
than the cut-off rating. The increase for the loan applications where the initial
rating is worse than the cut-off rating is 2.0%, again with a highly significant
Diff-in-Diff estimate.




2
    The probability of default is determined as PD = 1 / (1+exp(α + Σ si)) where si denotes the
individual scores. The constant term α cannot be split to the five scores, therefore the scores
cannot be directly converted into a probability of default.



                                                 17
C. Loan officer incentives and default rates

C1. Univariate results
         The evidence from the previous analyses is consistent with two
hypotheses: First, loan officers use several scoring trials as they correct
misspecified data from a previous trial (information correction hypothesis).
Second, loan officers strategically manipulate customer information in order to
generate fee income (information manipulation hypothesis). The fact that scoring
trials happen most frequently at the cut-off boundary can be seen as a first
indication for the latter explanation. In this section, we make use of the default
data to provide more direct evidence and to distinguish between these two
hypotheses.
         We compare the default rates for loans with more than two scoring trials
to those for loans with two or less scoring trials, where the default rate of a loan is
measured by using a time horizon of 12 months after the origination of the loan.
The results are presented in table 7. They show that the default rate for loans with
more than two trials is significantly higher than the default rate for loans with one
or two trials. This pattern holds before and after the change in the cut-off rating.
Before the change in the cut-off rating, the default rate for loans with more than
two trials amounts to 3.33%, while the default rate for loans with two or less trials
amounts to 2.16%. After the change in cut-off rating, the respective values are
3.67% and 2.28%. These differences are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level.
         We explore this pattern more by analyzing the respective differences in
default rates for each of the rating classes before and after January 2009. If loan
officers indeed manipulate information and use multiple scoring trials to generate
more loans, then the difference in default rates between loans with more than two
trials and loans with two or less trials should only exist just above the cut-off,


                                          18
where the loan officer can use multiple scoring trials to move a loan from below
to above the cut-off. The results show that the difference in default rates is indeed
statistically and economically significant only at the cut-off of 14 before January
2009 and 11 after January 2009, respectively. For the rating class 14 before
January 2009, the default rate is 7.09% for loans with one or two trials, while it is
12.15% for loans with more than two trials. Similarly, for the rating class 11 after
January 2009, the default rate is 7.83% for loans with one or two trials, and it is
10.11% for loans with more than two trials. We further explore these results using
a difference-in-difference setting by comparing the difference in default rates for
the rating class just below the cut-off rating to the difference in default rates for
the rating class one and two notches above the cut-off rating. This estimate is
highly significant both before and after January 2009.3 For example, before
January 2009, the default rate for loans with a rating of 14 with more than two
scoring trials is 5.06% higher than the default rate for loans with two and less
trials (12.15% versus 7.09%). This difference is only 0.486% for a rating of 12
and the difference-in-difference estimate of 4.57% is significant at the 1% level.
Similar, after January 2009, the difference between loans with more than two
scoring trials and loans with two and less scoring trials is 2.29% for a rating of 11.
It is -0.17% for a rating of 9, with the difference-in-difference estimate of 2.45%
again being significant at the 1% level.4 These results provide further evidence
that the use of several scoring trials is driven by loan officers’ manipulation of
information with the goal to generate more loans.




3
    These results are available upon request.
4
    The detailed results for the difference-in-difference estimates are available upon request.



                                                   19
C2. Multivariate results
          In the multivariate tests, we control again for customer, loan and loan
officer characteristics, and the control variables are thus identical to the ones used
in table 5. We estimate regression (3) using a linear probability model to address
the incidental parameter problem.5
          Columns (1)-(3) in table 8 report a step-by-step development of our
regression without control variables in column (1), with customer and loan
characteristics in column (2) and with all control variables in column (3).
Columns (4) to (6) add fixed effects for branch and loan officer and cluster
standard errors by branch. The results show that the number of scoring trials
predicts the default rate in all specifications with a coefficient between 0.3% and
0.4%. These coefficients are statistically significant throughout at the 1 percent
level. The effect is also economically highly significant. Increasing the number of
scoring trials from the median of 1 scoring trial by one standard deviation (1.63
scoring trials) to 2.63 scoring trial leads to an increase in the default rate of
approximately 0.3-0.4%.6 Compared to the unconditional default rate of 2.49%
this is a relative increase in the default probability of 12-16%. We also observe


5
    Standard logistic models suffer from the incidental parameter problem (Neyman and Scott
(1984)), i.e. the structural parameters cannot be estimated consistently in large but narrow panels.
There are two possible ways to circumvent the incidental parameter problem: First, a conditional
logistic regression can be estimated (Chamberlain (1980), Wooldridge (2002)). This approach has
the drawback that the estimator is no longer efficient (Andersen (1970)) but it yields consistent
estimates of the structural parameters. Second, we can use a linear probability model which leads
to both efficient and consistent estimates of the structural parameters. We follow Puri, Steffen, and
Rocholl (2011) and use the latter approach to estimate regression (3). Results for the conditional
logit model are presented as a robustness check in in section 5.
6
    Increasing the number of scoring trials from 1.00 to 2.63 increases the log by ln(2.63)=0.97.
Multiplying the coefficient of 0.3-0.4% by 0.97 yields the stated result.



                                                 20
that the experience of the loan officer (3-months absolute number of scoring
trials) positively predicts the default rate. This suggests that experienced loan
officers are more efficient at manipulating the internal rating in the desired
direction and magnitude and therefore need fewer trials to achieve the desired
result.
           We also regress the default rate on both the initial rating and the change in
the rating between the initial and the final scoring trial. If the additional
information that is added between the initial and the final scoring trial was
informative, we would expect the change in the rating to predict default rates,
beyond the information in the initial ratings. However, consistent with the
manipulation hypothesis, we find it is the initial rating, rather than the change in
rating that is informative.7
           We analyze further determinants for default rates in table 9. If a loan
officer uses multiple scoring trials to manipulate information, then the time
between the scoring trials should be negatively related to the default rates. In this
case, the loan officer does not carefully check or verify the existing information,
but simply plays with the input parameters to change the rating outcome. The
results in column (1) show that shorter trials lead indeed to higher default rates
and thus suggest that the loan officer does not give much care when revising the
information. Furthermore, it should be much easier for the loan officer to change
information on liabilities and costs rather than on assets and income to achieve the
desired outcome. While adding assets and income would have to be proven by
respective documents, reducing liabilities and costs could be achieved by simply
ignoring certain positions. This link is tested in columns (2) to (4). The results in
column (2) show that it is indeed the change in liabilities and costs that increases
default rates, while the results in column (3) show that it is a reduction in both

7
    These results are available upon request.



                                                21
positions that increases default rates. Combining the results from column (1) and
column (3), the results in column (4) show that a shorter time per trial as well as a
reduction in costs and liabilities lead to higher default rates.
        In sum, the results from the default regression provide evidence that loan
officers systematically manipulate customer information for their own advantage.
This results in a statistically and economically significant increase in the 12-
month default rate, even after controlling for loan, customer and loan officer
characteristics.

5. Robustness
        In this section we provide robustness tests for the main results from
section 4. In particular, we explore alternative models for estimating the number
of scoring trials and the default rate.

A. Number of scoring trials
        In the analysis above we have used the exogenous change in the cut-off
rating to identify the causal effect of loan officer incentives on the number of
scoring trials. An analysis which would have been natural in the absence of this
change is regression discontinuity. The basic idea of regression discontinuity is to
fit a regression function on both the left-hand side and the right-hand side of the
cut-off and compare the predicted values of these two regression functions at the
cut-off point (Thistlewaite and Campbell (1960), Imbens and Lemieux (2008),
Keys, Mukherjee, Seru, and Vig (2010), and Roberts and Whited (2011)). If the
predicted value at the cut-off using data from the right-hand side differs
significantly from the predicted value at the cut-off using data from the left-hand
side, this can be attributed to the different incentives prevalent on either side of
the cut-off. Techniques used in the literature differ in the regression function
(polynomial model or local linear regression), assumptions about the distribution



                                          22
of error terms (negative binomial or permutation tests). Furthermore, covariates
can be used to control for possible discontinuities in any of the explanatory
variables. We use all these models (polynomial and local linear regression,
distribution of error terms based on the negative binomial model and based on
permutation tests, with and without covariates) both before and after the change in
the cut-off rating and in all cases we find a significant jump in the number of
scoring trials at the cut-off rating. The estimate of the jump at the cut-off rating
ranges from 0.251 to 0.357 (see Panel I of table 10) which is very close to the
estimate of 0.288 from the standard negative binomial model presented in table 5.
        The regression discontinuity approach relies on a no-manipulation
assumption of the running variable, i.e. the initial rating. Economically, this is not
an issue here, as the loan officers do not know that individual scoring trials are
recorded. Hence, there is no reason to manipulate the initial scoring trial.
Nonetheless, we conduct a formal statistical test developed by McCrary (2007)
which tests for a discontinuity in the density of the running variable at the cut-off
point. Indeed, we do not find any evidence for a discontinuity in the density of the
internal rating at the cut-off point (Panel II of table 10).
       One remaining concern with the negative binomial model used in table 5 is
its susceptibility to the incidental parameter problem. Previous researchers have
argued based on simulation studies that the negative binomial model does not
suffer from an incidental parameter problem. For the case of the Poisson model,
consistency of the parameter estimates in the presence of a large number of fixed
effects is analytically proven (Cameron and Trivedi (1998)). The Poisson model is
not able to cope with overdispersion, however, the overdisperion of 0.05 in our
case is economically small (although statistically significant). A linear model is
able to cope with both overdispersion and does not suffer from an incidental
parameter problem. In addition to the negative binomial model from section 4, we
therefore provide robustness tests based on both a Poisson regression and a linear


                                           23
model. The results are shown in Panel A of table 11. For brevity, we only report
the coefficient and standard error of the cut-off dummy for the full specification
which includes customer, loan and loan officer characteristics as well as time and
loan officer fixed effects (i.e. specification as in column (6) of table 5). The
coefficient of 0.288 in the first row of Panel A therefore corresponds to the first
coefficient in column (6) in table 5. The use of different models results in very
similar and highly statistically significant coefficients of 0.290 (Poisson model)
and 0.226 (Linear model8), respectively.9

B. Default rate
           We use a conditional logit regression as a robustness test for the default
rate regression (3). Panel B of table 11 presents the results. Using a linear model
results in a coefficient of 0.4% for the logarithm of the number of scoring trials
(see also specification (6) in table 8). The conditional logit regression yields
similar, but slightly smaller, marginal effects at the mean. In sum, the robustness
tests confirm both the statistical and economic magnitude of the effect of scoring
trials on the default rate.

6. Conclusion
           The current financial crisis has raised an important question of how the
loan making process shall be regulated to minimize risks and reduce default rates.

8
    The Poisson model and the negative binomial model use the logarithm of the number of scoring
trials as the dependent variable. To be consistent with these models, we also use the logarithm of
the number of scoring trials, and not the number of scoring trials itself, as the dependent variable
in the linear model.
9
    To make use of the full information at hand, we also estimate a discrete hazard rate model which
takes into account data from every single loan trial. Consistent with the previous results we find
that a scoring trial worse than the cut-off rating significantly increases the likelihood of another
scoring trial. The detailed results for this hazard rate regression are available on request.



                                                  24
In this context, it has often been suggested that excessive discretion and arbitrary
judgment by the loan officer have resulted in poor loan performance. As a
consequence, it has been advocated that the loan making process should be
automated and rely more or even exclusively on hard information.
       This paper analyzes the loan making process in a system where loan
decisions are based purely on hard information. In this system, there is a
predefined cut-off rating which determines whether a loan application can be
accepted or not. Based on a sample of more than 240,000 loan applications at a
major European bank, we analyze how loan officer incentives are affected by the
exclusive use of hard information. We show that loan officers use more scoring
trials if the initial scoring trial is not successful. They increase the number of
scoring trials in particular when the initial scoring trial is close to the predefined
cut-off rating and even more at the boundary. We use a change in the cut-off
rating during our sample period and find that this change moves the significant
increase in scoring trials to the new cut-off rating. This pattern is most
pronounced for more experienced loan officers and for those loan officers who
have been unsuccessful in attracting new loans in the months before. We find that
the number of scoring trials is positively related to default rates, suggesting that
loan officers strategically manipulate information in a system that is based on
hard information and credit scoring alone.
       Our results suggest that pure reliance on hard information in the loan
making process does not necessarily lead to better outcomes. The underlying
incentives are important, and in the setting at hand, where loan officers are
incentivized based on loan volumes, reliance on hard information actually leads to
outcomes with worse loan performance. These results have important implications
for the current academic and regulatory debate on how to reform the loan making
process to minimize risks.




                                         25
References
Agarwal, S. and I. Ben-David (2012): “Do Loan Officers’ Incentives Lead to Lax
Lending Standards?,” Working Paper.


Agarwal, S. and Hauswald, R. (2010): “Authority and Information,” Working
Paper.


Allison, P. D., and R. Waterman (2002): “Fixed-effects negative binomial
regression models," Sociological methodology, 32, 247-265.


Andersen, B. E. (1970): “Asymptotic Properties of Conditional Maximum-
likelihood Estimators," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 32(2), 283-301.


Berger, A. N., N. H. Miller, M. A. Petersen, R. G. Rajan, and J. C. Stein (2005):
“Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from Lending Practices
of Large and Small Banks," Journal of Financial Economics, 76, 237-269.


Cameron, A. C., and P. K. Trivedi (1998): Regression analysis of count data.
Cambridge University Press.


Chamberlain, G. A. (1980): “Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data,"
Review of Economic Studies, 47, 225-238.


Cole, S., M. Kanz and L. Klapper (2012): “Incentivizing Calculated Risk Taking:
Evidence from a Series of Experiments with Commercial Bank Loan Officers,”
Harvard Working Paper.




                                        26
Hausmann, J. A., B. H. Hall, and Z. Griliches (1984): “Econometric Models for
Count Data with an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship," Econometrica,
52, 909-938.


Hertzberg, A., J. M. Liberti, and D. Paravisini (2010): “Information and
Incentives Inside a Firm: Evidence from Loan Officer Rotation," Journal of
Finance, 65(3), 795-828.


Imbens, G.W. and T. Lemieux (2008): “Regression discontinuity designs,”
Journal of Econometrics, 142, 615-635.


Keys, B. J., T. K. Mukherjee, A. Seru and V. Vig (2010): “Did Securitization
Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 125(1), 307-362.


Liberti, J. M., and A. R. Mian (2009): “Estimating the Effect of Hierarchies on
Information Use," Review of Financial Studies, 22(10), 4057-4090.


Neyman, J., and E. Scott (1948): “Consistent Estimates Based on Partially
Consistent Observations," Econometrica, 16, 1-32.


Puri, M., J. Rocholl, and S. Steffen (2011): “Global retail lending in the aftermath
of the US financial crisis: Distinguishing between supply and demand effects,"
Journal of Financial Economics, 100(3), 556-578.


Roberts, M.R. and T.M. Whited (2011): “Endogeneity in Empirical Corporate
Finance,“ Working Paper.




                                         27
Stein, J. C. (2002): “Information Production and Capital Allocation:
Decentralized versus Hierarchical Firms," Journal of Finance, 57(5), 1891-1922.


Udell, G. F. (1989): “Loan Quality, Commercial Loan Review and Loan Officer
Contracting," Journal of Banking & Finance, 13, 367-382.


Wooldridge, J. M. (2002): Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel
Data. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.


Thistlewaite, D., and D. Campbell, (1960): “Regression-discontinuity analysis: an
alternative to the ex-post facto experiment,” Journal of Educational Psychology,
51, 309-31.




                                       28
                                                      Figure 1: Accepted Loans
This figure compares the number of scoring trials for each loan that is accepted in each rating class for the periods before and after
January 2009.




                                                     Figure 2: Loan applications
This figure compares the number of scoring trials for each loan application based on the initial rating class for the periods before and
after January 2009.




                                                                  29
                                                         Table 1: Explanation of variables
Name                             Description
Inference and dependent variables
Cutoff                        Dummy variable equal to one if the internal rating is worse than the cutoff rating and zero otherwise. Only loan
                              applications with an internal rating equal or above the cutoff rating can be accepted, loan applications with ratings
                              below the cutoff are rejected.
Number of scoring trials      Number of distinct scoring trials for a loan application.
Default rate 12 months        Dummy variable equal to 1 if a loan has defaulted during the first 12 months after origination.
Customer characteristics
Internal rating               Internal rating ranging from 1 (best) to 24 (worst). The internal rating is based on the financial score, the socio-
                              demographic score, the account score, the loan score and the SCHUFA score. These scores are consolidated into one
                              overall score and calibrated to historical default experience. Each internal rating is associated with a default probability
                              for the borrower.
Probability of default        Probability of default based on the internal rating system. The probability of default is calibrated to past default
                              experience.
Financial score               Internal score based on income, costs, assets, and liabilities of the borrower. A higher score implies a lower probability
                              of default.
Socio-demographic score       Internal score based on socio-demographic data (e.g. age, sex, etc.). A higher score implies a lower probability of
                              default.
Account score                 Internal score based on the past account activity of the borrower. A higher score implies a lower probability of default.
Loan score                    Internal score based on the history of past loans with the same borrower. A higher score implies a lower probability of
                              default.
Schufa score                  External score similar to the FICO score in the U.S. A higher score implies a lower probability of default.
Relationship customer         Dummy variable equal to 1 if the customer had a checking account or a current loan with the bank before the loan
                              application.
Age                           Age of borrower. If a loan application has several borrowers, e.g., husband and wife, the average age is used.
Assets                        Total assets of the borrower in Euro. If a loan application has several borrowers, e.g., husband and wife, then the
                              combined assets are used.
Liabilities                   Total liabilities of the borrower in Euro. If a loan application has several borrowers, e.g., husband and wife, then the
                              combined liabilities are used.
Income                        Monthly net income of the borrower in Euro. If a loan application has several borrowers, e.g., husband and wife, then
                              the combined income is used. The income includes wages as well as capital income and other income.
Costs                         Monthly net costs of the borrower in Euro. If a loan application has several borrowers, e.g., husband and wife, then the
                              combined costs are used. The costs include cost of living, rents and costs for existing loans.
Loan characteristics
Loan amount                   Loan amount in EUR.
Number of borrowers           Number of borrowers, usually equal to one.
Accepted by bank              Dummy variable equal to one if the loan application is accepted by the bank, i.e. an offer is made to the customer.
Accepted by bank and Dummy variable equal to one if the loan application is accepted by the bank and the customer.
customer
Loan officer characteristics
3M average number of trials The average number of trials per loan application over the previous three months, calculated on loan officer level.
per loan application
3M absolute number of trials  The absolute number of scoring trials over the previous three months, calculated on loan officer level.
Success rate 3M               Success rate of the loan officer over the month preceding the current month. The success rate is measured as accepted
                              loans divided by total loans. Accepted loans are loans which were accepted by the bank and the borrower, i.e. where a
                              loan contract was signed. All loans is the number of distinct loan applications that a loan officer entered into the
                              system.
Other variables
Status                        Status of a scoring trial. The status can be either 'automatically rejected' if the internal rating is worse than the cutoff
                              rating, 'manually rejected' if the loan application is manually rejected by the loan officer and 'accepted' if the loan
                              application is accepted by the bank and customer.
Month-of-year                 Month of year coded as 1 (January) through 12 (December)




                                                                           30
                                                      Table 2: Descriptive statistics
This table presents summary statistics for the sample of loan applications between May 2008 and June 2010. Panel A presents summary
statistics on the loan application level based on the last scoring trial for each loan application, Panel B on the scoring trial level and
Panel C on the loan officer level. E.g. Panel A shows that 13% of the loan applications do not pass the cut-off rating based on the last
scoring trial while Panel B shows that 20% do not pass the cut-off rating based on all scoring trials. For variable definitions see table 1.


                                                        Unit                    N       Mean     Stddev    Median      Min        Max

 Panel A: Loan applications

 Inference and dependent variables
   Number of scoring trials                                                 242,011       1.83      1.63       1.00    1.00         69.00
   Cutoff                                   Dummy (0/1)                     242,011       0.13      0.33       0.00    0.00          1.00
   Default rate 12 months                   Dummy (0/1)                     116,969      0.025     0.156       0.00    0.00          0.00

 Customer characteristics
  Internal Rating                           Number (1=Best, 24=Worst)       242,011       8.40      3.99      8.00     1.00        24.00
  Relationship customer                     Dummy (0/1)                     242,011       0.63      0.48      1.00     0.00         1.00
  Age                                       Years                           242,011      45.24     13.32     44.00    18.00       109.00
  Net income per month                      EUR                             242,011      2,665     5,208     2,321      300    2,300,000

 Loan characteristics
  Loan amount                               EUR                             242,011     13,700   10,665     10,000    2,000        50,000
  Number of borrowers                                                       242,011       1.34     0.47       1.00     1.00          2.00
  Accepted by bank                          Dummy (0/1)                     242,011       0.70     0.46       1.00     0.00          1.00
  Accepted by bank and customer             Dummy (0/1)                     242,011       0.48     0.50       0.00     0.00          1.00

 Panel B: Scoring Trials

 Inference and dependent variables
   Cutoff                                   Dummy (0/1)                     442,255       0.20      0.40       0.00    0.00           1.00
   Additional trial                         Dummy (0/1)                     442,255       0.45      0.50       0.00    0.00           1.00

 Panel C: Loan officers

 Aggregate statistics
  Number of scoring trials                                                  442,255      78.50     95.79     43.00     1.00        974.00
  Number of distinct loan applications                                      242,011      42.96     47.80     25.00     1.00        390.00
  Number of accepted loans                                                  116,969      20.78     23.93     12.00     0.00        207.00
  Success Rate 3M                           %                               242,011      45.85     22.01     47.53     0.00        100.00




                                                                     31
                                                         Table 3: Example
 This table presents the scoring trials for one single consumer loan originated on May, 04th, 2009. Changes in input parameters are
 highlighted in bold. For variable definitions see table 1.


Trial                              Internal               Loan
No.              Date               rating     Cutoff    amount     Assets     Liabilities   Income    Costs            Status


 1      4 May 2009 4:03:24 PM         12         1        4,000        1,800    23,000       1,900     1,080    Automatically rejected
 2      4 May 2009 4:14:28 PM         12         1        4,000        1,800    23,000       1,950     1,080    Automatically rejected
 3      4 May 2009 4:15:00 PM         11         0        4,000        1,800    10,000       1,950     1,080     Manually rejected
 4      4 May 2009 4:15:31 PM         12         1        4,000        1,800    19,000       1,950     1,080    Automatically rejected
 5      4 May 2009 4:16:23 PM         11         0        4,000        1,800    10,000       1,950     1,080         Accepted




                                                                  32
                                      Table 4: Univariate results for the number of scoring trials
This table presents for each rating class the number of scoring trials before and after the change in the cutoff rating in January 2009.
The rating class is based on the initial rating for each loan application. An internal rating of '1' is the best rating and an internal rating
of '24' is the worst rating. In January 2009 the cutoff rating was changed from 14 to 11. Column A shows the number of scoring trials
before January 2009, Column B shows the number of scoring trials after January 2009 and Column C provides a t-test for the
difference. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.


                                             (A)                                (B)                             (C)
                                     Before January 2009                After January 2009                   Difference

                 Internal rating     N     Mean        SE              N      Mean        SE             Mean           SE


                       1           4,382   1.456    (0.0144)         9,674    1.453    (0.0097)        -0.004        (0.0174)
                       2           1,325   1.479    (0.0258)         3,128    1.480    (0.0162)         0.000        (0.0305)
                       3           1,515   1.459    (0.0232)         3,674    1.507    (0.0162)         0.048*       (0.0283)
                       4           2,150   1.480    (0.0219)         5,221    1.504    (0.0136)         0.024        (0.0258)
                       5           3,699   1.516    (0.0164)         9,516    1.520    (0.0106)         0.004        (0.0195)
                       6           6,569   1.540    (0.0134)        18,275    1.573    (0.0083)         0.033**      (0.0157)
                       7           9,828   1.615    (0.0122)        25,969    1.637    (0.0073)         0.022        (0.0143)
                       8           7,299   1.692    (0.0159)        19,951    1.713    (0.0093)         0.021        (0.0185)
                       9           6,269   1.686    (0.0157)        17,144    1.749    (0.0102)         0.062***     (0.0188)
                       10          5,356   1.816    (0.0202)        13,567    1.824    (0.0121)         0.008        (0.0235)
                       11          6,803   1.809    (0.0177)        16,101    1.928    (0.0135)         0.119***     (0.0223)

                       12          4,280   1.927    (0.0248)         9,334    2.759    (0.0270)         0.832***     (0.0367)
                       13          2,790   2.035    (0.0330)         5,808    2.680    (0.0352)         0.645***     (0.0483)
                       14          2,143   2.088    (0.0416)         4,085    2.578    (0.0394)         0.490***     (0.0573)

                       15          1,471   3.231    (0.0969)         2,755    2.730    (0.0524)        -0.501***     (0.1102)
                       16            872   2.956    (0.1035)         1,683    2.636    (0.0670)        -0.321***     (0.1233)
                       17            630   2.932    (0.1162)         1,190    2.638    (0.0926)        -0.294**      (0.1486)
                       18            486   2.916    (0.1343)           889    2.506    (0.0798)        -0.410***     (0.1563)
                       19            386   2.832    (0.1357)           718    2.405    (0.0989)        -0.426**      (0.1679)
                       20            399   2.779    (0.1306)           590    2.393    (0.0970)        -0.386**      (0.1626)
                       21            335   2.946    (0.1710)           481    2.557    (0.1296)        -0.389*       (0.2146)
                       22            356   2.989    (0.1574)           520    2.448    (0.1142)        -0.541***     (0.1945)
                       23            402   2.736    (0.1317)           578    2.709    (0.1154)        -0.027        (0.1751)
                       24            585   2.627    (0.1141)           830    2.396    (0.0967)        -0.231        (0.1496)




                                                                      33
                                                               Table 5: Multivariate results for the number of scoring trials
We estimate the determinants for the number of scoring trials. The models are estimated using a negative binomial model. All incentive, customer, loan, and loan officer characteristics
are based on the first scoring trial for each loan application. For variable definitions see table 1. Intercept, year, month-of-the-year, branch and loan officer fixed effects are not shown.
Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.

                                                  (1)                      (2)                       (3)                      (4)                      (5)                           (6)
  Dependent                               Number of Trials          Number of Trials         Number of Trials          Number of Trials         Number of Trials           Number of Trials
  Model                                   Negative Binomial         Negative Binomial        Negative Binomial         Negative Binomial        Negative Binomial          Negative Binomial
  INCENTIVE
   Cutoff                                0.480***       (0.0040)   0.313***      (0.0093)   0.275***       (0.0099)   0.289***      (0.0104)   0.289***      (0.0142)    0.288***      (0.0104)
  CUSTOMER
   Relationship Customer                                           -0.043***     (0.0041)   -0.040***      (0.0042)   -0.040***     (0.0043)   -0.040***     (0.0057)    -0.041***     (0.0043)
   Log(Age)                                                        -0.056***     (0.0058)   -0.051***      (0.0060)   -0.047***     (0.0061)   -0.047***     (0.0069)    -0.047***     (0.0061)
   Log(Income)                                                     -0.020***     (0.0045)   -0.014***      (0.0048)   -0.014***     (0.0049)   -0.014**      (0.0056)    -0.009*       (0.0051)
  LOAN
   Log(Loan amount)                                                 0.157***     (0.0024)    0.157***      (0.0024)    0.162***     (0.0025)    0.162***     (0.0031)     0.164***     (0.0025)
   Number of borrowers                                             -0.016***     (0.0045)   -0.014***      (0.0046)   -0.009*       (0.0048)   -0.009        (0.0057)    -0.010**      (0.0048)
  LOAN OFFICER
   Log (3M average number of                                                                0.271***       (0.0057)   0.158***      (0.0062)   0.158***      (0.0087)    -0.057***     (0.0073)
     trials per loan application)
   Log (3M absolute number of                                                               0.015***       (0.0021)   0.023***      (0.0025)   0.023***      (0.0033)    0.005*        (0.0033)
     trials)
   SuccessRate 3M                                                                           -0.066***      (0.0066)   -0.055***     (0.0073)   -0.055***     (0.0085)    -0.002        (0.0081)

  Rating fixed effects                            No                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes                           Yes
  Month-of-year fixed effects                     No                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes                           Yes
  Year fixed effects                              No                       No                        No                      Yes                       Yes                          Yes
  Branch fixed effects                            No                       No                        No                      Yes                       Yes              Implicit in loan officer FE
  Loan officer fixed effects                      No                       No                        No                      No                        No                           Yes
  SE clustered on branch level                    No                       No                        No                       No                       Yes                           Yes

  Diagnostics
  Adj. R2                                        3.92%                   6.27%                     13.76%                   15.13%                   15.13%                       17.40%
  N                                             242,011                 242,011                    226,757                  226,757                  226,757                      226,757




                                                                                              34
                                  Table 6: Difference-in-difference analysis for the changes from the first scoring trial to the last scoring trial
We estimate the changes in parameters between the first and the last scoring trial. Column (A) shows the results for all loan applications in which the first scoring trial results in a
rating better or equal than the cut-off rating. Column (B) shows the results for all loan applications in which the first scoring trial results in a rating worse than the cut-off rating.
Column (C) shows the difference-in-difference estimate. The variables "Assets / Liabilities" and "(Income-Costs)/Liabilities" are the two main ratios which determine the financial
score. For variable definitions see table 1. We report p-values of the difference and difference-in-difference estimates in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1, 5 and
10 percent level, respectively.

                                                                                 (A)                                               (B)                                   (C)
                                                                              Cutoff = 0                                        Cutoff = 1                           Diff-in-Diff

Parameter                         Unit                        First Trial     Last Trial      Difference         First Trial    Last Trial    Difference             Diff-in-Diff
                                                                                              (p-value)                                       (p-value)               (p-value)

Probability of default            %                                 0.481           0.482            0.001             5.398         4.790         -0.608                      -0.609
                                                                                                  (0.6161)                                       (0.0000)                    (0.0000)
Internal rating                   Number (1 to 24)                  7.362           7.339        -0.023**            15.214         14.584     -0.630***                   -0.607***
                                                                                                  (0.0119)                                       (0.0000)                    (0.0000)
Cutoff                            Dummy (0/1)                       0.000           0.004        0.004***              1.000         0.842     -0.158***                   -0.162***
                                                                                                  (0.0000)                                       (0.0000)                    (0.0000)

Financial score                                                     4.334           4.363        0.029***              3.620         3.807      0.188***                    0.158***
                                                                                                  (0.0000)                                       (0.0000)                    (0.0000)
Socio-demographic score                                             4.797           4.798            0.001             4.277         4.284         0.007*                       0.006
                                                                                                  (0.7518)                                       (0.0565)                    (0.1379)
Schufa score                                                        4.794           4.794            0.000             3.824         3.831          0.007                       0.007
                                                                                                  (0.9558)                                       (0.3111)                    (0.3259)
Account score                                                       5.198           5.194           -0.005             3.507         3.513          0.006                       0.011
                                                                                                  (0.3652)                                       (0.5086)                    (0.3085)
Loan score                                                          4.109           4.108           -0.001             3.503         3.508          0.005                       0.005
                                                                                                   (0.757)                                       (0.7577)                    (0.7252)

Assets / Liabilities              %                              184.852         192.605         7.753***            41.473         58.378    16.905***                     9.151***
                                                                                                  (0.0009)                                      (0.0000)                     (0.0035)
(Income – Costs) / Liabilities    %                                11.881          12.224           0.342*             7.950         9.914     1.964***                     1.621***
                                                                                                  (0.0883)                                      (0.0000)                     (0.0000)




                                                                                            35
                             Table 7: Default rates by rating class and number of scoring trials
This table presents default rates by rating class and by number of scoring trials before and after the change in the
cutoff rating in January 2009. The rating class is based on the final rating for each loan. An internal rating of ‘1’ is
the best rating, an internal rating of ‘14’ is the worst rating for which loans could be accepted before January 2009,
an internal rating of ‘11’ is the worst rating for which loans could be accepted after January 2009. Column A shows
the default rates before January 2009, Column B shows the default rates after January 2009. Column (A1) and (B1)
show the default rates for loans with one or two scoring trials, Column (A2) and (B2) show the default rates for
loans with more than two scoring trials, columns (A3) and (B3) show the difference between the default rate of
loans with one or two and more than two scoring trials and columns (A4) and (B4) provide the respective p-values
based on an exact Fisher test. For brevity, the number of observations is not shown. ***, **, * denotes significance
at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.


                                                     (A)                                                    (B)

                                            Before January 2009                                     After January 2009

                               (A1)           (A2)           (A3)         (A4)        (B1)           (B2)            (B3)       (B4)

    Internal Rating         Loans with    Loans with > 2                           Loans with    Loans with > 2
(from last scoring trial)    ≤ 2 trials    scoring trial   Difference    p-value    ≤ 2 trials    scoring trial   Difference   p-value
           1                   0.088%           0.336%        0.248%     0.3083       0.195%           0.000%       -0.195%    0.6076
           2                   0.147%           0.000%       -0.147%     1.0000       0.144%           0.930%       0.786%*    0.0891
           3                   0.246%           0.000%       -0.246%     1.0000       0.509%           0.402%       -0.107%    1.0000
           4                   0.254%           0.575%        0.321%     0.4230       0.300%           0.542%        0.242%    0.3531
           5                   0.445%           0.365%       -0.080%     1.0000       0.813%           0.153%      -0.660%*    0.0798
           6                   0.742%           0.509%       -0.233%     0.7910       0.609%           0.680%        0.071%    0.7296
           7                   1.174%           0.530%      -0.645%*     0.0857       1.522%           1.185%       -0.337%    0.2510
           8                   1.297%           0.931%       -0.366%     0.4752       1.954%           1.729%       -0.225%    0.5830
           9                   1.961%           2.507%        0.546%     0.3836       2.769%           2.602%       -0.167%    0.7516
           10                  2.731%           2.370%       -0.360%     0.6879       3.910%           4.311%        0.401%    0.4735
           11                  4.745%           5.828%        1.083%     0.2166       7.829%          10.113%     2.285%***    0.0001
           12                  5.201%           5.687%        0.486%     0.6117
           13                  7.759%           6.349%       -1.409%     0.3644
           14                  7.091%          12.148%     5.057%***     0.0011


          All                  2.159%           3.325%     1.166%***     0.0000       2.277%           3.672%     1.394%***    0.0000




                                                                    36
                                                                      Table 8: Multivariate results for the default rate
We estimate the probability of default over the first 12 months after origination. The models are estimated using a linear probability model. For variable definitions see table 1. Intercept, year,
month-of-the-year, branch and loan officer fixed effects are not shown. Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10
percent level, respectively.


                                                  (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)                     (5)                       (6)
Dependent                                     Default rate           Default rate           Default rate            Default rate           Default rate              Default rate
                                               12months               12months               12months                12months               12months                  12months
Model                                           Linear                 Linear                 Linear                  Linear                 Linear                    Linear
INCENTIVE
 Log(Number of trials)                   0.011*** (0.0010)      0.004*** (0.0010)       0.003*** (0.0010)      0.004*** (0.0010)       0.004*** (0.0011)      0.004*** (0.0012)
CUSTOMER
 Relationship Customer                                          -0.040*** (0.0017)     -0.040*** (0.0018)      -0.035*** (0.0017)     -0.035*** (0.0030)     -0.032*** (0.0027)
 Log(Age)                                                       -0.020*** (0.0018)     -0.019*** (0.0018)      -0.018*** (0.0019)     -0.018*** (0.0023)     -0.018*** (0.0023)
 Log(Income)                                                    -0.011*** (0.0014)     -0.009*** (0.0014)      -0.011*** (0.0015)     -0.011*** (0.0018)     -0.013*** (0.0019)
LOAN
 Log(Loan amount)                                                0.005*** (0.0008)      0.005*** (0.0008)       0.004*** (0.0008)      0.004*** (0.0012)      0.003*** (0.0011)
 Number of borrowers                                            -0.040*** (0.0016)     -0.041*** (0.0017)      -0.035*** (0.0017)     -0.035*** (0.0028)     -0.032*** (0.0027)
LOAN OFFICER
 Log (3M average number of trials
  per loan application)                                                                -0.001    (0.0017)      -0.001    (0.0017)     -0.001    (0.0021)     -0.004* (0.0022)
 Log (3M absolute number of trials)                                                     0.007*** (0.0007)       0.004*** (0.0007)      0.004*** (0.0011)      0.006*** (0.0011)
 SuccessRate 3M                                                                         0.001    (0.0019)       0.001    (0.0019)      0.001    (0.0023)      0.001    (0.0024)
Rating fixed effects                              No                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes
Month-of-year fixed effects                       No                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes
Year fixed effects                                No                     No                      No                     Yes                    Yes                        Yes
Branch fixed effects                              No                     No                      No                     Yes                    Yes            Implicit in loan officer FE
Loan officer fixed effects                        No                     No                      No                     No                     No                         Yes
SE clustered on branch level                      No                     No                      No                     No                     Yes                       Yes
Diagnostics
Adj. R2                                         0.17%                   4.06%                  4.25%                   6.95%                  6.95%                    11.46%
N                                              116,969                 116,969                109,787                 109,787                109,787                   109,787




                                                                                               37
                                         Table 9: Multivariate results for the default rate: Time per trial and changes to input parameters
We estimate the probability of default over the first 12 months after origination. The models are estimated using a linear probability model. Log(Time per Trial) denotes the time from the first to the last scoring trial
(measured in hours) divided by the number of scoring trials minus 1. This item is therefore only available for loan applications with more than one scoring trial. ∆(logAssets) [∆(logLiabilities), ∆(logIncome),
∆(logCosts)] denotes the logarithm of the assets [liabilities, income, costs] from the final scoring trial minus the logarithm of the assets [liabilities, income, costs] from the initial scoring trial. ∆(logAssets)>0 denotes
max(∆(logAssets), 0), ∆(logAssets)<0 denotes min(∆(logAssets), 0), the same notation applies to liabilities, income and costs. For the remaining variable definitions see table 1. Intercept, year, month-of-the-year,
branch and loan officer fixed effects are not shown. Heteroscedasticity consistent standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.
                                                                                              (1)                                    (2)                              (3)                              (4)
     Dependent                                                                     Default rate 12 months                 Default rate 12 months           Default rate 12 months           Default rate 12 months
     Model                                                                                 Linear                                 Linear                           Linear                           Linear

     INCENTIVE
       Log(Number of trials)                                                     0.010***              (0.0027)        0.004***              (0.0012)   0.004***              (0.0013)    0.010***              (0.0027)
       Log(Time per trial)                                                      -0.0008***             (0.0003)                                                                          -0.0009***             (0.0002)
      ∆(logAssets)                                                                                                       0.000               (0.0007)
          ∆(logAssets)<0                                                                                                                                  0.007               (0.0114)      0.003               (0.0119)
          ∆(logAssets)>0                                                                                                                                  0.001               (0.0008)      0.000               (0.0008)
      ∆(logLiabilities)                                                                                                -0.002***             (0.0005)
          ∆(logLiabilities)<0                                                                                                                           -0.002***             (0.0006)    -0.002***             (0.0006)
          ∆(logLiabilities)>0                                                                                                                             0.000               (0.0011)      0.000               (0.0012)
      ∆(logIncome)                                                                                                      -0.027               (0.0205)
          ∆(logIncome)<0                                                                                                                                 -0.038               (0.0323)     -0.063*              (0.0351)
          ∆(logIncome)>0                                                                                                                                 -0.017               (0.0279)      -0.006              (0.0291)
      ∆(logCosts)                                                                                                      -0.015**              (0.0063)
          ∆(logCosts)<0                                                                                                                                 -0.023***             (0.0079)    -0.024***             (0.0084)
          ∆(logCosts)>0                                                                                                                                   0.004               (0.0123)      0.004               (0.0131)

     CUSTOMER
      Relationship Customer                                                      -0.035***             (0.0037)        -0.032***             (0.0027)   -0.032***             (0.0027)    -0.035***             (0.0037)
      Log(Age)                                                                   -0.023***             (0.0036)        -0.018***             (0.0023)   -0.018***             (0.0023)    -0.023***             (0.0036)
      Log(Income)                                                                -0.017***             (0.0029)        -0.013***             (0.0019)   -0.013***             (0.0019)    -0.017***             (0.0029)

     LOAN
      Log(Loan amount)                                                             0.003*              (0.0017)        0.003***              (0.0011)   0.003***              (0.0011)     0.003**              (0.0017)
      Number of borrowers                                                        -0.034***             (0.0037)        -0.032***             (0.0026)   -0.032***             (0.0026)    -0.034***             (0.0037)

     LOAN OFFICER
      Log (3M average number of trials per loan application)                      -0.006               (0.0037)        -0.004**              (0.0022)   -0.004**              (0.0022)     -0.006               (0.0037)
      Log (3M absolute number of trials)                                         0.008***              (0.0018)        0.006***              (0.0011)   0.006***              (0.0011)    0.008***              (0.0018)
      SuccessRate 3M                                                              -0.006               (0.0040)          0.001               (0.0024)     0.001               (0.0024)     -0.005               (0.0040)

     Rating fixed effects                                                                     Yes                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes
     Month-of-year fixed effects                                                              Yes                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes

     Year fixed effects                                                                       Yes                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes
     Branch fixed effects                                                         Implicit in loan officer FE           Implicit in loan officer FE      Implicit in loan officer FE       Implicit in loan officer FE
     Loan officer fixed effects                                                               Yes                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes

     SE clustered on branch level                                                             Yes                                   Yes                              Yes                               Yes

     Diagnostics
     Adj. R2                                                                                 16.55%                                11.48%                           11.49%                            16.61%
     N                                                                                       45,527                                109,787                          109,787                           45,527




                                                                                                                  38
                                                Table 10: Robustness test / Regression discontinuity
This table reports estimates for regression that uses the number scoring trials for each initial rating class as the dependent variable. In
order to estimate the discontinuity (Initial rating ≥ 14.5 for the period before January 2009, Initial rating ≥ 11.5 for the period after
January 2009 ) we estimate seventh-order polynomials (Panel Ia) and local linear regressions (Panel Ib) on either side of the cutoff
using a negative binomial model. Column (A) presents results for the period before January 2009, column (B) presents the results for
the period after January 2009. Columns (A1) and (B1) report results for the estimate of the discontinuity, columns (A2) and (B2)
report robust standard errors, columns (A3) and (B3) report the number of observations and columns (A4) and (B4) report the R-
squared. We also report a permutation test p–value beneath each regression. “Without Covariates” denotes regressions without any
covariates beyond the initial rating, “With Covariates” denotes regressions which include customer, client and loan officer
characteristics (which are not shown for reasons of brevity). Panel II reports the results from the McCrary test for the manipulation of
the running variable. Columns (C1) and (D1) report the estimate of the discontinuity in the density of the internal rating at the cutoff
rating, columns (C2) and (D2) report the respective standard errors. ***, **, * denotes significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level,
respectively.


                                                           (A)                                                        (B)

                                                  Before January 2009                                       After January 2009

                                  (A1)              (A2)            (A3)          (A4)        (B1)            (B2)             (B3)         (B4)

                              Initial rating                                              Initial rating
           Method               > 14 (β)            (SE)         Observations      R2       > 11 (β)         t-stat         Observations     R2


    Panel I: Test for discontinuity at the cutoff rating

    Panel Ia: Polynomials
       without covariates         0.357***         (0.0735)           70,330     4.49%        0.281***      (0.0263)            171,681    4.82%
                                          Permutation test p-value: 0.0002                           Permutation test p-value: 0.0021
       with covariates            0.331***         (0.0726)           61,065     19.76%       0.291***      (0.0259)            165,692    11.47%
                                          Permutation test p-value: 0.0006                           Permutation test p-value: 0.0016

    Panel Ib: Local linear regression
       without covariates         0.346***         (0.0915)             1,920    1.36%        0.251***     (0.0285)              18,662    1.34%
                                         Permutation test p-value: <0.0001                           Permutation test p-value: <0.0001
       with covariates            0.284***         (0.0877)             1,690    14.90%       0.252***     (0.0276)              18,043    5.70%
                                         Permutation test p-value: <0.0001                           Permutation test p-value: <0.0001




    Panel II: Test for manipulation of the running variable at the cutoff rating
                                   (C1)             (C2)                                       (D1)           (D2)
                              Discontinuity                                               Discontinuity
                               at rating of                                                at rating of
                                   14.5              SE                                        11.5           SE
    McCrary test                        0.078      (0.2479)                                      -0.031     (0.1106)




                                                                            39
                                               Table 11: Robustness test / Model choice
This table presents robustness tests for the multivariate analyses from table 5 and table 8. Panel A shows a robustness test for the
number of scoring trials using a Poisson and a linear model in addition to the negative binomial model presented in table 5. Panel B
shows a robustness test for the default rate using a conditional logistic regression in addition to the linear probability model presented
in table 8. Only the coefficient for the cutoff dummy are shown in Panel A. Only the coefficient for the logarithm of the number of
scoring trials is shown in Panel B. All coefficients are from a multivariate specification of the respective model including all customer,
loan, and loan officer characteristics and year, month-of-the-year, and loan officer fixed effects. For the conditional logistic model in
Panel B we report marginal effects to facilitate comparison of the coefficient to the linear model. Heteroscedasticity consistent
standard errors are shown in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively.



                      Method                        Parameter                       Coefficient            SE

                      Panel A: Number of scoring trials

                      Negative Binomial             Cutoff                           0.288***           (0.0104)
                      Poisson                       Cutoff                           0.290***           (0.0100)
                      Linear                        Cutoff                           0.226***           (0.0105)

                      Panel B: Default rate

                      Linear                        Log(Number of trials)            0.004***           (0.0012)
                      Conditional Logistic          Log(Number of trials)            0.003***           (0.0008)




                                                                    40
