                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    PRODUCT AND LABOR MARKET IMPERFECTIONS AND SCALE ECONOMIES:
        MICRO-EVIDENCE ON FRANCE, JAPAN AND THE NETHERLANDS

                                         Sabien Dobbelaere
                                            Kozo Kiyota
                                          Jacques Mairesse

                                        Working Paper 19059
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19059


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We are grateful to Christopher Baum, Björn Brügemann, Masahisa Fujita, Kyoji Fukao, Michihiro
Kandori, Bas van der Klaauw, José Luis Moraga-González, Masayuki Morikawa, Mark Schaffer, Ayumu
Tanaka and other participants at various conferences and seminars for helpful comments and suggestions.
The analysis using the French firm-level data was conducted at “Centre de Recherche en Économie
et Statistique” (CREST) and the one using the Japanese firm-level data at the Research Institute of
Economy, Trade and Industry (RIETI). The authors would like to thank Statistics Netherlands for
providing the Dutch data. Kiyota acknowledges financial support from the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (Grant-in-aid A-22243023). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Sabien Dobbelaere, Kozo Kiyota, and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Product and labor market imperfections and scale economies: Micro-evidence on France,
Japan and the Netherlands
Sabien Dobbelaere, Kozo Kiyota, and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 19059
May 2013, Revised June 2015
JEL No. C23,D21,J50,L13

                                              ABSTRACT

Allowing for three labor market settings (perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining, efficient
bargaining and monopsony), this paper relies on two extensions of Halls econometric framework
for estimating simultaneously price-cost margins and scale economies. Using an unbalanced panel
of 17,653 firms over the period 1986-2001 in France, 8,728 firms over the period 1994-2006 in Japan
and 7,828 firms over the period 1993-2008 in the Netherlands, we first apply two procedures to classify
30 comparable manufacturing industries in 6 distinct regimes that differ in terms of the type of competition
prevailing in product and labor markets. For each of the predominant regimes in each country, we
then investigate industry differences in the estimated product and labor market imperfections and scale
economies. Consistent with differences in institutions and in the industrial relations system in the three
countries, we find important regime differences across the three countries and also observe differences
in the levels of product market imperfections and scale economies within regimes.


Sabien Dobbelaere                                    Jacques Mairesse
Faculty of Economics and                             CREST (ParisTech-ENSAE)
Business Administration                              15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
VU University Amsterdam                              92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
De Boelelaan 1105                                    FRANCE
1081 HV AMSTERDAM                                    and UNU-MERIT (Maastricht University)
THE NETHERLANDS                                      and also NBER
and Tinbergen Institute (TI) and IZA                 mairesse@ensae.fr
sabien.dobbelaere@vu.nl

Kozo Kiyota
Keio University
Keio Economic Observatory
2-15-45, Mita, Minato-ku
108-8345 TOKYO
JAPAN
and RIETI
kiyota@sanken.keio.ac.jp
1       Introduction
A well-established result from welfare economic theory is that absent market failures, the unfettered market
outcome is economically e¢ cient. In reality, few if any markets are perfect in the sense that they satisfy
the assumptions underlying textbook models of perfect competition or yield the performance of hypothetical
perfectly competitive markets. The pervasiveness of deviations from economically e¢ cient choices is often
used as a rationale for public policy. The decision to (de)regulate or change regulatory policies must –among
other things– be based on a careful identi…cation of market failures. Indeed, identifying market failures
and choosing appropriate policy instruments to mitigate them have been at the core of policy analysis for
decades (Weimer and Vining, 2005; Kleiman and Teles, 2008; Koske et al., 2014). This paper focuses on the
identi…cation and quanti…cation of one potential type of market failure, namely market power in product and
labor markets. This allows us to evaluate how actual product and labor markets deviate from their perfectly
competitive or economically e¢ cient counterparts.

More speci…cally, combining …rm, industry and country-level perspectives for three countries, our analysis
serves the purpose of quantifying industry di¤erences in product and labor market imperfections and scale
economies using …rm-level data in France, Japan and the Netherlands. The cross-country (cross-industry)
comparison is motivated by the fact that resource allocative e¢ ciency di¤ers across countries. The selection
of countries is driven by the following two reasons. First, there exist inherent institutional, organizational
and cultural di¤erences between France, Japan and the Netherlands, making our comparative study partic-
ularly relevant. Second, highly comparable microdata sets are available in these countries, allowing us to
conduct a reliable international comparative study.1 Do manufacturing industries in the three countries under
consideration belong to di¤erent regimes characterizing the type of competition prevailing in product and
labor markets? To what extent do manufacturing industries within a particular regime di¤er in the degree of
imperfections in the product and labor markets in which they operate? These are the main questions that
we address.

In this paper, we rely on two extensions of Hall’s (1988) econometric framework for estimating simultaneously
price-cost margins and scale economies using …rm panel data that take into account imperfections in the
labor market. Instead of imposing a particular labor market setting on the data –a common practice in
empirical studies estimating labor market imperfections–we follow Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013) and use
econometric production functions as a tool for testing the competitiveness of product and labor markets
and evaluating their degree of imperfection. We consider two product market settings (perfect competition
(P C) and imperfect competition (IC)) and three labor market settings (perfect competition or right-to-
manage bargaining (P R), e¢ cient bargaining (EB) and monopsony (M O)). We thus distinguish six regimes.
This tractable econometric method only requires data on production values, factor inputs and factor costs
to classify economic entities in the six di¤erent regimes. Therefore, it proves particularly useful in our
comparative setting.

Our empirical analysis is based on three large unbalanced panels of manufacturing …rms: 17,653 …rms over
the period 1986-2001 in France, 8,728 …rms over the period 1994-2006 in Japan and 7,828 …rms over the
    1 For
       example, Bellone et al. (2014) use the same …rm-level data for France and Japan to investigate productivity gaps between
French and Japanese manufacturing industries.


                                                              2
period 1993-2008 in the Netherlands. It consists of two parts. In the …rst part, we apply two procedures
to classify 30 comparable manufacturing industries in distinct regimes that di¤er in terms of the type of
competition prevailing in product and labor markets in each country. The …rst classi…cation procedure is
based on point estimates of our parameters of interest and enables a complete classi…cation whilst the second
is based on con…dence intervals around estimated parameters which entails a more statistically correct –but
incomplete– characterization of industries. Consistent with di¤erences in the industrial relations system in
the three countries, we observe important di¤erences in the prevalent product and labor market settings,
and hence in the prevalent regimes across the three countries. Irrespective of the classi…cation procedure,
we …nd that (i) the proportion of industries (and …rms) that is characterized by imperfect competition in
the product market is much higher in France and the Netherlands than in Japan and (ii) the most prevalent
labor market setting is e¢ cient bargaining in France and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining
in Japan and the Netherlands. As such, the dominant regime is one of imperfect competition in the product
market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market in France, one of perfect competition in the product
market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market in Japan and one of
imperfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the
labor market in the Netherlands. In the second part, we investigate industry di¤erences in the estimated
product and labor market imperfection parameters within the predominant regimes in each country. In
addition to the important cross-country regime di¤erences that our analysis reveals, we also …nd di¤erences
in the levels of product market imperfections and scale economies within regimes.

From a methodological point of view, our analysis is most closely related to Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013)
and to some extent to Petrin and Sivadasan (2013). Both studies are based on the gap methodology, which
is motivated by the observation that several phenomena move an economic entity away from the neoclas-
sical setup where a variable input factor’s estimated marginal product is equal to its measured payment.
Paramount among these are economic factors like mark-ups, hiring, …ring and search costs, variable factor
utilization, factor adjustment costs and nonoptimal managerial behavior, and measurement errors. Using a
sample of 10,646 manufacturing …rms in France over the period 1978-2001, Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013)
provide a detailed industry- and …rm-level analysis of product and labor market imperfections as two sources
of discrepancies between the output contribution of individual production factors and their respective rev-
enue shares. Using a sample of 5,000 manufacturing plants in Chile over the period 1982-1994, Petrin and
Sivadasan (2013) estimate the gaps between an input’s marginal product and its cost to infer the value of
lost output arising from allocative ine¢ ciency.

Our contribution to the econometric literature on estimating microeconomic production functions and the
one on estimating simultaneously market imperfections in product and labor markets is threefold. First, given
that we infer the type and the degree of market imperfections from consistent estimation of …rm-level produc-
tion functions, we discuss the methodological issues that arise when estimating microeconomic production
functions (most notably simultaneity bias, selection bias and omitted price bias) and the direction of these
possible biases. Second, we carefully check the sensitivity of our revealed product and labor market settings
to the choice of estimator. Third, given that market imperfections are the norm but that misallocations
in product and labor markets vary greatly across countries and across industries, our study is the …rst to
investigate in what respects real-world product and labor markets deviate from perfectly-functioning markets


                                                     3
in a comparative setting. By unraveling potential cross-country cross-industry di¤erences, our analysis might
deepen our understanding of sizeable variation in total factor productivity (TFP) across countries.2

We proceed as follows. Section 2 highlights some institutional characteristics in the three countries, thereby
motivating the comparative nature of our study. Section 3 discusses the theoretical framework. Section
4 presents the …rm panel data for France, Japan and the Netherlands. Section 5 discusses the estimation
method. Section 6 elucidates the econometric implementation, applies two classi…cation procedures to char-
acterize the type of competition in the product and labor markets of our selected manufacturing industries
and investigates the sensitivity of both classi…cation procedures to four widely adopted estimators. Section
7 analyses industry di¤erences in the degree of market imperfections within predominant regimes. Section 8
concludes.


2        Institutional background
Institutional and social norms vary greatly by country. Pursuing a highly comparable cross-country industry
analysis is therefore valuable for understanding di¤erent patterns of economic phenomena across countries.
This section brie‡y discusses some institutional characteristics of our selected countries which serve as back-
ground information for our econometric analysis.

During the last decade, OECD countries have extensively liberalized product markets and –as a consequence–
a convergence of regulation across OECD countries can be discerned. However, di¤erences remain in the reg-
ulatory settings in France, Japan and the Netherlands that our comparative study may con…rm. For example,
the OECD overall indicator of product market anti-competitive regulations shows that the Netherlands is
characterized by a level of anti-competitive restrictions that is signi…cantly lower than the OECD average,
while regulations in France and Japan are close to the OECD average. This is particularly true for domestic
economic regulation which is related to public ownership, involvement in business operation and barriers to
competition. In contrast, administrative regulation which is related to regulatory and administrative opacity
and administrative burdens on startups appears to be less stricter in Japan (Wöl‡ et al., 2009, 2010).

On the labor market side, industrial relations di¤er considerably between France, Japan and the Netherlands.
In all OECD countries, employees are represented in trade unions –which embody the traditional form of
employee representation– and works councils which are organized at the company or establishment level.
In Japan, trade union representation dominates while employee representation at the workplace occurs only
through works councils in the Netherlands. France is characterized by a complex system of employee represen-
tation where both trade unions and elected representatives coexist. A unique feature of Japanese industrial
relations is that unions are organized along enterprise lines. They are mainly concerned with the preservation
of long-term employment contracts for regular employees, which is conducive to cooperative behavior (Verret,
2006; Noda and Hirano, 2013). In contrast, France and the Netherlands are characterized by industry-based
unionism. In terms of union membership, trade union density is around the OECD average in Japan and
the Netherlands (about 20%), while the French trade union movement is among the weakest in the OECD
    2A recent literature emphasizes resource misallocation across heterogeneous production units as an important source of large
cross-country di¤erences in measured TFP (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2008, 2013; Hsieh and Klenow, 2009).


                                                               4
countries with only about 8% of employees in unions. French trade unions are divided into a number of rival
confederations, competing for membership. However, union membership is not the only indicator of strength.
Despite low membership and apparent division, French trade unions have repeatedly shown that they are able
to mobilize workers in mass strikes and demonstrations to great e¤ect. In France, negotiations are mostly
held at the industry level which can be supplemented with bargaining agreements at the …rm level. Since
the government often extends the terms of industry-level agreements to all employers, collective bargaining
coverage is very high (95%). In the Netherlands, the proportion of employees covered by collective bargaining
is also quite high and amounts to 85% (Venn, 2009). The fact that enterprise-based unions aim at defending
the interests of unions members through collective bargaining and at concluding collective agreements that
only cover their members explains the very low collective bargaining coverage in Japan (only 16%). These
institutional and organizational di¤erences might shape …rms’ operational environment in general and the
type of competition in product and labor markets in particular.


3      Theoretical framework
This section extends the framework of Hall (1988) for estimating price-cost margins and scale economies.
To this end, we follow Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013) by considering three labor market settings: perfect
competition or right-to-manage bargaining (Nickell and Andrews, 1983), e¢ cient bargaining (McDonald and
Solow, 1981) and monopsony (Manning, 2003).3 This section contains the main ingredients of the theoretical
framework. For technical details, we refer to Appendix A.

We start from a production function Qit = it F (Nit ; Mit ; Kit ), where i is a …rm index, t a time index, N is
labor, M is material input and K is capital. it = Ae i +ut + it , with i an unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ect, ut
a year-speci…c intercept and it a random component, is an index of technical change or “true” total factor
productivity. Denoting the logarithm of Qit ; Nit ; Mit ; Kit and it by qit ; nit ; mit ; kit and it respectively,
the logarithmic speci…cation of the production function gives:

                                     qit = ("Q             Q             Q
                                             N )it nit + ("M )it mit + ("K )it kit +   it                                (1)

where ("Q
        J )it (J = N; M; K) is the elasticity of output with respect to input factor J.


Firms operate under imperfect competition in the product market (IC). We allow for three labor mar-
ket settings (LM S): perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining (P R)4 , e¢ cient bargaining (EB)
and monopsony (M O). We assume that material input and labor are variable factors. Short-run pro…t
maximization implies the following …rst-order condition with respect to material input:

                                                   ("Q
                                                     M )it =       it   (   M )it                                        (2)
    3 Asnoted in Booth (2014), these imperfectly competitive labor market models can be viewed as polar extremes and are both
intuitively appealing and tractable.
   4 Our framework does not allow to disentangle perfect competition in the labor market from right-to-manage bargaining.

In both settings, labor is unilaterally determined by the …rm from pro…t maximization, i.e. the wage rate equals the marginal
revenue of labor (see Section A.1 in Appendix A).




                                                               5
where ( M )it = PjititM                                                              Pit
                      Qit is the share of material costs in total revenue and it = (CQ )it refers to the mark-up of
                        it


output price Pit over marginal cost (CQ )it . Depending on the prevalent LM S, short-run pro…t maximization
implies the following …rst-order condition with respect to labor:

                            ("Q
                              N )it           =       it   (   N )it        if LM S = P R                                                                    (3)
                                              =       it(      N )it        it it   [1   (    N )it     (   M )it ]        if LM S = EB                      (4)
                                                      it (      N )it
                                              =                             if LM S = M O                                                                    (5)
                                                               it

                          wit Nit
where (       N )it   =   Pit Qit      is the share of labor costs in total revenue.                           it   =    1
                                                                                                                           it
                                                                                                                                 represents the relative extent
                                                                                                                             it
                                                                                                                         ("N
                                                                                                                           w )it
of rent sharing, it 2 [0; 1] the absolute extent of rent sharing, it =                                                  1+("N
                                                                                                                                   and ("N
                                                                                                                                         w )it 2 <+ the wage
                                                                                                                            w )it
elasticity of the labor supply. From the …rst-order conditions with respect to material input and labor, it
follows that the parameter of joint market imperfections ( it ):

                                                    ("Q M )it    ("Q
                                                                   N )it
                                         it       =                                                                                                          (6)
                                                    ( M )it     ( N )it
                                                  = 0      if LM S = P R                                                                                     (7)
                                                              1 ( N )it ( M )it
                                                  =   it it                        >0                               if LM S = EB                             (8)
                                                                     ( N )it
                                                              1
                                                  =     it N      <0      if LM S = M O                                                                      (9)
                                                          ("w )it

Assuming that the elasticity of scale,                              it   = ("Q         Q         Q
                                                                             N )it + ("M )it + ("K )it , is known, the capital elasticity can be
expressed as:
                                                                    ("Q
                                                                      K )it =       it   ("Q
                                                                                           N )it        ("Q
                                                                                                          M )it                                             (10)

Inserting Eqs. (2), (6) and (10) in Eq. (1) and rearranging terms gives:

                  qit =      it   [(   N )it   (nit        kit ) + (      M )it   (mit       kit )] +    it ( N )it     (kit    nit ) +   it kit   +   it   (11)


4       Data description
Our modi…ed production function framework only requires data on production values, factor inputs and
factor costs. This section presents the micro data in the three countries.

The French data are based on …rm accounting information from EAE (“Enquête Annuelle d’Entreprise”,
“Service des Etudes et Statistiques Industrielles” (SESSI)). The Japanese data are sourced from the con-
…dential micro database of the “Kigyou Katsudou Kihon Chousa Houkokusho” (Basic Survey of Japanese
Business Structure and Activities (BSJBSA)) collected annually by the Research and Statistics Department
(METI).5 The survey is compulsory for …rms with more than 50 employees and with capital of more than 30
million yen. The Dutch data are sourced from the Production Surveys (PS) at Statistics Netherlands which
are collected annually by the “Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek” (CBS). A combination of census and
strati…ed random sampling is used for each wave of the PS. A census is used for the population of enterprises
    5 For   details on the Japanese data, we refer to Kiyota et al. (2009).


                                                                                         6
with at least …fty employees and a strati…ed random sampling is used for enterprises with fewer than …fty
employees. The stratum variables are the economic activity and the number of employees of an enterprise.
For each country, our estimation sample is restricted to …rms having at least four consecutive observations.
After some trimming on input shares in total revenue and input growth rates to eliminate outliers and anom-
alies, we end up with an unbalanced panel of 17,653 …rms covering the period 1986-2001 in France (F R),
8,728 …rms spanning the period 1994-2006 in Japan (JP ) and 7,828 …rms over the period 1993-2008 in the
Netherlands (N L). Table B.1 in Appendix B gives the panel structure of the estimation sample by country.

Output (Q) is de…ned as current production de‡ated by the two-digit producer price index in F R and real
gross output measured by nominal sales divided by the industry-level gross output price index in JP and
N L.6 Labor (N ) refers to the average number of employees in F R and JP , and the number of employees
in September of a given year in N L. Material input is de…ned as intermediate consumption de‡ated by
the industry-level intermediate consumption price index in the three countries. The capital stock (K) is
measured by the gross bookvalue of …xed assets in F R, computed from tangible assets and investment
based on the perpetual inventory method in JP 7 and proxied by depreciation of …xed assets de‡ated by the
industry-level gross …xed capital formation price index for all assets in N L. The price de‡ators for JP are
obtained from the Japan Industrial Productivity (JIP) 2009 database, which was compiled by RIETI and
Hitotsubashi University.8 The price de‡ators for N L are obtained from the EUKLEMS database (November
2009 release, March 2011 update). The shares of labor ( N ) and material input ( M ) are constructed by
dividing respectively the …rm total labor cost and unde‡ated intermediate consumption by the …rm unde‡ated
production and by taking the average of these ratios over adjacent years.

Table 1 reports the means, standard deviations and quartile values of our main variables by country. The
average growth rate of real …rm output is 3.3% per year in F R, 2.0% in JP and 2.5% in N L. In F R, labor,
materials and capital have increased at an average annual growth rate of 1.4%, 4.9% and 0.8% respectively. In
JP , labor and capital have decreased at an average annual growth rate of 0.3%, while materials has increased
at an average annual growth rate of 1.3%. In N L, labor, materials and capital have increased at an average
annual growth rate of 0.4%, 2.6% and 1.6% respectively. The Solow residual or the conventional measure of
T F P is stable over the considered period in each country. As expected for …rm-level data, the dispersion of
all these variables is considerably large. For example, T F P growth is lower than -5.2% (-2.2%) [-4.3% ] for
the …rst quartile of …rms and higher than 5.9% (4.2%) [5.9%] for the upper quartile in F R (JP ) [N L].

                                              <Insert Table 1 about here>
    6 As in many …rm-level datasets, we observe …rm-level revenues and not prices and quantities separately. The productivity

literature is dominated by two approaches to deal with this issue. One approach de‡ates …rm-level revenues by an industry-
level price index and thus estimates a revenue production function rather than an output production function. The other
approach follows Klette and Griliches (1996) which amounts to adding the growth in industry output as an additional regressor.
Theoretically, this approach relies on the assumption that the market power of …rms originates from product di¤erentiation.
Intuitively, in the case of product di¤erentiation, the demand for an individual …rm’s products is a function of its relative
price within the industry. Relative price di¤erences can then be expressed in terms of relative output growth di¤erences in the
industry. We follow the predominant approach in the literature and use the former.
    7 Details on the measurement of the user cost of capital can be found in Section B.1 in Appendix B.
    8 For more details on the JIP database, see Fukao et al. (2007).




                                                              7
5      Estimation method
We use econometric production functions as a tool for testing the competitiveness of product and labor
markets and for assessing their degree of imperfection, not only for estimating factor elasticities and total
factor productivity as has been common practice in the econometric literature on estimating microeconomic
production functions.

Consistent estimation of the output contribution of individual production factors is non trivial because
…rms choose inputs knowing their own productivity level, which is unobservable to the econometrician.
First discussed by Marschak and Andrews (1944), this endogeneity problem –known in the literature as the
simultaneity/transmission bias–has fuelled formidable advances in econometric methods and practices. This
section aims at investigating the sensitivity of production function coe¢ cient, scale elasticity and product and
labor market imperfection estimates to four widely adopted estimators: (i) the ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimator, (ii) the within-group …xed-e¤ ects (FE) estimator, (iii) the system generalized method of moments
(SYS-GMM) estimator and (iv) the Wooldridge-Levinsohn-Petrin estimator.9 To this end, we follow most
of the literature by estimating average parameters:

                                         qit = "Q        Q        Q
                                                N nit + "M mit + "K kit + ut +         it                                     (12)

with it = ! it + it . Of the error components, ! it represents unobserved productivity to the econometrician
but possible observed by the …rm at t when input decisions are made (transmitted productivity shock), while
 it captures all other sources of error or productivity that is not observed by the …rm before making input
choices at t. ut is a year-speci…c intercept.

Because of the potential correlation between ! it and the inputs chosen at t, the OLS estimator (which
assumes that the moments of the regressors with the disturbances are zero) produces inconsistent estimates.

If one is willing to assume that the productivity shock is constant over time (! it = ! i ), the endogeneity
problem can be solved by exploiting the panel structure of the data and using the FE estimator, which is a
method of moments estimator based on the data after subtracting o¤ time averages. However, this solution
has produced unsatisfactory results. Typically, the coe¢ cient on capital and returns to scale are estimated
implausibly low (see e.g. Griliches and Mairesse, 1998).10

A general approach to estimating error components models designed for panels with few time periods and
many individuals, covariates that are not strictly exogenous, unobserved heterogeneity, heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation within individuals was developed by Arellano and Bover (1995) and Blundell and Bond
(1998) (SYS-GMM estimator). This approach extends the standard (…rst-di¤ erenced) GMM estimator of
    9 The  purpose of this section is to provide some intuition behind the selected estimators. We refer the reader to the original
papers mentioned in this section or textbooks for details on the econometric methods and to Section A.2 in Appendix A for a
discussion of the semiparametric structural control function approach as an alternative to the parametric GMM approach to
deal with endogeneity of inputs and unobserved productivity.
  1 0 First-di¤erencing –another common method of eliminating the unobserved individual e¤ects– usually produces even smaller

production function coe¢ cients due to the presence of measurement error. See also Mairesse (1990) and Griliches and Hausman
(1986).



                                                                8
Arellano and Bond (1991) –which eliminates unobserved …rm-speci…c e¤ects by taking …rst di¤erences– by
relying on a richer set of orthogonal conditions.11 The error components are an unobserved …xed e¤ect ( i ),
a possibly autoregressive productivity shock (! it = ! it 1 + it with j j < 1) and serially uncorrelated mea-
surement errors ( it ), with it ; it i:i:d. Consistent with our static theoretical framework, we estimate the
restricted version of the Blundell-Bond model and only consider idiosyncratic productivity shocks (imposing
  = 0).12 We apply the two-step GMM estimator which is asymptotically more e¢ cient than the one-step
GMM estimator and which is robust to whatever patterns of heteroskedasticity and cross-correlation. We use
a …nite-sample correction to the two-step covariance matrix developed by Windmeijer (2005). The validity
of GMM crucially hinges on the assumption that the instruments are exogenous. We report both the Sargan
and Hansen test statistics for the joint validity of the overidentifying restrictions.13 ;14 In addition, we provide
di¤erence-in-Hansen statistics to test the validity of subsets of instruments.

Fundamental to the control function (CF ) approach is to use …rm decisions to …nd proxy variables for the
transmitted productivity shock (! it ) and use information in these proxy variables to invert out unobserved
productivity ! it from the residual. Olley and Pakes (1996) (OP for short) use the investment decision
to proxy for ! it whereas Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (LP for short) use an intermediate input demand
function to invert out ! it . As noted by Ackerberg et al. (2006) (ACF for short) and Bond and Söderbom
(2005), collinearity between labor and the non-parametric inverse of ! it (i.e. the control function) causes
the production coe¢ cient of labor to be nonparametrically unidenti…ed in the …rst stage. ACF propose
a hybrid of the OP and LP approaches. They implement a two-stage estimator that resolves the …rst-
stage collinearity problem by only separating the untransmitted productivity shock ( it ) from the production
function in the …rst stage and consistently estimating all production function coe¢ cients in the second stage.
Wooldridge (2009) modi…es the LP approach (W-LP for short) by writing the moment restrictions used by
LP in terms of two equations with the same dependent variable but di¤erent instrument sets and applying
generalized method of moments. The main advantages of this one-step approach compared to the ACF
two-step estimation procedure are (i) obtaining robust standard errors in the standard GMM framework,
  1 1 The Arellano-Bover/Blundell-Bond estimator assumes that the …rst di¤erences of the instrumental variables are uncorrelated
with the …xed e¤ects, which allows the introduction of more instruments which might improve e¢ ciency dramatically. It was
successfully applied within a production function framework by Blundell and Bond (2000).
  1 2 Considering only labor as a variable input factor, Blundell and Bond (2000) estimate a dynamic common factor respresenta-

tion of a Cobb-Douglas production function: qit = "Q   N nit   "Q           Q
                                                                 N nit 1 + "M mit    "Q          Q
                                                                                      M mit 1 + "K kit    "Q
                                                                                                           K kit + (ut     ut 1 ) +
( i (1    ) + it + it      it 1 ). Table 2 in Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013) presents estimates of a dynamic speci…cation of our
modi…ed production function.
  1 3 We build sets of instruments following the Holtz-Eakin et al. (1988)-approach which avoids the standard two-stage least

squares trade-o¤ between instrument lag depth and sample depth by including separate instruments for each time period and
substituting zeros for missing observations. However, the SYS-GMM estimator might generate moment conditions proli…cally
with the instrument count quadratic in the time dimension of the panel. To avoid instrument proliferation, we only use 2- and
3-year lags of the instrumented variables as instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced equation and the 1-year lag of the …rst-di¤erenced
instrumented variables as instruments in the original equation. The use of past levels and di¤erences of inputs as instruments
for current inputs can be theoretically justi…ed through adjustment costs generating dependence of current input levels on past
realizations of productivity shocks (see Bond and Söderbom, 2005).
  1 4 We opt to report both the Sargan and the Hansen statistics after the two-step estimations since the Sargan tests do not

depend on an estimate of the optimal weighting matrix and are hence not so vulnerable to instrument proliferation. On the
other hand, they require homoskedastic errors for consistency which is not likely to be the case. As documented by Andersen
and Sørensen (1996) and Bowsher (2002), instrument proliferation might weaken the Hansen test of instrument validity to the
point where it generates implausibly good p-values (see Roodman, 2009 for a discussion).


                                                                9
(ii) generating more e¢ cient estimates by using the cross-equation correlation and an optimal weighting
matrix accounting for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity and (iii) allowing for straightforward testing
of overidenti…cation restrictions. As usually done, we approximate the unobserved productivity shock by a
third-order polynomial in material costs and capital.

Besides the simultaneity bias, other methodological issues emerge when estimating microeconomic production
functions, most notably omitted price bias, selection bias/endogeneity of attrition and measurement error.
To deal with these methodological issues, several estimators have been proposed.15 Like most researchers,
we do not observe …rm-level price indices. As noted in the previous section, we de‡ate …rm-level nominal
sales and input expenditures by an industry price index. If …rms face downward-sloping demands, a negative
correlation might arise between …rm-level price deviations (from the average price index) and input choices.
As a result, the production function estimates of the variable inputs could be biased downward. De Loecker
(2011) implements the correction for the omitted output price bias developed by Klette and Griliches (1996)
(KG for short) in the OP estimation algorithm.16 ; 17 Relaxing the KG assumption of equal demand elasticities
across …rms within industries and allowing for di¤erentiated products in both output and inputs markets,
Katayama et al. (2009) propose a –more ‡exible but less straightforward in terms of practical implementation–
nonparametric Bayesian approach to resolve the omitted (output and input) price bias.18 The omitted price
bias might work in the opposite direction than the simultaneity bias, making any prior on the net direction
of the bias di¢ cult.

Intuitively, the selection bias arises because a …rm decides on the allocation of inputs in a particular period
conditional on its survival. A …rm’s knowledge about its productivity level (! it ) prior to making exit decisions
generates a negative correlation between ! it and kit conditional on continuing since a …rm with a higher
capital level will ceteris paribus be able to withstand a lower ! it without exiting (Ackerberg et al., 2007). As
a result, our capital coe¢ cient could be biased downward. We argue, however, that this bias is mitigated
by using unbalanced panels which take entry and exit implicitly into account. The OP estimation algorithm
takes explicitly both the endogeneity and the selection problem into account.

The presence of measurement error (errors-in-variables or errors-in-regressors) causes biased and inconsistent
parameter estimates. As shown by Griliches and Hausman (1986) and Wansbeek (2001), panel data allow
correction for measurement error without assuming a known measurement error covariance matrix or using
  1 5 We  opt to give some intuition on the possible direction of these biases rather than discussing these estimators at length
or evaluating the sensitivity of microeconomic production function estimates to these estimators. For a descriptive overview of
these issues, we refer to Van Beveren (2012).
  1 6 In the case of imperfectly competitive output markets, controlling for …rm-level unobserved output prices controls at least

partly for …rm-level unobserved input prices since higher input prices will be passed through a higher output price (De Loecker,
2011).
  1 7 Crépon et al. (2005) implement the Klette and Griliches (1996) solution in a simpli…ed version of our framework. Other

studies related to the omitted price bias include Dunne and Roberts (1992), Griliches and Mairesse (1998), Melitz (2001),
Mairesse and Jaumandreu (2005), Jaumandreu and Mairesse (2006), Levinsohn and Melitz (2006), Foster et al. (2008) and
Syverson (2011).
  1 8 Other studies resolving the omitted input and output price bias by exploiting …rm-level variation in output and input prices

are Eslava et al. (2004) and Ornaghi (2006, 2008).




                                                               10
additional validation/replication data to estimate the measurement error covariance matrix.19

Finally, our production function estimates could be biased by the presence of adjustment costs in inputs. In
particular, assuming that labor and materials are variable input factors free of adjustment costs (i.e. decided at
production time when ! it is observed by the …rm) could generate an upward bias in the respective production
function coe¢ cients.20 However, by estimating average production function coe¢ cients, we argue that this
e¤ect should be limited. Note that although our estimation method might wash out …rm-level di¤erences in
adjustment costs which are temporary in nature, country- and industry-level di¤erences in adjustment costs
which are permanent/structural in nature might still remain.21

It is clear that the methodologies discussed above are based on di¤erent statistical and economic assumptions.
Since we are primarily interested in retrieving consistent production function coe¢ cients based on three
di¤erent micro datasets rather than an accurate measure of productivity, we judge the SYS-GMM estimator
to be the most appropriate one among the four selected estimators. We put forward the following arguments.
First, the SYS-GMM estimator generates consistent estimates incorporating …rm …xed e¤ects ( i ). Second,
following the structural estimation approach building on an inverse productivity function, the W-LP estimator
relies on a larger set of assumptions regarding input demand equations, such as strict monotonicity and scalar
unobservable assumptions. Third, there is an e¢ ciency gain from using the SYS-GMM estimator rather than
an instrumental variables (IV ) estimation using GMM. The SYS-GMM estimator allows the projection on
the instruments to be di¤erent for every year whereas the W-LP estimator constrains it to be the same. This
di¤erent method for constructing instruments drives the di¤erence in number of observations between the
SYS-GMM and W-LP estimation samples. Applying the W-LP estimator results in a loss of 36%-50% of
our observations.22

For illustrative purposes, we assume homogeneity of the production technology across all …rms. Table B.2 in
Appendix B presents the estimates of production function coe¢ cients, scale elasticity and product and labor
market imperfection parameters at the manufacturing level for the four selected estimators. Focusing …rst on
the technology parameter estimates (b  "NQ , b
                                             "MQ
                                                 and b
                                                     "KQ
                                                         ), we observe the following systematic patterns across
countries which are in line with prior expectations. The OLS estimate of the labor coe¢ cient is the highest
  1 9 Xiao et al. (2010) unify Griliches and Hausman’s and Wansbeek’s methods by showing that both methods are asymptotically
equivalent and computationally similar.
  2 0 Investigating the direction of this bias on all production function coe¢ cients would require resorting to a dynamic speci…-

cation of …rm productivity changes (which is beyond the scope of our analysis) or data on capacity utilization or working hours
(which are not available in our datasets). Bond and Van Reenen (2007) survey recent microeconometric studies on investment
and employment using …rm-level or plant-level data, thereby focusing on the adjustment processes for both capital and labor.
  2 1 Cahuc and Zylberberg (2004) point out that high …ring costs tend to raise wages (if the workers are already employed)

because …rms will face the costs when the workers separate from …rms. As …ring costs are higher in F R than in JP (OECD,
2004), the reservation wage –for workers who have already been employed– will be systematically higher in F R than in JP ,
which could raise the elasticity of output with respect to labor in F R compared to JP . We consider investigating this issue as
an interesting avenue for future research but beyond the scope of this paper.
  2 2 More speci…cally, to obtain the SYS-GMM estimates, we follow the literature and use the “xtabond 2”-routine in Stata,

which performs two-step e¢ cient GMM estimation using Holtz-Eakin et al. (1988)-type of instruments. The W-LP estimator is
programmed with a single line of code in Stata (made available on Amil Petrin’s website) and implements an IV using textbook
two-step e¢ cient GMM. In contrast to the xtabond2-routine, there is no building of Holtz-Eakin et al. (1988)-instruments as
such.



                                                               11
among all estimators. This is consistent with an upward bias in OLS estimates due to the transmission
problem. The SYS-GMM estimator yields the highest estimate for the material input coe¢ cient while the
largest capital coe¢ cient estimate is found using the W-LP estimator. Note that the capital coe¢ cient
estimates using the W-LP estimator are far too large, especially for JP and N L. One potential reason could
be that this estimator is based on a set of assumptions regarding input demand equations that do not …t
the data very well in these countries. For JP and N L, we …nd the lowest capital coe¢ cient estimate when
accounting for …rm-level …xed e¤ects while ignoring any further impact of heterogeneous productivity shocks
(FE estimator). This downward bias in the capital coe¢ cient might re‡ect that measurement error in the
capital variable a¤ects the capital coe¢ cient more severely in the within transformation where a large share
of variability is taken out of the data. Consequently, decreasing returns to scale are found when applying the
FE estimator.

How do variation in technology parameter estimates a¤ect the joint market imperfection parameter estimate
( b ) which determines the prevalent regime? Irrespective of the selected estimator, we infer from b that the
IC-EB-regime applies at the manufacturing level in F R and JP . This regime stability is not con…rmed for
N L, which is due to a combination of relatively narrowly dispersed labor coe¢ cient estimates and relatively
widely dispersed material input coe¢ cient estimates across estimators.

Focusing on our preferred estimator (SYS-GMM ), we …nd that the three countries are characterized by
IC-EB at the manufacturing level. The price-cost mark-up is estimated at 1:229 in F R, 1:184 in JP and
1:277 in N L. The absolute extent rent of rent-sharing is estimated at 0:598 in F R, 0:672 in JP and 0:693
in N L. We …nd decreasing returns to scale in F R while no evidence against constant returns to scale in JP
and N L. A crucial assumption of the validity of GMM is that the instruments are exogenous. The Sargan
and Hansen statistics test the joint validity of the moment conditions (identifying restrictions). For the
three countries, both tests indicate that the null of exogeneity is rejected, thus rendering our instrumentation
strategy invalid. As the Hansen test evaluates the entire set of overidentifying restrictions/instruments,
it is particularly important to test the validity of subsets of instruments (levels and di¤erenced) via the
di¤erence-in-Hansen tests. For JP , the di¤erence-in-Hansen tests suggest that the 2- and 3-year lags of the
inputs as instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced equation may be to blame (exogeneity rejected)23 while the use
of 1-year lagged …rst-di¤erenced inputs as instruments in the levels equation does not prove informative for
N L. While the Hansen test is usually considered as a test of instrument validity, it can also be thought of
as a test of structural speci…cation (Baum, 2006; Roodman, 2009). When the functional form of a model
does not match the phenomenon it aims to describe or when important explanatory variables are missing,
components of variation could be moved into the error term and make them correlated with the instruments.
As our manufacturing samples contain heterogeneous …rms from di¤erent industries, this problem might
arise by imposing common slopes for the industries. If input choice is correlated with unobserved …rm-
level production technology di¤erences, this unaccounted heterogeneity might further introduce a bias in the
production function coe¢ cients. Following the tradition in the empirical industrial organization literature,
these arguments greatly motivate our analysis at the industry level.
 2 3 Note   however the implausibly perfect p-value of 1.000 of Dif-Hansen (lev).




                                                                12
6     Classi…cation procedure
This section focuses on the cornerstone of our analysis, i.e. the classi…cation of comparable manufacturing
industries in distinct regimes that di¤er in terms of the type of competition prevailing in product and labor
markets in each country. First, we elucidate the econometric implementation and perform two classi…cation
procedures –one based on point estimates of our parameters only and the other based on con…dence intervals
around estimated parameters–using our preferred SYS-GMM estimator. Second, we evaluate the sensitivity
of both classi…cation procedures to the four widely adopted estimators that we discussed in the previous
section.


6.1    Econometric implementation
Eq. (6) shows that the di¤erences between the estimated output elasticities of labor and materials and their
revenue shares are key to empirical identi…cation of the product and labor market imperfection parameters.

Essential is that the test for the prevalent LM S assumes that …rms take the price of materials as given. In a
perfectly competitive labor market or in a right-to-manage bargaining setting, the only source of discrepancy
between the estimated output elasticity of labor and the share of labor costs in revenue is the …rm price-cost
mark-up, just like in the materials market [Eq. (3)]. Therefore, the di¤erence in the two factors’ output-
elasticity-to-revenue-share ratios, i.e. the parameter of joint market imperfections, equals zero [Eq. (7)].

In an e¢ cient bargaining setting, the marginal employee receives a wage that exceeds his/her marginal revenue
since e¢ cient bargaining allocates inframarginal gains across employees. As such, the output-elasticity-to-
revenue-share ratio for labor becomes smaller, and smaller than the respective ratio for materials in particular.
Hence, there is a positive di¤erence between the materials and labor ratios, i.e. the parameter of joint market
imperfections is positive [Eq. (8)].

In a monopsony setting, on the other hand, the marginal employee obtains a wage that is less than his/her
marginal revenue. As such, the output-elasticity-to-revenue-share ratio for labor exceeds the respective ratio
for materials, yielding the negative parameter of joint market imperfections [Eq. (9)].

Depending on the LM S, it follows from the parameter of joint market imperfections that the di¤erences
between the estimated output elasticities of labor and materials and their revenue shares can be mapped into
either the …rm price-cost mark-up and the extent of rent sharing [Eq. (8)] or the …rm price-cost mark-up and
the …rm labor supply elasticity [Eq. (9)].

Since our study aims at (i) comparing regime di¤erences in terms of the type of competition prevailing in
product and labor markets across F R, JP and N L and (ii) assessing within-regime industry di¤erences in
the estimated product and labor market imperfection parameters and the scale elasticity parameters in each
of the countries, we estimate average parameters. There are many sources of variation in input shares. Some
of them are related to variation in labor adjustment costs, machinery and capacity utilization, i.e. variation
over the business cycle. When deriving our parameters of interest, we want to abstract from such sources of



                                                       13
variation. Therefore, we assume average input shares. The empirical speci…cation that acts as the bedrock
for the regressions at the industry level is hence given by:

                     qit =   [   N   (nit      kit ) +     M   (mit    kit )] +   N   (kit   nit ) + kit +   it                   (13)

The estimated industry-speci…c joint market imperfections parameter b j determines the regime charac-
terizing the type of competition prevailing in the product and the labor market. A priori, 6 distinct regimes
are possible: (1 ) perfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage
bargaining in the labor market, (2 ) imperfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or
right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market, (3 ) perfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient
bargaining in the labor market, (4 ) imperfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in
the labor market, (5 ) perfect competition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market and (6 )
imperfect competition in the product market and monopsony in the labor market. We denote the 6 possible
regimes by R 2 < = fP C-P R; IC-P R; P C-EB; IC-EB; P C-M O; IC-M Og, where the …rst part re‡ects the
type of competition in the product market and the second part re‡ects the type of competition in the labor
market. Once the regime is determined, we derive the product and labor market imperfection parameters
from the estimated joint market imperfections parameter.

In each country, we consider 30 comparable manufacturing industries, making up our estimation sample. This
decomposition is detailed enough for our purpose and ensures that each industry contains a su¢ cient number
of observations (minimum: 342 observations). Table B.3 in Appendix B presents the industry repartition of
the estimation sample and the number of …rms and the number of observations by industry and country. For
each industry j 2 f1; : : : ; 30g, we estimate a standard Cobb-Douglas production function [Eq. (13)] using the
SYS-GMM estimator.

On pragmatic grounds, we consider that de…ning perfect competition in both product and labor markets as
respectively implying j = 1 and j = 0 is unrealistic. We prefer to distinguish between nearly perfectly (or
weakly imperfectly) competitive product markets as H10 : j        j0 against imperfectly competitive product
markets as H1a : j > j0 , and similarly nearly perfectly (or weakly imperfectly) competitive labor markets as
H20 : j j j j j0 j against imperfectly competitive labor markets as H2a : j j j > j j0 j. The di¢ cult problem
is to …nd sensible values for both threshold values j0 and j0 that are the same for the three countries.
Note that we could have chosen to make such distinction between perfectly and imperfectly competitive labor
markets in terms of bj and b  "N
                               w    –instead of in terms of b j –which makes more direct economic sense but
                                        j
would have added a number of complications. In particular, bj and b
                                                                  "N
                                                                   w                               do not only depend on      j   and
                                                                                               j

 j   but also on the input shares (         N )j   and (   M )j   and the output elasticities "Q
                                                                                               N           and "Q
                                                                                                                M       . Then, they
                                                                                                       j            j
would have to be di¤erent across countries and across industries as well as di¤erent for e¢ cient bargaining
and monopsony. After some considerations, we have chosen j0 = 1:10 and j j0 j = j0:30j as reasonable values
for our comparison. Table B.4 in Appendix B motivates the “data-dependent” choice of j0:30j for j j0 j. It
shows that when we choose a common threshold of j0:30j for j j0 j, the average and median values of industry-
speci…c labor market imperfection parameters are economically meaningful for the three countries. Remark
that if we apply the classi…cation procedure of Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013), which has the advantage of


                                                                      14
not relying on data-dependent threshold values24 but does not consider a comparison across countries, we
…nd that –consistent with our results– the dominant labor market setting is EB in F R and P R in JP and
N L.

We apply two classi…cation procedures. Classi…cation procedure 1 is based on point estimates of our para-
meters only and classi…cation 2 is based on con…dence intervals around estimated parameters.

1) Classi…cation procedure 1, on which we comment below, is summarized as follows:

   Classi…cation procedure 1:                          Null hypothesis
   Hypothesis test                                      not rejected
                   (   "Q
                        M j )
   H10 :    j   1 =(       M )j
                                    1      0:10 and
                    "Q            "Q
                                                       R = P C -P R
                (     )
                     M j     (      )
                                   N j
   H20 :     j= (   M )j     (     N )j
                                              j0:30j
                      ("Q
                        M )j
   H10 :    j   1 =(       M )j
                                    1 > 0:10 and
                    "Q            "Q
                                                        R = IC -P R
                (     )
                     M j     (      )
                                   N j
   H20 :     j= (   M )j     (     N )j
                                              j0:30j
                      ("Q
                        M )j
   H10 :    j   1 =(       M )j
                                    1      0:10 and
                    "Q            "Q
                                                       R = P C -EB
                (     )
                     M j     (      )
                                   N j
   H20 :     j= (   M )j     (     N )j
                                          > 0:30
                      ("Q
                        M )j
   H10 :    j   1 =(       M )j
                                    1 > 0:10 and
                    "Q            "Q
                                                        R = IC -EB
                (     )
                     M j     (      )
                                   N j
   H20 :     j= (   M )j     (     N )j
                                          > 0:30
                      ("Q
                        M )j
   H10 :    j   1 =(       M )j
                                    1      0:10 and
                    "Q            "Q
                                                       R = P C -M O
                (     )
                     M j     (      )
                                   N j
   H20 :     j= (   M )j     (     N )j
                                          <    0:30
                      ("Q
                        M)    j
   H10 :    j   1 =(       M )j
                                    1 > 0:10 and
                                                       R = IC -M O
                ("Q
                  M )j       ( "Q
                                N )j
   H20 :     j= ( M)         (     N )j
                                          <    0:30
                       j




Classi…cation 1 is entirely based on the point estimates of the price-cost mark-up j and the joint market
imperfections parameter j . For example, if our null hypothesis is that imperfect competition in the product
market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market feature the industry, we perform the following test:
H10 : j 1 > 0:10 and H20 : j > 0:30. The test rejects that the IC-EB-regime applies if either H10
or H20 is rejected. By construction, this procedure does not take into account the precision of the estimates
but has the advantage of entailing a complete classi…cation.
 2 4 This classi…cation proceduree consists of two parts. In the …rst part, we perform an F -test of the joint hypothesis H0 :
   j   1  =   j = 0, where the alternative is that at least one of the parameters does not equal zero. The …rst part allows to
select industries belonging to the P C-P R-regime. In the second part, we test a 2-dimensional hypothesis by conducting two
separate t-tests to classify the remaining industries in one of the 5 other regimes.


                                                                15
Table 2 summarizes the resulting industry classi…cation. Columns 3-5 in Table B.5 in Appendix B provide
details on the speci…c industries belonging to each regime according to classi…cation 1. Focusing on the
product market side, more than 86% of the industries comprising more than 95% of the …rms are typi…ed
by imperfect competition in F R and N L whilst this does only hold for 47% of the industries comprising
44% of the …rms in JP . On the labor market side, 43% of the industries comprising 68% of the …rms are
characterized by e¢ cient bargaining, 43% of the industries comprising 27% of the …rms by perfect competition
or right-to-manage bargaining and monopsony features only 13% of the industries comprising 5% of the …rms
in F R. In JP , 70% of the industries comprising 67% of the …rms are characterized by perfect competition
or right-to-manage bargaining and 30% of the industries comprising 33% of the …rms e¢ cient bargaining.
Strikingly, none of the industries is characterized by monopsony. In N L, the three labor market settings are
evenly distributed: 33% of the industries comprising 38% of the …rms are characterized by perfect competition
or right-to-manage bargaining, 33% of the industries comprising 36% of the …rms by e¢ cient bargaining and
33% of the industries comprising 26% of the …rms by monopsony.

Taken together, the predominant regimes in F R are IC-EB, IC-P R, P C-P R and IC-M O:

     IC-EB-regime: 43% of the industries comprising 68% of the …rms,

     IC-P R-regime: 33% of the industries comprising 22% of the …rms,

     P C-P R-regime: 10% of the industries comprising 5% of the …rms and

     IC-M O-regime: 10% of the industries comprising 4% of the …rms.

In JP , the predominant regimes are P C-P R, IC-P R, P C-EB and IC-EB:

     P C-P R-regime: 37% of the industries comprising 42% of the …rms,

     IC-P R-regime: 33% of the industries comprising 25% of the …rms,

     P C-EB-regime: 17% of the industries comprising 14% of the …rms and

     IC-EB-regime: 13% of the industries comprising 19% of the …rms.

In N L, the predominant regimes are IC-P R, IC-EB and IC-M O:

     IC-P R-regime: 30% of the industries comprising 37% of the …rms,

     IC-EB-regime: 33% of the industries comprising 36% of the …rms and

     IC-M O-regime: 27% of the industries comprising 22% of the …rms.

                                        <Insert Table 2 about here>




                                                     16
2) Classi…cation procedure 2, on which we comment below, is summarized as follows:

                                                                      Statistical
   Classi…cation procedure 2:                                                             Null hypothesis not rejected
                                                                      signi…cance level
   Hypothesis test for product market setting (P M S)
  P C is null: H10 :   j 1 0:10 against H1a : j 1 > 0:10                     5%                  PMS = PC
  IC is null: H10 :   j 1 > 0:10 against H1a :   j  1 0:10                   5%                  P M S = IC
   Hypothesis test for EB -labor market setting (LM S)
  P R is null: H10 :   j   0:30 against H1a : j > 0:30                       5%                  LM S = P R
  EB is null: H10 :    j > 0:30 against H1a : j   0:30                       5%                  LM S = EB
   Hypothesis test for M O -labor market setting (LM S)
  P R is null: H10 :   j        0:30 against H1a :    j   <   0:30           5%                  LM S = P R
  M O is null: H10 :       j<    0:30 against H1a :   j        0:30          5%                  LM S = M O


Classi…cation procedure 2 is based on con…dence intervals around estimated parameters. To determine the
relevant product/labor market setting, we consider two a priori null hypotheses. Focusing on the product
market side, choosing IC as the null hypothesis can be interpreted as believing more strongly in (some degree
of) imperfect competition, whilst the opposite is true when choosing P C as the null hypothesis. The choice
of two a priori null hypotheses allows the characterization of three types of industries. In particular, industry
j

     is characterized to be highly imperfectly competitive or far from perfectly competitive, denoted by IC ,
     if P M S = IC under both null hypotheses.

     is characterized to be weakly imperfectly competitive or nearly perfectly competitive, denoted by P C ,
     if P M S = P C under both null hypotheses.

     belongs to the overlapping category, denoted by mover, if the P M S-type is di¤erent under both null
     hypotheses.

Focusing on the labor market side, choosing EB=M O as the null hypothesis can be interpreted as believing
more strongly that the marginal employee receives a wage that di¤ers from his/her marginal revenue, whilst
choosing P R as the null hypothesis supports more the belief that the marginal employee receives a wage
equal to his/her marginal revenue. The choice of two a priori null hypotheses allows the characterization of
four types of industries. In particular, industry j

     is most likely to be characterized by e¢ cient bargaining, denoted by EB , if LM S = EB under both
     null hypotheses.

     is most likely to be characterized by monopsony, denoted by M O , if LM S = M O under both null
     hypotheses.

     is most likely to be characterized by perfect competition/right-to-manage bargaining, denoted by P R ,
     if LM S = P R under both null hypotheses.

                                                               17
     belongs to the overlapping category, denoted by mover, if the LM S-type is di¤erent under both null
     hypotheses.

Table 3a reports the three types of industries on the product market side and the four types of industries on
the labor market side. Table 3b summarizes the resulting –incomplete–industry classi…cation. Table B.5 in
Appendix B provides details on (i) the characterization of the speci…c industries (columns 6-8 on the product
market side, columns 9-11 on the labor market side) and (ii) the speci…c industries belonging to a particular
regime (columns 12-14).

Let us …rst focus the discussion on the product market side. A large proportion of industries is characterized
to be highly imperfectly competitive in F R and N L: 67% of the industries comprising 84% of the …rms in
the former and 73% of the industries comprising 89% of the …rms in the latter. In contrast, 20% of the
industries comprising 18% of the …rms are typi…ed to be nearly perfectly competitive in JP . In N L and
F R, only about one fourth of the industries making up about one tenth of the …rms are typi…ed as movers
whereas 57% of the industries comprising 57% of the …rms belong to the overlapping category in JP .

On the labor market side, the majority of industries comprising the majority of …rms are typi…ed as movers
in JP and N L. In F R, this holds for 47% of the industries making up 44% of the …rms. In F R, 30% of
the industries comprising 57% of the …rms are most likely to be characterized by e¢ cient bargaining whereas
the remaining 23% of industries comprising 9% of the …rms are most likely to be characterized by perfect
competition/right-to-manage bargaining. In N L and JP , about 30% of the industries making up more than
34% of the …rms are typi…ed as P R -industries whereas only a relatively small proportion –13% (3%) of the
industries comprising 14% (8%) of the …rms in JP (N L)–are characterized as EB -industries.

                                       <Insert Table 3a about here>

Whereas classi…cation procedure 2 provides a more statistically correct characterization of industries, it
entails an incomplete classi…cation. From Table 3b, it follows that 43% (20%) of the industries comprising
63% (40%) of the …rms can be classi…ed in one of the six regimes in F R (N L) whereas this is only true for
17% of the industries making up 20% of the …rms in JP . The dominant regime is

     IC -EB in F R, covering 30% of the industries comprising 57% of the …rms,

     P C -P R in JP , covering 10% of the industries comprising 10% of the …rms and

     IC -P R in N L, covering 13% of the industries comprising 31% of the …rms.

                                       <Insert Table 3b about here>

Summing up, irrespective of the classi…cation procedure, we observe considerable di¤erences in the prevalent
product and labor market settings and hence in the prevalent regimes across countries. The proportion of
industries (and …rms) that is characterized by imperfect competition in the product market is much higher
in F R and N L than in JP . The most prevalent labor market setting is e¢ cient bargaining in F R and
perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in JP and N L. As such, the dominant regime is one
of imperfect competition in the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market in F R, one

                                                     18
of perfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the
labor market in JP and one of imperfect competition in the product market and perfect competition or
right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market in N L. These di¤erences in labor market settings are largely
consistent with di¤erences in the industrial relations system and in institutions in the three countries (see
Section 2). The predominant EB-labor market setting in F R is compatible with industry-based unionism and
high collective bargaining coverage in F R and with the fact that French trade unions have proven to be quite
powerful. The predominant P R-labor market setting in JP matches with the prevalence of enterprise-based
unionism which stimulates cooperative behavior.25 ;26

Does the …nding of important regime di¤erences across the three countries imply that manufacturing indus-
tries in the three countries di¤er considerably in the type of competition prevailing in product and labor
markets? To answer that question, we compare the relevant regime of each industry j 2 f1; : : : ; 30g across
the three countries. To ensure a complete classi…cation, we base the comparison on classi…cation procedure
1. From columns 3-5 in Table B.5 in Appendix B, it follows that ten industries are characterized by the
same product market setting in each of the three countries. Industries manufacturing textiles, furniture,
chemicals, pharmaceuticals, metals, other metal products, electronic parts and components, other transport
equipment, precision instruments and miscellaneous manufacturing products are characterized by imperfect
competition. Six industries are typi…ed by the same labor market setting in each of the three countries.
Industries manufacturing miscellaneous chemical products, plastics, general industrial machinery and other
electrical machinery are characterized by perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining whilst industries
manufacturing miscellaneous food and related products and wooden products are characterized by e¢ cient
bargaining. As discussed in Section 2, several studies –including OECD studies– report the degree of prod-
uct and labor market regulation at the country level. Our …nding that the same manufacturing industry is
mostly characterized by di¤erent product and labor market settings in the three countries, however, calls for
an approach to construct such a regulation index at the country-industry level rather than at the country
level.


6.2     Sensitivity of classi…cation to estimation methods
How sensitive are the revealed product and labor market settings and regimes to the choice of estimator? As a
sensitivity check, we take our preferred estimator (SYS-GMM ) as the benchmark and compare systematically
each of the three other estimators (OLS, FE and W-LP ) to this benchmark. Tables 4 and 5 summarize this
sensitivity check by reporting the proportion of industries belonging to the same product market setting/labor
market setting/regime according to each pair of estimators for classi…cation 1 and classi…cation 2 respectively.

  2 5 Applying the classi…cation procedure of Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013), we …nd that –consistent with classi…cation proce-

dures 1 and 2– the dominant regime is IC-EB in F R and IC-P R in N L. In JP , the dominant regime is found to be IC-P R.
Details on this classi…cation procedure are not reported but available upon request.
  2 6 A more rigorous analysis of the relationship between regime di¤erences and di¤erences in terms of (legal) institutions

and industrial relations across the three countries would necessitate …rm-level information on e.g. the skill composition of the
workforce, the degree of unionization, the nature of innovation activities, the export/import status and sales or even plant-level
information on prices and product characteristics. Besides lacking this type of information in our current datasets, we consider
addressing/testing empirically these relationships as a worthy subject for future research but beyond the scope of this paper.




                                                               19
From Table 4, it follows that for the three countries, the lowest match in terms of P M S results from comparing
the SYS-GMM and W-LP estimators whilst the highest match is obtained by comparing the SYS-GMM and
OLS estimators. The proportion of industries belonging to the same P M S lies in the [67%-83%]-range for
F R, the [50%-63%]-range for JP and the [37%-90%]-range for N L. The match in terms of LM S across
estimators is driven by the matched P R-industries. Consistent with the product market side, we observe the
lowest match in terms of LM S by comparing the SYS-GMM and W-LP estimators in the three countries
whilst the highest match by comparing the SYS-GMM and FE estimators in F R and by comparing the
SYS-GMM and OLS estimators in JP and N L. The proportion of industries belonging to the same LM S
lies in the [27%-77%]-range for F R, the [57%-70%]-range for JP and the [37%-73%]-range for N L. For the
three countries, the lowest match in terms of regime (requiring a match in terms of the product market
as well as the labor market setting) results from comparing the SYS-GMM and W-LP estimators whilst
the highest match is obtained by comparing the SYS-GMM and OLS estimators for F R and N L and the
SYS-GMM and FE estimators for JP . The proportion of industries belonging to the same regime lies in the
[20%-37%]-range for F R, the [27%-43%]-range for JP and the [23%-67%]-range for N L.

                                               <Insert Table 4 about here>

To design Table 5, we select the industries that (i) do not belong to the overlapping categories of either the
product or the labor market side using the SYS-GMM estimator (see Table 3a) and determine the proportion
of industries belonging to either the same product market setting (P C or IC ) or the same labor market
setting (P R , EB or M O ) according to each pair of estimators and (ii) can be classi…ed in one of the six
regimes (see Table 3b) and determine the proportion of industries belonging to the same regime according to
each pair of estimators.27 Focusing on the product market side, the match in terms of P M S is qualitatively
the same as for classi…cation 1. In quantitative terms, the match between SYS-GMM and W-LP is much
lower for the three countries compared to classi…cation 1. Focusing on the labor market side, we observe the
lowest match in terms of LM S by comparing the SYS-GMM and W-LP estimators in the three countries
(which is consistent with classi…cation 1) whilst the highest match by comparing the SYS-GMM and OLS
estimators for F R and N L and the SYS-GMM and FE estimators for JP . In quantitative terms, the match
between SYS-GMM and W-LP is much lower for JP but higher for F R and N L compared to classi…cation 1.
The proportion of industries belonging to the same LM S lies in the [44%-56%]-range for F R, the [8%-77%]-
range for JP and the [60%-90%]-range for N L. The match in terms of regime is quantitatively close to the one
for classi…cation 1 in F R. The lowest match results from comparing the SYS-GMM and FE results and the
highest match from comparing the SYS-GMM and OLS results. Consistent with classi…cation 1, the lowest
match in terms of regime is obtained by comparing the SYS-GMM and W-LP estimators for JP and N L.28
For these two countries, the highest match results from comparing the SYS-GMM and FE results. The latter
match is signi…cantly higher than the one for classi…cation 1. The proportion of industries belonging to the
same regime lies in the [31%-46%]-range for F R, the [0%-60%]-range for JP and the [0%-83%]-range for N L.
  2 7 For example, focusing on the product market side in F R, we determine the proportion of P C - and IC -industries (22

in total, see Table 3a) belonging to the same P M S. Comparing the SYS-GMM with the OLS results, about 73% of these
22 industries match in terms of product market setting: 68% are characterized as IC -industries according to both estimators
whilst 5% are characterized as P C -industries.
  2 8 Note, however, that in contrast to classi…cation 1, none of the industries is characterized by the same regime in these two

countries.



                                                               20
                                                                                  <Insert Table 5 about here>


7           Within-regime industry di¤erences in parameters of interest
To what extent do manufacturing industries within a particular regime di¤er in the degree of imperfections in
the product and labor markets in which they operate? To address that question, we condition our answer on
classi…cation 1 and investigate industry di¤erences in the estimated industry-speci…c scale elasticity parameter
bj , joint market imperfections parameter b , and corresponding price-cost mark-up b and absolute extent
                                             j                                           j
of rent-sharing  b  or labor supply elasticity b" N
                                                       parameters within each of the predominant regimes in
                                  j                                                              w
                                                                                                         j
F R, JP and N L.

Table 6 presents the industry mean and the industry quartile values of the SYS-GMM results within the
predominant regimes in each country. The left part of Table 6 reports the estimated scale elasticity parameter,
the middle part the estimated joint market imperfections parameter and the right part the relevant product
and labor market imperfection parameters, i.e. the price-cost mark-up within P C-P R and IC-P R, the price-
cost mark-up and the extent of rent sharing within P C-EB and IC-EB, and the price-cost mark-up and the
labor supply elasticity within IC-M O. We also present the industry-speci…c pro…t ratio parameter, which
can be expressed as the estimated industry-speci…c price-cost mark-up divided by the estimated industry-
speci…c scale elasticity bb . This ratio shows that the source of pro…t lies either in imperfect competition
                                                           j
or decreasing returns to scale. The standard errors ( ) of bj , bj , bj , b j and b
                                                                                  "N
                                                                                   w                                                                                                are computed using the
                                                                                                                                                                                j
                                                                       29
Delta method (Wooldridge, 2002). All industry-speci…c estimates are presented in Table B.6 in Appendix
B.30 , 31 In addition to the parameters reported in Table 6, Table B.6 also reports the computed factor shares
                                                                                                                                    Q                  Q            Q   N                                            Q
                                                                                                                                   b
                                                                                                                                   "M                 b
                                                                                                                                                      "N        b
                                                                                                                                                                "M                                                   b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "M
                                                                                                                                                                                                  b
  2 9 Dropping             subscript j, b, b, b, b and b
                                                       "N
                                                        w are derived as follows: b =                                                   ;b=             Q
                                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                    ,b=          1+b
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ;   b=      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q    and
                                                                                                                                    M                 b
                                                                                                                                                      "
                                                                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 M   b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "N
                                                                                                                                                            ( N+ M          1)
                                                                                                                                                        M
                b
"N
bw =                b.   Their respective standard errors are computed as:
            1
                                                                                                                             !2                                 !                           !2
                                                                                                     Q       2                      Q Q                                 Q   2
                                              2                                                      b
                                                                                                     "M                  Q          "N b
                                                                                                                                   2b  "M             Q; Q      + b
                                                                                                                                                                  "N                    Q
        2                  1                                   2                M
                                                                                             2                       b
                                                                                                                     "
                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                  b
                                                                                                                                                  "     b
                                                                                                                                                        "
                                                                                                                                                      N M
                                                                                                                                                                                    b
                                                                                                                                                                                    "
                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2       (    b   )2
    b           =        ( M )2
                                      Q           ;        b       =                                                                                  4                                          ,       b       =   (1+b )4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ,
                                      b
                                      "M                                      N+ M       1                                                   Q
                                                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                                                             "M
                                                          !2                         !                               !2
                                  Q       2                        Q Q                       Q       2
                                  b
                                  "M                  Q
                                                                "N b
                                                               2b  "M         Q; Q    + b
                                                                                        "N                       Q                                              2
        2                     2                   b
                                                  "                           b
                                                                              " b
                                                                                "
                                                                              N M
                                                                                                             b
                                                                                                             "
                                                                                                                 M
                                                                                                                                             2              b
                          N                           N
    b       =                                                            Q    4                                              and        "N
                                                                                                                                        b         =          b )4 .
                          M                                              b
                                                                         "N                                                              w             (1
  3 0 Forreasons of completeness, Table B.6 also provides detailed information on the SYS-GMM estimates of the industries
which are classi…ed in the non-predominant regimes in the three countries, i.e. the P C-P R- and P C-M O-regimes in F R and
the P C-M O- and P C-P R-regimes in N L.
  3 1 As mentioned above, the Hansen statistic tests the joint validity of the moment conditions (identifying restrictions).

In 20 out of the 30 industries in F R, in 15 out of the 30 industries in JP and in 2 out of the 30 industries in N L,
the null hypothesis of joint validity of instruments is rejected. For 15 out of these 20 industries in F R (more speci…cally
ind. j = 1; 2; 4; 5; 6; 7; 9; 14; 15; 17; 19; 20; 21; 22; 26), the di¤erence-in-Hansen tests reject the exogeneity of the 1-year lagged
…rst-di¤erenced inputs as instruments in the levels equation whereas the validity of the 2- and 3-year lags of the inputs as
instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced equation is not rejected. Looking in detail at the di¤erence-in-Hansen tests for these 15
industries in JP reveals a more complex pattern: For 6 industries (ind. j = 2; 9; 15; 19; 25; 26) the di¤erence-in-Hansen tests
reject the exogeneity of both the 1-year lagged …rst-di¤erenced inputs as instruments in the levels equation and the 2-year lags
of the inputs as instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced equation, for 5 industries (ind. j = 13; 14; 16; 22; 27) the validity of the 1-year
lagged …rst-di¤erenced inputs as instruments in the levels equation is rejected and for industry 8 the use of 3-year lags of the



                                                                                                             21
and the output elasticity estimates. In Table B.6, industries within the P C-P R- and IC-P R-regimes are
ranked according to bj . Within the P C-EB- and IC-EB-regimes, we rank industries in increasing order of
b . Within the P C-M O- and IC-M O-regimes, industries are ranked according to b .
 j                                                                                j


Let us focus the discussion on the primary parameters within the predominant regimes in F R, JP and N L
respectively. The predominant regimes in F R are IC-EB (43% of industries/68% of …rms), IC-P R (33%
of industries/22% of …rms), P C-P R (10% of industries/5% of …rms) and IC-M O (10% of industries/4% of
…rms).

      Within regime R = IC-EB in F R, bj is lower than 0.944 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
      than 0.993 for industries in the third quartile. b j is lower than 0.539 for industries in the …rst quartile
      and higher than 0.642 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than 1.308 for
      the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.390 for the top quartile. The corresponding bj is lower
      than 0.373 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 0.466 for the top quartile. The median
      values of bj , b j , bj and bj are estimated at 0.955, 0.555, 1.339 and 0.428 respectively.

      Within regime R = IC-P R in F R, bj is lower than 0.981 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
      than 1.016 for industries in the third quartile. bj is lower than 1.171 for industries in the …rst quartile
      and higher than 1.272 for industries in the upper quartile. The median values of bj and bj are estimated
      at 1.006 and 1.225 respectively.

      Within regime R = P C-P R in F R, bj is lower than 0.939 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
      than 0.981 for industries in the third quartile. bj is lower than 0.892 for industries in the …rst quartile
      and higher than 1.092 for industries in the upper quartile. The median values of bj and bj are estimated
      at 0.953 and 1.034 respectively.

      Within regime R = IC-M O in F R, bj is lower than 1.015 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
      than 1.059 for industries in the third quartile. b j is lower than -0.624 for industries in the …rst quartile
      and higher than -0.418 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than 1.130 for
                                                                                                    "N
      the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.207 for the top quartile. The corresponding bw                              is
                                                                                                                                j
      estimated to be lower than 1.883 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than 2.700 for industries
      in the upper quartile. The median values of bj , b j , bj and b
                                                                    "N
                                                                     w     are estimated at 1.045, -0.542, 1.176
                                                                                      j
      and 2.226 respectively.

The predominant regimes in JP are P C-P R (37% of industries/42% of …rms), IC-P R (33% of industries/25%
of …rms), P C-EB (17% of industries/14% of …rms) and IC-EB (13% of industries/19% of …rms).

      Within regime R = P C-P R in JP , bj is lower than 1.031 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
      than 1.069 for industries in the third quartile. bj is lower than 1.037 for industries in the …rst quartile
      and higher than 1.092 for industries in the upper quartile. The median values of bj and bj are estimated
      at 1.037 and 1.066 respectively.
inputs as instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced equation does not prove informative. As for N L, the di¤erence-in-Hansen tests
reject the null of the subset of instruments in the levels equation for industry 2 whereas the validity of 2-year lags of the inputs
as instruments in the …rst-di¤erenced equation is rejected for industry 18.


                                                                22
     Within regime R = IC-P R in JP , bj is lower than 1.025 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
     than 1.056 for industries in the third quartile. bj is lower than 1.127 for industries in the …rst quartile
     and higher than 1.182 for industries in the upper quartile. The median values of bj and bj are estimated
     at 1.029 and 1.135 respectively.

     Within regime R = P C-EB in JP , bj is lower than 1.003 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
     than 1.014 for industries in the third quartile. b j is lower than 0.347 for industries in the …rst quartile
     and higher than 0.438 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than 1.067
     for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.087 for the top quartile. The corresponding bj is
     estimated to be lower than 0.449 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than 0.499 for industries
     in the upper quartile. The median values of bj , b j , bj and bj are estimated at 1.007, 0.357, 1.080 and
     0.458 respectively.

     Within R = IC-EB in JP , bj is lower than 1.014 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than
     1.028 for industries in the third quartile. b j is lower than 0.437 for industries in the …rst quartile and
     higher than 0.474 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than 1.162 for the
     …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.193 for the top quartile. The corresponding bj is estimated
     to be lower than 0.405 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than 0.513 for industries in the
     upper quartile. The median values of bj , b j , bj and bj are estimated at 1.024, 0.446, 1.177 and 0.450
     respectively.

The predominant regimes in N L are IC-P R (30% of industries/37% of …rms), IC-EB (33% of industries/36%
of …rms) and IC-M O (27% of industries/22% of …rms).

     Within regime R = IC-P R in N L, bj is lower than 1.014 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher
     than 1.033 for industries in the third quartile. bj is lower than 1.309 for industries in the …rst quartile
     and higher than 1.368 for industries in the upper quartile. The median values of bj and bj are estimated
     at 1.024 and 1.339 respectively.

     Within R = IC-EB in N L, bj is lower than 0.983 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than
     1.046 for industries in the third quartile. b j is lower than 0.422 for industries in the …rst quartile and
     higher than 0.571 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than 1.364 for the
     …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.506 for the top quartile. The corresponding bj is estimated
     to be lower than 0.389 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than 0.480 for industries in the
     upper quartile. The median values of bj , b j , bj and bj are estimated at 1.011, 0.498, 1.400 and 0.436
     respectively.

     Within R = IC-M O in N L, bj is lower than 1.020 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than
     1.130 for industries in the third quartile. b j is lower than -0.819 for industries in the …rst quartile and
     higher than -0.415 for industries in the third quartile. The corresponding bj is lower than 1.159 for
                                                                                                   "N
     the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.336 for the top quartile. The corresponding bw            is
                                                                                                             j
     estimated to be lower than 1.556 for industries in the …rst quartile and higher than 3.115 for industries
     in the upper quartile. The median values of bj , b j , bj and b
                                                                   "N
                                                                    w     are estimated at 1.047, -0.574, 1.229
                                                                         j
     and 2.220 respectively.

                                                      23
                                        <Insert Table 6 about here>

Summing up, we observe important regime di¤erences across the three countries and also …nd di¤erences in
the levels of scale elasticities and product market imperfections within a regime. The levels of labor market
imperfections appear to be quite similar across countries within a regime. Within the IC-P R-regime in F R,
JP and N L, the median scale elasticity estimates are comparable across JP and N L and higher than in
F R. The median price-cost mark-up is estimated to be the lowest in JP and the highest in N L. The same
pattern can be observed within the IC-EB-regime in F R, JP and N L whilst the median absolute extent of
rent sharing is estimated to be fairly similar across the three countries. Within the IC-M O-regime in F R
and N L, the median scale elasticity and the median labor supply elasticity estimates are quite similar whilst
the median price-cost mark-up is estimated to be the highest in N L.

How do our estimates of product and labor market imperfections match up with other studies focusing on the
same countries? Our industry classi…cation 1 and the order of magnitudes of our joint market imperfections
parameter and corresponding product and labor market imperfection parameters within each regime are
consistent with the classi…cation and parameter estimates of Dobbelaere and Mairesse (2013). The latter
study uses an unbalanced panel of 10,646 French …rms in 30 manufacturing industries over the period 1978-
2001 extracted from EAE and assumes constant returns to scale. Using an unbalanced panel of more than
8,000 Japanese …rms in 26 manufacturing industries over the period 1994-2006 extracted from the BSJBSA
and imposing LM S = P R on the data, Kiyota (2010) estimates the scale elasticity parameter to be lower
than 0.868 for the bottom quartile of industries and higher than 0.930 for the top quartile. The price-cost
mark-up is estimated to be lower than 0.940 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 0.993 for
the upper quartile. Using an unbalanced panel of 2,471 Dutch …rms in 11 manufacturing industries over the
period 1992-1997 extracted from the Amadeus database, assuming constant returns to scale and imposing
LM S = P R on the data, Konings et al. (2001) …nd that the price-cost mark-up is lower than 1.460 for the
…rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.790 for the upper quartile.

As mentioned above, other studies focusing on the same kind of analysis include Dobbelaere (2004) and
Boulhol et al. (2011). Using an unbalanced panel of 7,086 Belgian …rms in 18 manufacturing industries
over the period 1988-1995 extracted from the annual company accounts collected by the National Bank of
Belgium and imposing LM S = EB on the data, the former estimates the scale elasticity parameter to be
lower than 1.000 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 1.171 for the upper quartile. The price-
cost mark-up is estimated to be lower than 1.347 for the bottom quartile of industries and higher than 1.629
for the top quartile. The corresponding absolute extent of rent-sharing estimate is lower than 0.134 for the
…rst quartile of industries and higher than 0.221 for the third quartile. Using a panel of 11,799 British …rms
in 20 manufacturing industries over the period 1988-2003 extracted from OneSource and Financial Analysis
Made Easy, assuming constant returns to scale and imposing LM S = EB on the data, Boulhol et al. (2011)
estimate the price-cost mark-up to be lower than 1.212 for the bottom quartile of industries and higher than
1.292 for the top quartile. The corresponding absolute extent of rent sharing is estimated to be lower than
0.189 for the …rst quartile of industries and higher than 0.544 for the upper quartile. Whereas there is an
abundant literature on estimating the extent of product market power (see Bresnahan, 1989 for a survey and
De Loecker and Warzynski, 2012 for references), there is less direct evidence of employer market power over its


                                                      24
workers. For studies estimating the wage elasticity of the labor supply curve facing an individual employer,
we refer to Reynolds (1946), Nelson (1973), Sullivan (1989), Boal (1995), Falch (2001), Manning (2003),
Staiger et al. (2010) and Booth and Katic (2011). These studies point to an elasticity in the [0:7-5]-range.


8    Conclusion
It is generally believed that market imperfections are the norm, not the exception. The theory of market
failures is widely used as an analytical tool for making policy choices. In practice, the case for public policy
interventions must start with the identi…cation and quanti…cation of market imperfections, which is at the
core of our study. In particular, this paper examines how actual product and labor markets deviate from
their perfectly competitive or economically e¢ cient counterparts and focuses on manufacturing industries in
France, Japan and the Netherlands. How di¤erent are manufacturing industries in their factor shares, in their
marginal products, in their scale economies and in their imperfections in the product and labor markets in
which they operate? How does their behavior deviate across countries? In order to analyze these non-trivial
questions, we rely on two extensions of Hall’s (1988) econometric framework for estimating price-cost margins
and scale economies by nesting three distinct labor market settings (perfect competition or right-to-manage
bargaining, e¢ cient bargaining and monopsony).

Using an unbalanced panel of 17,653 …rms over the period 1986-2001 in France, 8,728 …rms over the pe-
riod 1994-2006 in Japan and 7,828 …rms over the period 1993-2008 in the Netherlands, we …rst apply two
procedures to determine the prevalent product market and labor market settings, and hence the prevalent
regime, in 30 comparable manufacturing industries. We then investigate industry di¤erences in the estimated
product and labor market imperfection parameters within the predominant regimes in each country.

Institutions, social norms and the nature of industrial relations vary signi…cantly between our selected coun-
tries. Along with lifetime employment, seniority wages and bonuses, enterprise-based unionism is at the core
of Japanese industrial relations. Being concerned with ensuring job security for regular employees, the system
is conducive to cooperative behavior. Contrary to Japan, industry-based unionism is prevalent in France and
the Netherlands. In France, there are rival trade union confederations competing for membership, causing the
French trade union movement to be among the weakest in the OECD countries (only about 8% of employees
in unions) while trade union density is close to the OECD average in Japan and the Netherlands (20%).
Collective bargaining coverage is very high in France and the Netherlands (95% and 85% respectively) while
very low in Japan (16%).

These di¤erences in the industrial relations system in the three countries are re‡ected in our results. Indeed,
irrespective of the classi…cation procedure, our analysis provides evidence of pronounced regime di¤erences
across France, Japan and the Netherlands. The dominant regime in France is one of imperfect competition in
the product market and e¢ cient bargaining in the labor market (IC-EB). The median pro…t ratio –de…ned as
the price-cost mark-up divided by the scale elasticity–and absolute extent of rent-sharing parameters in the
IC-EB-industries are of 1.40 and 0.43 respectively. In Japan, the dominant regime is perfect competition
in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market (P C-
P R), with a median pro…t ratio of about 1.00. The dominant regime in the Netherlands is one of imperfect

                                                      25
competition in the product market and perfect competition or right-to-manage bargaining in the labor market
(IC-P R ), with a median pro…t ratio of about 1.31. Our study does not only highlight cross-country regime
di¤erences, it also reveals cross-country di¤erences in the levels of product market imperfections and scale
economies within a particular regime.

Our analysis can be pursued in several directions, either to explain some of our …ndings or to examine some
new developments. First, given that our study reveals important cross-country regime di¤erences and cross-
country di¤erences in terms of product and labor market settings for given manufacturing industries, one
obvious research avenue is to examine the potential relationship between regime di¤erences and di¤erences
in terms of (legal) institutions and industrial relations across the three countries using …rm-level information
on e.g. the skill composition of the workforce, the nature of innovation activities, and export and import
transactions. Second, our gap methodology identi…es regimes by comparing di¤erences between the esti-
mated average output elasticities of labor and materials and their average revenue shares. A more rigorous
identi…cation strategy could be based on bootstrap hypothesis testing. Third, a natural extension of our
production function framework is to take into account worker heterogeneity by building on the method of
Hellerstein et al. (1999) and to investigate whether our product and labor market imperfection parameters
vary by skill type. Finally, extending our analysis from a static to a dynamic framework might enable us
to investigate the impact of country- and industry-level adjustment costs which are structural/permanent in
nature on the prevalence of di¤erent product and labor market settings.


References
 [1] Ackerberg D, Caves K, Frazer G. 2006. Structural identi…cation of production functions. Unpublished
     manuscript.

 [2] Ackerberg D, Benkard L, Berry S, Pakes A. 2007. Econometric tools for analyzing market outcomes. In
     Handbook of Econometrics, vol. 6, Heckman JJ. (ed). Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 [3] Arellano M, Bond SR. 1991. Some tests of speci…cation for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an
     application to employment equations. Review of Economic studies. 58(2): 277-297.

 [4] Arellano M, Bover O. 1995. Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of error-components
     models. Journal of Econometric 68(1): 29-51.

 [5] Baum FC. 2006. An introduction to modern econometrics using Stata. Texas: Stata Press.

 [6] Bellone F, Kiyota K, Matsuura T, Musso P, Nesta L. 2014. 70: 56-74.

 [7] Bhaskar V, Manning A, To T. 2002. Oligopsony and monopsonistic competition in labor markets. Journal
     of Economic Perspectives 16(2): 155-174.

 [8] Bhaskar V, To T. 1999. Minimum wages for Ronald McDonald monopsonies: A theory of monopsonistic
     competition. Economic Journal 109(455): 190-203.

 [9] Blundell RW, Bond SR. 1998. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models.
     Journal of Econometrics 87(1): 115-143.

                                                      26
[10] Blundell RW, Bond SR. 2000. GMM estimation with persistent panel data: An application to production
     functions. Econometric Reviews 19(3): 321-340.

[11] Boal WM. 1995. Testing for employer monopsony in turn-of-the-century coal mining. RAND Journal of
     Economics 26(3): 519-536.

[12] Boal WM, Ransom MR. 1997. Monopsony in the labor market. Journal of Economic Literature 35(1):
     86-112.

[13] Bond SR, Söderbom M. 2005. Adjustment costs and the identi…cation of Cobb-Douglas production
     functions. Nu¢ eld College Economics Working Paper 2005-04.

[14] Bond SR, Van Reenen J. 2007. Microeconometric models of investment and employment. In Handbook
     of Econometrics, vol. 6A, Heckman JJ, Leamer EE (eds). North-Holland: Amsterdam.

[15] Booth AL, Katic P. 2011. Estimating the wage elasticity of labour supply to a …rm: What evidence is
     there for monopsony? Economic Record 87(278): 359-369.

[16] Booth A. 2014. Wage determination and imperfect competition. Labour Economics, Special Issue -
     European Association of Labour Economists 25th Annual Conference, forthcoming.

[17] Boulhol H, Dobbelaere S, Maioli S. 2011. Imports as product and labour market discipline. British
     Journal of Industrial Relations 49(2): 331-361.

[18] Bowsher CG. 2002. On testing overidentifying restrictions in dynamic panel data models. Economics
     Letters 77(2): 211-220.

[19] Bresnahan T. 1989. Empirical studies of industries with market power. In Handbook of Industrial Orga-
     nization, vol. 2, Schmalensee R, Willig R (eds). North-Holland: Amsterdam.

[20] Burdett K, Mortensen D. 1998. Wage di¤erentials, employer size and unemployment. International
     Economic Review 39(2): 257-273.

[21] Cahuc P, Zylberberg A. 2004. Labor Economics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[22] Crépon B, Desplatz R, Mairesse J. 2005. Price-cost margins and rent sharing: Evidence from a panel
     of French manufacturing …rms. Annales d’Economie et de Statistique, Special issue in memory of Zvi
     Griliches 79/80: 585-611.

[23] Del Gatto M, Di Liberto A, Petraglia C. 2011. Measuring productivity. Journal of Economic Surveys
     25(5): 952-1008.

[24] De Loecker J. 2011. Product di¤erentiation, multi-product …rms and estimating the impact of trade
     liberalization on productivity. Econometrica 79(5): 1407-1451.

[25] De Loecker J, Warzynski F. 2012. Markups and …rm-level export status. American Economic Review
     102(6): 2437-2471.



                                                   27
[26] Dobbelaere S. 2004. Estimation of price-cost margins and union bargaining power for Belgian manufac-
     turing. International Journal of Industrial Organization 22(10): 1381-1398.

[27] Dobbelaere S, Mairesse J. 2013. Panel data estimates of the production function and product and labor
     market imperfections. Journal of Applied Econometrics 28(1): 1-46.

[28] Doraszelski U, Jaumandreu J. 2013. R&D and productivity: Estimating endogenous productivity. Review
     of Economic Studies 80(4): 1338-1383.

[29] Dunne T, Roberts MJ. 1992. Costs, demand and imperfect competition as determinants of plant level
     output prices. In Empirical studies in industrial organization: Essays in honor of Leonard W. Weiss,
     Audretsch DB, Siegfried JJ. (eds). Kluwer Aacademic Publishers: Boston

[30] Eberhardt M, Helmer C. 2010. Untested assumptions and data slicing: A critical review of …rm-level
     production function estimators. Department of Economics Discussion Paper 513. University of Oxford.

[31] Eslava M, Haltiwanger J, Kugler A, Kugler M. 2004. The e¤ects of structural reforms on productivity
     and pro…tability enhancing reallocation: Evidence from Colombia. Journal of Development Economics
     75(2): 333-371.

[32] Falch T. 2001. Decentralized public sector wage determination: Wage curve and wage comparison for
     Norwegian teachers in the pre-WW2 period. Labour 15(3): 343-369.

[33] Foster L, Haltiwanger J, Syverson C. 2008. Reallocation, …rm turnover, and e¢ ciency: Selection on
     productivity or pro…tability? American Economic Review 98(1): 394-425.

[34] Fukao K, Hamagata S, Inui T, Ito K, Kwon HU, Makino T, Miyagawa T, Nakanishi Y, Tokui J. 2007.
     Estimation procedures and TFP analysis of the JIP database 2006. RIETI Discussion Paper 07-E-003.
     Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.

[35] Fukao K, Kwon HU. 2006. Why did Japan’s TFP growth slow down in the lost decade? An empirical
     analysis based on …rm-level data of manufacturing. Japanese Economic Review 57(2): 195-228.

[36] Griliches Z, Hausman JA. 1986. Errors in variables in panel data. Journal of Econometrics 31(1):
     93-118.

[37] Griliches Z, Mairesse J. 1998. Production functions: The search for identi…cation. In Essays in honour
     of Ragnar Frisch, Econometric Society Monograph Series. Strom S (ed). Cambridge University Press:
     Cambridge.

[38] Hall RE. 1988. The relationship between price and marginal cost in US industry. Journal of Political
     Economy 96(5): 921-947.

[39] Hellerstein JK, David N, Troske KR. 1999. Wages, productivity and worker characteristics: Evidence
     from plant-level production function and wage equations. Journal of Labor Economics 17(3): 409-446.

[40] Holtz-Eakin D, Newey W, Rosen HS. 1988. Estimating Vector Autoregressions with panel data. Econo-
     metrica 56(6): 1371-1395.

                                                    28
[41] Hsieh CT, Klenow P. 2009. Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and India. Quarterly Journal
     of Economics 124(4): 1403-1448.

[42] Jaumandreu J, Mairesse J. 2006. Using price and demand information to identify production functions.
     MPRA Discussion Paper 1247.

[43] Katayama H, Lu S, Tybout JR. 2009. Firm-level productivity studies: Illusions and a solution. Interna-
     tional Journal of Industrial Organization 27(3): 403-413.

[44] Kiyota K. 2010. Productivity, markup, scale economies, and the business cycle: Estimates from …rm-
     level panel data in Japan. RIETI Discussion Paper 10-E-040. Research Institute of Economy, Trade and
     Industry.

[45] Kioyta K, Nakajima T, Nishimura KG. 2009. Measurement of the market power of …rms: the Japanese
     case in the 1990s, Industrial and Corporate Change 18(3): 381-414.

[46] Kleiman MAR, Teles SM. 2008. Market and non-market failures. In Oxford handbook of public policy,
     Moran M, Rein M, Goodin RE (eds). Oxford University Press: Oxford.

[47] Klette TJ, Griliches Z. 1996. The inconsistency of common scale estimators when output prices are
     unobserved and endogenous. Journal of Applied Econometrics 11(4): 343-361.

[48] Konings J, Van Cayseele P, Warzynski F. 2001. The dynamics of industrial mark-ups in two small open
     economies: Does national competition policy matter? International Journal of Industrial Organization
     19(5): 841-859.

[49] Koske I, Wanner I, Bitetti R, Barbiero O. 2014. The 2013 update of the OECD product market regulation
     indicators: Policy insights for OECD and non-OECD countries, OECD Economics Department Working
     Papers, forthcoming.

[50] Levinsohn J, Melitz MJ. 2006. Productivity in a di¤erentiated products market equilibrium. Unpublished
     manuscript. Princeton University.

[51] Levinsohn J, Petrin A. 2003. Estimating production functions using inputs to control for unobservables.
     Review of Economic Studies 70(2): 317-341.

[52] Mairesse J. 1990. Time-series and cross-sectional estimates on panel data: Why are they di¤erent and
     why should they be equal? In Panel data and labor market studies. Hartog J, Ridder G, Theeuwes J
     (eds). North-Holland: Amsterdam.

[53] Mairesse J, Jaumandreu J. 2005. Panel-data estimates of the production function and the revenue func-
     tion: What di¤erence does it make? Scandinavian Journal of Economics 107(4): 651-672.

[54] Manning A. 2003. Monopsony in motion: Imperfect competition in labor markets. Princeton University
     Press: Princeton.

[55] Marschak J, Andrews WH. 1944. Random simultaneous equations and the theory of production. Econo-
     metrica 12(3-4): 143-205.

                                                    29
[56] McDonald IM, Solow RM. 1981. Wage bargaining and employment. American Economic Review 71(5):
     896-908.

[57] Melitz M. 2001. Estimating …rm-level productivity in di¤erentiated product industries. Unpublished
     manuscript. Harvard University.

[58] Nelson P. 1973. The elasticity of labor supply to the individual …rm. Econometrica 41(5): 853-866.

[59] Nickell SJ, Andrews M. 1983. Unions, real wages and employment in Britain 1951-79. Oxford Economic
     Papers 35(supplement): 183-205.

[60] Noda T, Hirano D. 2013. Enterprise unions and downsizing in Japan before and after 1997. Journal of
     the Japanese and International Economies 28(C): 91-118.

[61] OECD. 2004. OECD Employment Outlook. Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.

[62] Olley S, Pakes A. 1996. The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry.
     Econometrica 64(6): 1263-1295.

[63] Ornaghi C. 2006. Assessing the e¤ects of measurement errors on the estimation of production functions.
     Journal of Applied Econometrics 21(6): 879-891.

[64] Ornaghi C. 2008. Price de‡ators and the estimation of the production function. Economics Letters 99(1):
     168-171.

[65] Petrin A, Sivadasan J. 2013. Estimating lost output from allocative e¢ ciency, with an application to
     Chile and …ring costs. Review of Economics and Statistics 95(1): 286-301.

[66] Research and Statistics Department, Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). 1994-2006. Ki-
     gyou Katsudou Kihon Chousa Houkokusho (Basic Survey of Japanese Business Structure and Activities).
     METI: Tokyo.

[67] Restuccia D, Rogerson R. 2008. Policy distortions and aggregate productivity within heterogeneous
     establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics 11(4): 707-720.

[68] Restuccia D, Rogerson R. 2013. Misallocation and productivity. Review of Economic Dynamics 16(1):
     1-10.

[69] Reynolds L. 1946. The supply of labor to the …rm. Quarterly Journal of Economics 60(2): 390-411.

[70] Roodman DM. 2009. A note on the theme of too many instruments. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
     Statistics 71(1): 135-158.

[71] Shea J. 1993. The input-output approach to instrument selection. Journal of Business and Economic
     Statistics 11(2): 145-155.

[72] Staiger D, Spetz J, Phibbs C. 2010. Is there monopsony in the labor market? Evidence from a natural
     experiment. Journal of Labor Economics 28(2): 211-236.



                                                    30
[73] Sullivan D. 1989. Monopsony power in the market for nurses. Journal of Law and Economics 32(2):
     S135-S178.

[74] Syverson C. 2004. Market structure and productivity: A concrete example. Journal of Political Economy
     112(6): 1181-1222.

[75] Syverson C. 2011. What determines productivity? Journal of Economic Literature 49(2): 326-65.

[76] Tokui J, Inui T, Kim YG. 2008. Embodied technological progress and productivity slowdown in Japan.
     RIETI Discussion Paper 08-E-017. Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry.

[77] Van Beveren I. 2012. Total factor productivity: A practical review.Journal of Economic Surveys 26(1):
     98-128.

[78] Van Biesebroeck J. 2007. Robustness of productivity estimates. Journal of Industrial Economics 55(3):
     529-569.

[79] Venn D. 2009. Legislation, collective bargaining and enforcement: Updating the OECD employment
     protection indicators. OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Paper 89. Organisation for
     Economic Cooperation and Development.

[80] Verret I. 2006. Collective employee representation systems in Japan and France. Unpublished manuscript.

[81] Wansbeek TJ. 2001. GMM estimation in panel data models with measurement error. Journal of Econo-
     metrics 104(2), 259-268.

[82] Weimer DL, Vining AR. 2005. Policy analysis: Concepts and practice. Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle
     River, New Jersey.

[83] Windmeijer F. 2005. A …nite sample correction for the variance of linear e¢ cient two-step GMM esti-
     mators. Journal of Econometrics 126(1): 25-51.

[84] Wöl‡A, Wanner I, Kozluk T, Nicoletti G. 2009. Ten years of product market reform in OECD countries:
     Insights from a revised PMR indicator. OECD Economics Department Working Paper 695. Organisation
     for Economic Cooperation and Development.

[85] Wöl‡ A, Wanner I, Röhn O, Nicoletti G. 2010. Product market regulation: Extending the analysis
     beyond OECD countries. OECD Economics Department Working Paper 799. Organisation for Economic
     Cooperation and Development.

[86] Wooldridge JM. 2002. Econometric analysis of cross sections and panel data. MIT Press: Cambridge,
     MA.

[87] Wooldridge JM. 2009. On estimating …rm-level production functions using proxy variables to control for
     unobservables. Economics Letters 104(3): 112-114.

[88] Xiao Z, Shao J, Palta M. 2010. Instrumental variable and GMM estimation for panel data with mea-
     surement error. Statistica Sinica 20(4): 1725-1747.



                                                    31
                          Table 1: Descriptive statistics by country
                                      FRANCE (1986-2001)
Variables                                       Mean   Sd.   Q1                    Q2            Q3      N
Real …rm output growth rate qit                 0.033 0.152 -0.050                 0.030        0.115    156,947
Labor growth rate nit                           0.014 0.128 -0.040                 0.000        0.066    156,947
Materials growth rate mit                       0.049 0.192 -0.054                 0.044        0.148    156,947
Capital growth rate kit                         0.008 0.156 -0.070                -0.013        0.074    156,947
( N )j ( nit     kit ) + ( M )j ( mit    kit )  0.022 0.148 -0.058                 0.024        0.102    156,947
( N )j ( kit     nit )                         -0.002 0.055 -0.028                -0.004        0.024    156,947
SRit                                            0.003 0.098 -0.052                 0.004        0.059    156,947
Labor share in nominal output ( N )i            0.309 0.130  0.217                 0.296        0.386    156,947
Materials share in nominal output ( M )i        0.502 0.143  0.413                 0.511        0.602    156,947
1 ( N )i ( M )i                                 0.188 0.087  0.130                 0.165        0.219    156,947
Number of employees Nit                         144   722    30                    46           99       156,947
                                       JAPAN (1994-2006)
Variables                                       Mean   Sd.   Q1                    Q2            Q3      N
Real …rm output growth rate qit                 0.020 0.140 -0.050                 0.015        0.085    75,067
Labor growth rate nit                          -0.003 0.096 -0.042                -0.005        0.034    75,067
Materials growth rate mit                       0.013 0.161 -0.065                 0.009        0.088    75,067
Capital growth rate kit                        -0.003 0.108 -0.071                -0.032        0.028    75,067
( N )j ( nit     kit ) + ( M )j ( mit    kit )  0.011 0.144 -0.058                 0.021        0.089    75,067
( N )j ( kit     nit )                          0.000 0.027 -0.015                -0.003        0.010    75,067
SRit                                            0.011 0.067 -0.022                 0.009        0.042    75,067
Labor share in nominal output ( N )i            0.199 0.088  0.139                 0.187        0.245    83,322
Materials share in nominal output ( M )i        0.714 0.105  0.657                 0.728        0.786    83,322
1 ( N )i ( M )i                                 0.087 0.048  0.054                 0.074        0.105    83,322
Number of employees Nit                         531   2,255  94                    160          340      83,322
                              THE NETHERLANDS (1993-2008)
Variables                                       Mean   Sd.   Q1                    Q2            Q3      N
Real …rm output growth rate qit                0.025  0.186 -0.063                 0.022        0.115    65,321
Labor growth rate nit                          0.004  0.127 -0.026                 0.000        0.034    65,321
Materials growth rate mit                      0.026  0.251 -0.088                 0.020        0.142    65,321
Capital growth rate kit                        0.016  0.227 -0.076                 0.000        0.114    65,321
( N )j ( nit     kit ) + ( M )j ( mit    kit ) 0.001  0.175 -0.077                -0.003        0.078    65,321
( N )j ( kit     nit )                         0.003  0.061 -0.023                 0.000        0.032    65,321
SRit                                           0.008  0.107 -0.043                 0.004        0.059    65,321
Labor share in nominal output ( N )i           0.275  0.109  0.200                 0.273        0.344    73,149
Materials share in nominal output ( M )i       0.447  0.147  0.349                 0.439        0.539    73,149
1 ( N )i ( M )i                                0.278  0.092  0.215                 0.272        0.332    73,149
Number of employees Nit                        105    472    27                    45           93       73,149
          Note: SRit =    qit   (   N )j   nit   (   M )j   mit   [1   (   N )j    (   M )j ]    kit .




                                                     32
                       Table 2: Industry classi…cation 1 by country
# ind.
prop. of ind. (%)                    LABOR MARKET SETTING
prop. of …rms (%)
PRODUCT MARKET              PR                     EB                        MO
SETTING             FR      JP      NL      FR     JP     NL      FR         JP    NL    FR     JP     NL
                        3      11      1       0      5   0              1   0      2       4     16      3
PC                   10:0    36:7    3:3       0   16:7   0            3:3   0    6:7    13:3   53:4   10:0
                      4:7    41:9    1:2       0   14:3   0            0:6   0    3:9     5:3   56:2    5:1
                      10      10        9     13      4     10           3   0       8     26     14     27
IC                  33:3    33:3    30:0    43:3   13:3   33:3        10:0   0    26:7   86:6   46:6   90:0
                    22:2    24:8    37:1    68:3   18:9   36:0         4:1   0    21:8   94:6   43:7   94:9
                      13      21      10      13      9     10           4   0      10     30    30     30
                    43:3    70:0    33:3    43:3   30:0   33:3        13:3   0    33:4    100   100    100
                    26:9    66:7    38:3    68:3   33:2   36:0         4:7   0    25:7    100   100    100




                                            33
       Table 3a: Product and labor market settings according to industry classi…cation 2 by country
                    PRODUCT MARKET SETTING                           FR      JP            NL
                    PC
                    # ind.                                             2      6          1
                    prop. of   ind. (%)                              6:7   20:0        3:3
                    prop. of   …rms (%)                              3:4   18:1        1:0
                    IC
                    # ind.                                            20      7         22
                    prop. of   ind. (%)                             66:7   23:3       73:3
                    prop. of   …rms (%)                             84:3   24:7       88:6
                    mover
                    # ind.                                             8     17          7
                    prop. of ind. (%)                               26:7   56:7       23:3
                    prop. of …rms (%)                               12:2   57:2       10:4
                    LABOR MARKET SETTING                             FR      JP            NL
                    PR
                    # ind.                                             7      9          9
                    prop. of   ind. (%)                             23:3   30:0       30:0
                    prop. of   …rms (%)                              9:3   34:7       39:8
                    EB
                    # ind.                                             9      4          1
                    prop. of   ind. (%)                             30:0   13:3        3:3
                    prop. of   …rms (%)                             56:9   14:4        7:9
                    MO
                    # ind.                                           0      0          0
                    prop. of   ind. (%)                              0      0          0
                    prop. of   …rms (%)                              0      0          0
                    mover
                    # ind.                                            14     17         20
                    prop. of   ind. (%)                             46:7   56:7       66:7
                    prop. of   …rms (%)                             33:8   50:8       52:3



                                 Table 3b: Industry classi…cation 2 by country
# ind.
prop. of ind. (%)                             LABOR MARKET SETTING
prop. of …rms (%)
PRODUCT MARKET                         PR                    EB                       MO
SETTING                        FR       JP   NL      FR       JP      NL    FR         JP        NL    FR      JP      NL
                                  2       3   1         0      1     0            0    0     0             2       4      1
PC                              6:7    10:0 3:3         0    3:3     0            0    0     0          6:7    13:3     3:3
                                3:4    10:0 1:0         0    1:5     0            0    0     0          3:4    11:5    1:0
                                   2    0    4           9      1      1          0    0     0            11      1        5
IC                               6:7    0 13:3        30:0    3:3    3:3          0    0     0         36:7     3:3    16:6
                                 2:3    0 30:9        56:9    7:7    7:9          0    0     0         59:2     7:7    38:8
                                  4       3     5        9      2      1          0    0     0           13        5        6
                               13:4    10:0 16:6      30:0    6:6    3:3          0    0     0        43:4     16:6     19:9
                                5:7    10:0 31:9      56:9    9:2    7:9          0    0     0        62:6     19:2     39:8




                                                      34
                    Table 4: Sensitivity of classi…cation 1 to estimation methods
                                       SYS-GMM - OLS           SYS-GMM - FE           SYS-GMM - W-LP
PRODUCT MARKET SETTING                  FR     JP      NL      FR      JP      NL      FR    JP     NL
PC
prop. of ind. (%)                        6:7    43:3    6:7     16:7    40:0    3:3   10:0   36:4   10:0
IC
prop. of ind. (%)                      76:7    20:0    83:3    50:0    23:3    73:3   56:7   13:3   26:7
T OT AL P M S
prop. of ind. (%)                      83:4    63:3    90:0    66:7    63:3    76:6   66:7   49:7   36:7
LABOR MARKET SETTING                    FR     JP      NL      FR      JP      NL      FR    JP     NL
PR
prop. of ind. (%)                      30:0    66:7    30:0    63:3    46:7    20:0   13:3   40:0    6:7
EB
prop. of ind. (%)                      10:0     3:3    13:3     6:7    16:7    10:0   10:0   16:7   10:0
MO
prop. of ind. (%)                       3:3     0:0    30:0     6:7     0:0    10:0    3:3   0:0    20:0
T OT AL LM S
prop. of ind. (%)                      43:3    70:0    73:3    76:7    63:4    40:0   26:6   56:7   36:7
REGIME                                  FR     JP      NL      FR      JP      NL      FR    JP     NL
prop. of ind. (%)                      36:7    40:0    66:7    26:7    43:3    36:7   20:0   26:7   23:3




                                                 35
                       Table 5: Sensitivity of classi…cation 2 to estimation methods
                                          SYS-GMM - OLS           SYS-GMM - FE            SYS-GMM - W-LP
PRODUCT MARKET SETTING                     FR      JP      NL     FR       JP      NL      FR     JP     NL
PC
prop. of ind. (%)                           4:6     38:5    4:4     9:1     38:5    0:0    9:1    15:4   4:3
IC
prop. of ind. (%)                          68:2     7:7    73:9    50:0     7:7    73:9    27:3    0:0   8:7
(P C + IC )
prop. of ind. (%)                         72:7     46:2    78:3   59:1     46:2    73:9   36:4    15:4   13:0
LABOR MARKET SETTING                       FR      JP      NL     FR       JP      NL      FR     JP     NL
PR
prop.   of ind. (%)                       37:5     30:8    90:0   37:5     46:2    80:0   18:8    7:7    60:0
EB
prop.   of ind. (%)                         18:8     0:0    0:0   12:5     30:8    10:0    25:0    0:0   0:0
MO
prop.   of ind. (%)                          0:0     0:0    0:0      0:0     0:0    0:0    0:0    0:0    0:0
(P R    + EB + M O )
prop.   of ind. (%)                       56:3     30:8    90:0   50:0     76:9    90:0   43:8    7:7    60:0
REGIME                                     FR      JP      NL     FR       JP      NL      FR     JP     NL
prop. of ind. (%)                         46:2     20:0    66:7   30:8     60:0    83:3    38:5    0:0   0:0




                                                     36
                  Table 6: Industry-speci…c scale elasticity parameter bj , joint market imperfections parameter b j ,
      and corresponding price-cost mark-up bj and absolute extent of rent sharing bj or labor supply elasticity b
                                                                                                                "N
                                                                                                                 w j by country


                                                              FRANCE
Regime     R = IC-EB                            bj             b                                       b                                   b
                                                                   j                 bj                b                 bj                    j
[43% of    industries, 68% of …rms]                                                                        j

Industry   mean                         0.964   (0.021)   0.599    (0.150)   1.352   (0.049)   1.403   (0.062)   0.762   (0.167)   0.423   (0.057)
Industry   Q1                           0.944   (0.019)   0.539    (0.124)   1.308   (0.042)   1.339   (0.054)   0.595   (0.127)   0.373   (0.041)
Industry   Q2                           0.955   (0.020)   0.555    (0.138)   1.339   (0.049)   1.400   (0.056)   0.749   (0.155)   0.428   (0.048)
Industry   Q3                           0.993   (0.021)   0.642    (0.156)   1.390   (0.052)   1.441   (0.073)   0.872   (0.213)   0.466   (0.081)
Regime     R = IC-P R                           bj             b                                       b
                                                                   j                 bj                b
[33% of    industries, 22% of …rms]                                                                        j

Industry   mean                         0.995   (0.030)    0.082   (0.234)   1.233   (0.079)   1.239   (0.089)
Industry   Q1                           0.981   (0.026)   -0.093   (0.208)   1.171   (0.065)   1.195   (0.074)
Industry   Q2                           1.006   (0.030)    0.134   (0.255)   1.225   (0.074)   1.225   (0.082)
Industry   Q3                           1.016   (0.034)    0.216   (0.266)   1.272   (0.096)   1.253   (0.113)
Regime     R = P C-P R                          bj             b                                       b
                                                                   j                 bj                b
[10% of    industries, 5% of …rms]                                                                         j

Industry   mean                         0.958   (0.030)   -0.229   (0.294)   1.006   (0.075)   1.050   (0.094)
Industry   Q1                           0.939   (0.023)   -0.287   (0.215)   0.892   (0.037)   0.936   (0.057)
Industry   Q2                           0.953   (0.025)   -0.202   (0.326)   1.034   (0.070)   1.101   (0.085)
Industry   Q3                           0.981   (0.042)   -0.197   (0.343)   1.092   (0.117)   1.113   (0.141)
Regime     R = IC-M O                           bj             b                                       b                 b
                                                                   j                 bj                b                     j         "N
                                                                                                                                       bw          j
[10% of    industries, 4% of …rms]                                                                         j

Industry   mean                         1.040   (0.024)   -0.528   (0.326)   1.171   (0.083)   1.127   (0.088)   0.691   (0.146)   2.270   (1.630)
Industry   Q1                           1.015   (0.021)   -0.624   (0.276)   1.130   (0.062)   1.081   (0.062)   0.653   (0.108)   1.883   (0.900)
Industry   Q2                           1.045   (0.022)   -0.542   (0.321)   1.176   (0.083)   1.110   (0.094)   0.690   (0.162)   2.226   (1.690)
Industry   Q3                           1.059   (0.028)   -0.418   (0.379)   1.207   (0.104)   1.190   (0.108)   0.730   (0.168)   2.700   (2.302)
                                                               JAPAN
Regime     R = P C-P R                          bj             b                                       b
                                                                   j                 bj                b
[37% of    industries, 42%   of …rms]                                                                      j

Industry   mean                         1.047   (0.021)   -0.109 (0.248)     1.058   (0.047)   1.011   (0.054)
Industry   Q1                           1.031   (0.016)   -0.283 (0.214)     1.037   (0.042)   0.967   (0.048)
Industry   Q2                           1.037   (0.018)   -0.136 (0.256)     1.066   (0.044)   0.995   (0.053)
Industry   Q3                           1.069   (0.027)    0.003 (0.278)     1.092   (0.055)   1.052   (0.064)
Regime     R = IC-P R                           bj             b                                       b
                                                                   j                 bj                b
[33% of    industries, 25%   of …rms]                                                                      j

Industry   mean                         1.034   (0.018)   0.134    (0.206)   1.148   (0.036)   1.111   (0.043)
Industry   Q1                           1.025   (0.016)   0.040    (0.159)   1.127   (0.029)   1.079   (0.037)
Industry   Q2                           1.029   (0.017)   0.113    (0.199)   1.135   (0.036)   1.107   (0.043)
Industry   Q3                           1.056   (0.021)   0.204    (0.238)   1.182   (0.041)   1.119   (0.049)
Regime     R = P C-EB                           bj             b                                       b                                   b
                                                                   j                 bj                b                 bj                    j
[17% of    industries, 14%   of …rms]                                                                      j

Industry   mean                         1.003   (0.017)   0.440    (0.220)   1.071   (0.035)   1.067   (0.039)   0.908   (0.469)   0.474   (0.134)
Industry   Q1                           1.003   (0.015)   0.347    (0.208)   1.067   (0.024)   1.059   (0.035)   0.815   (0.369)   0.449   (0.083)
Industry   Q2                           1.007   (0.015)   0.357    (0.245)   1.080   (0.034)   1.062   (0.041)   0.847   (0.489)   0.458   (0.143)
Industry   Q3                           1.014   (0.016)   0.438    (0.251)   1.087   (0.045)   1.080   (0.043)   0.997   (0.563)   0.499   (0.171)
Regime     R = IC-EB                            bj             b                                       b                                   b
                                                                   j                 bj                b                 bj                    j
[13% of    industries, 19%   of …rms]                                                                      j

Industry   mean                         1.021   (0.013)   0.455    (0.166)   1.177   (0.033)   1.153   (0.040)   0.869   (0.306)   0.459   (0.086)
Industry   Q1                           1.014   (0.011)   0.437    (0.138)   1.162   (0.025)   1.146   (0.030)   0.681   (0.223)   0.405   (0.069)
Industry   Q2                           1.024   (0.014)   0.446    (0.171)   1.177   (0.032)   1.152   (0.038)   0.827   (0.256)   0.450   (0.091)
Industry   Q3                           1.028   (0.015)   0.474    (0.194)   1.193   (0.041)   1.161   (0.050)   1.057   (0.388)   0.513   (0.103)




                                                                       37
            Table 6 (ctd): Industry-speci…c scale elasticity parameter bj , joint market imperfections parameter b j ,
   and corresponding price-cost mark-up bj and absolute extent of rent sharing bj or labor supply elasticity b
                                                                                                             "N
                                                                                                              w j by country


                                                     THE NETHERLANDS
Regime     R = IC-P R                           bj             b                                       b
                                                                   j                 bj                b
[30% of    industries, 37% of …rms]                                                                        j

Industry   mean                         1.026   (0.026)    0.083   (0.274)   1.342   (0.078)   1.308   (0.086)
Industry   Q1                           1.014   (0.015)   -0.010   (0.155)   1.309   (0.056)   1.281   (0.059)
Industry   Q2                           1.024   (0.017)    0.173   (0.235)   1.339   (0.064)   1.308   (0.076)
Industry   Q3                           1.033   (0.029)    0.189   (0.270)   1.368   (0.073)   1.335   (0.089)
Regime     R = IC-EB                            bj             b                                       b                                   b
                                                                   j                 bj                b                 bj                    j
[33% of    industries, 36% of …rms]                                                                        j

Industry   mean                         1.013   (0.034)   0.513    (0.320)   1.415   (0.092)   1.398   (0.111)   0.773   (0.153)   0.430   (0.047)
Industry   Q1                           0.983   (0.014)   0.422    (0.172)   1.364   (0.053)   1.328   (0.066)   0.636   (0.097)   0.389   (0.031)
Industry   Q2                           1.011   (0.027)   0.498    (0.227)   1.400   (0.081)   1.401   (0.101)   0.773   (0.120)   0.436   (0.036)
Industry   Q3                           1.046   (0.050)   0.571    (0.338)   1.506   (0.121)   1.476   (0.153)   0.922   (0.154)   0.480   (0.053)
Regime     R = IC-M O                           bj             b                                       b                 b
                                                                   j                 bj                b                     j         "N
                                                                                                                                       bw          j
[27% of    industries, 22% of …rms]                                                                        j

Industry   mean                         1.070   (0.051)   -0.814 (0.700)     1.262   (0.193)   1.180   (0.195)   0.651   (0.221)   2.271   (2.396)
Industry   Q1                           1.020   (0.018)   -0.819 (0.261)     1.159   (0.069)   1.058   (0.072)   0.606   (0.114)   1.556   (1.023)
Industry   Q2                           1.047   (0.039)   -0.574 (0513)      1.229   (0.172)   1.204   (0.174)   0.687   (0.177)   2.220   (1.943)
Industry   Q3                           1.130   (0.089)   -0.415 (1.114)     1.336   (0.285)   1.285   (0.284)   0.754   (0.304)   3.115   (3.098)

                                         Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                   38
Appendix A : Details of the theoretical framework and the estimation method

A.1 Theoretical framework

A.1.1 IC and perfectly comp. labor market/right-to-manage bargaining (IC-PR)

IC and perfectly competitive labor market

Let us start from the following speci…cation of the production function: qit = ("Q                  Q
                                                                                      N )it nit + ("M )it mit +
("Q
  K )it kit + it (Eq. (1) in the main text). Firms operate under imperfect competition in the product market
(IC) and act as price takers in the input markets. Assuming that material input and labor are variable input
factors, short-run pro…t maximization implies the following two …rst-order conditions:

                                                         ("Q
                                                           M )it =      it   (   M )it                                  (A.1)

                                                          ("Q
                                                            N )it =     it   (   N )it                                  (A.2)

Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) equal Eqs. (2) and (3) in the main text.

Assuming that the elasticity of scale,            it   = ("Q         Q         Q
                                                           N )it + ("M )it + ("K )it , is known, the capital elasticity can be
expressed as:
                                              ("Q
                                                K )it =        it      ("Q
                                                                         N )it       ("Q
                                                                                       M )it                            (A.3)

Inserting Eqs. (A.1), (A.2) and (A.3) in the production function and rearranging terms yields:

                        qit =   it   [(   N )it   (nit     kit ) + (    M )it    (mit    kit )] +   it kit   +   it     (A.4)



IC and right-to-manage (RTM) bargaining

Let us abstain from the assumption that labor is priced competitively. We assume that the workers and
the …rm bargain over wages (w) but that the …rm retains the right to set employment (N ) unilaterally af-
terwards (right-to-manage bargaining; Nickell and Andrews, 1983). Since, as in the perfectly competitive
labor market case, material input and labor are unilaterally determined by the …rm from pro…t maximiza-
tion [see Eqs. (A.1) and (A.2) respectively], the mark-up of price over marginal cost ( ) that follows from
Eq. (A.4) is not only consistent with the assumption that the labor market is perfectly competitive but also
with the less restrictive right-to-manage bargaining assumption.

A.1.2 IC and e¢ cient bargaining (IC-EB)

Firms operate under imperfect competition in the product market (IC). On the labor side, we assume that the
workers and the …rm bargain over wages (w) and employment (N ) (e¢ cient bargaining; McDonald and Solow,
1981). It is the objective of the workers to maximize U (wit ; Nit ) = Nit wit + (N it Nit )wit , where N it is the
competitive employment level (0 < Nit N it ) and wit wit the reservation wage. Consistent with capital


                                                                    39
quasi-…xity, it is the …rm’s objective to maximize its short-run pro…t function: it = Rit wit Nit jit Mit ,
where Rit = Pit Qit stands for total revenue. The outcome of the bargaining is the generalized Nash solution
to:
                                                                                        1
                    max     Nit wit + N it Nit wit N it wit it fRit wit Nit jit Mit g        it
                                                                                                       (A.5)
                          wit ; Nit ; Mit

where          it   2 [0; 1] represents the absolute extent of rent sharing.

Material input is unilaterally determined by the …rm from pro…t maximization, which directly leads to
Eq. (A.1).

Maximization with respect to the wage rate and labor respectively gives the following …rst-order conditions:

                                                                          Rit      wit Nit        jit Mit
                                                wit = wit +          it                                                                             (A.6)
                                                                                      Nit

                                                                          Rit      (RN )it Nit         jit Mit
                                            wit = (RN )it +          it                                                                             (A.7)
                                                                                        Nit
with      it   =     1
                         it
                               the relative extent of rent sharing and (RN )it the marginal revenue of labor.
                          it



Solving simultaneously Eqs. (A.6) and (A.7) leads to the following expression for the contract curve:

                                                                     (RN )it = wit                                                                  (A.8)

Eq. (A.8) shows that under risk neutrality, the …rm’s decision about employment equals the one of a (non-
bargaining) neoclassical …rm that maximizes its short-run pro…t at the reservation wage.

                                                                                                                                                      Pit
Denote the marginal revenue by (RQ )it and the marginal product of labor by (QN )it . Given that                                              it = (RQ )it

in equilibrium, we can express the marginal revenue of labor as (RN )it = (RQ )it (QN )it =                                          (RQ )it ("Q     Qit
                                                                                                                                               N )it Nit =
Pit (QN )it
         . Using this expression together with Eq. (A.8), the elasticity of output with respect to labor can
     it
be written as:
                                                  wit Nit
                                    ("Q
                                      N )it = it           = it ( N )it                                (A.9)
                                                  Pit Qit
Given that we can rewrite Eq. (A.6) as (                     N )it   =(    N )it   +    it   [1    (   N )it     (    M )it ],   Eq. (A.9) is equivalent
to Eq. (4) in the main text:

                                            ("Q
                                              N )it =   it   (   N )it     it it   [1    (    N )it     (   M )it ]                               (A.10)



A.1.3 IC and monopsony (IC-MO)

So far, we have assumed that there is a potentially in…nite supply of employees wanting a job in the …rm.
A small wage cut by the employer will result in the immediate resignation of all existing workers. However,
there are a number of reasons why labor supply might be less than perfectly elastic, creating rents to jobs.
Paramount among these are the absence of perfect information on alternative possible jobs (Burdett and
Mortensen, 1998), moving costs (Boal and Ransom, 1997) and heterogeneous worker preferences for job

                                                                           40
characteristics (Bhaskar and To, 1999; Bhaskar et al., 2002) on the supply side, and e¢ ciency wages with
diseconomies of scale in monitoring (Boal and Ransom, 1997) and entry costs on the part of competing …rms
on the demand side. All these factors give employers non-negligible market power over their workers.

Consider a …rm that operates under imperfect competition in the product market (IC) and faces a labor
supply Nit (wit ), which is an increasing function of the wage wit . Both Nit (wit ) and the inverse of this
relationship wit (Nit ) are referred to as the labor supply curve of the individual …rm. The monopsonist …rm’s
objective is to maximize its short-run pro…t function, taking the labor supply curve as given:

                           max        (wit ; Nit ; Mit ) = Rit (Nit ; Mit )      wit (Nit ) Nit   jit Mit             (A.11)
                          Nit ; Mit

Maximization with respect to material input directly leads to Eq. (A.1).

Maximization with respect to labor gives the following …rst-order condition:

                                                          wit =   it (RN )it                                          (A.12)
               ("N
                 w )it
where it =    1+("N
                      and ("N
                            w )it 2 <+ represents the wage elasticity of the labor supply. Rewriting Eq. (A.12)
                  w )it
gives the following expression for the elasticity of output with respect to labor (Eq. (5) in the main text):
                                                                                 1
                                              ("Q
                                                N )it =    it ( N )it   1+                                            (A.13)
                                                                               ("N
                                                                                 w )it




A.2 Consistent estimation of microeconomic production functions: Alternative
estimators

The recent literature on production function estimation is dominated by two econometric approaches that
di¤er in handling endogeneity of inputs and unobserved productivity in models linear in parameters. In-
tuitively, both approaches di¤er in the way they put assumptions on the economic environment that allow
econometricians to exploit lagged input decisions as instruments for current input choices. The parametric
generalized method of moments (GMM ) approach relies on instrumental variables (IV ). The semiparametric
structural control function (CF ) approach uses observed variables and economic theory to invert out produc-
tivity nonparametrically and hence to obtain an observable expression for productivity.1 In the main text,
we provide details on the GMM approach and its application in our framework. This section discusses (i)
the IV approach and (ii) the CF approach on which the Wooldridge-Levinsohn-Petrin estimator is based.

Following most of the literature, we are interested in estimating average production coe¢ cients of the pro-
duction function:
                                   qit = "Q        Q        Q
                                          N nit + "M mit + "K kit + ut + it                           (A.14)
   1 Eberhardt and Helmers (2010) survey the most popular parametric and semiparametric estimators dealing with the transmis-

sion bias for Cobb-Douglas production functions while Del Gatto et al. (2011) survey methodologies for measuring productivity.
Van Biesebroeck (2007) compares the robustness of …ve commonly used techniques to estimating total factor productivity –index
numbers, data envelop analysis, stochastic frontiers, GMM and the Levinsohn-Petrin estimator–to the presence of measurement
error and to di¤erences in production technology.


                                                                  41
with it = ! it + it . Of the error components, ! it represents unobserved productivity to the econometrician
but possible observed by the …rm at t when input decisions are made (transmitted productivity shock), while
 it captures all other sources of error or productivity that is not observed by the …rm before making input
choices at t. ut is a year-speci…c intercept.

A.2.1 Instrumental variables approach

The most straightforward solution to the endogeneity problem when estimating Eq. (A.14) is to use instru-
mental variables that are correlated with the inputs but uncorrelated with productivity (! it and it ). Potential
instruments might be input prices, output prices and output demand/input supply shifters. Only the latter
set of instruments would be valid irrespective of the type of competition in output and input markets. In
practice, …nding valid instruments has proven to be very hard in production function estimations.2

A.2.2 Control function approach

Fundamental to the CF approach is to use …rm decisions to …nd proxy variables for the transmitted produc-
tivity shock (! it ) and use information in these proxy variables to invert out ! it from the residual. Olley and
Pakes (1996) (OP for short) use the investment decision to proxy for unobserved productivity. To obtain
consistent estimates, their dynamic model of …rm behavior assumes that the only unobserved state variable
is productivity (scalar unobservable assumption) which evolves as a …rst-order Markov process and that the
investment demand function is strictly monotonic in ! it to ensure invertibility of the investment demand
function. Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) (LP for short) cast doubt on the validity of the strict monotonicity
assumption because investment is very lumpy and hence the investment proxy might not smoothly respond
to the productivity shock and because the proportion of …rms reporting zero investment might be large in
many datasets. They use an intermediate input demand function to invert out unobserved productivity. Both
the OP/LP procedure consists of two steps. In a …rst step, semiparametric methods are used to identify the
coe¢ cients on the variable input factors and the joint e¤ect of all state variables on output.3 In a second
step, the coe¢ cients of the observable state variables are estimated under assumptions on the dynamics of
the productivity process. Ackerberg et al. (2006) propose an alternative estimation procedure that draws on
aspects of both the OP and LP procedures.4




   2 Exceptions   are Eslava et al. (2004) and Syverson (2004) who follow Shea (1993) and use demand shifters in geographically
di¤erentiated industries as instruments. As discussed in Ackerberg et al. (2007), using input prices as instruments has not been
successful in practice.
    3 Obviously, the nonparametric treatment of the inverse of the investment function –approximated by a high-order polynomial

in its arguments– prevents identi…cation of the capital coe¢ cient due to collinearity.
    4 Other recent extensions include Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2013) and Gandhi et al. (2013). Doraszelski and Jaumandreu

(2013) develop an estimable model of endogenous productivity that integrates the capital model of R&D within the OP /LP
productivity estimator. Gandhi et al. (2013) relax the scalar unobservable assumption in investment or other input demand
functions, which rules out measurement or optimization error in these variables. They propose a nonparametric estimation
strategy which is based on a transformation of the …rm’s …rst-order conditions for ‡exible inputs.


                                                              42
Appendix B : Statistical annex

B.1 Measurement of the cost of capital in the Japanese data

The capital stock is constructed from tangible …xed assets. In the BSJBSA, tangible …xed assets include land
that is reported at nominal book values except for 1995 and 1996. In other words, the information on land
is available only in 1995 and 1996. To construct the capital stock, we …rst exclude land from tangible …xed
assets, multiplying by (1 the land ratio):

                                                eK )it = (1
                                               (B                 {)(BK )it                                 (B.1)

where (BeK )it and (BK )it are the book value of tangible …xed assets that excludes land and includes land
respectively and { is the land ratio. Following Fukao and Kwon (2006), the land ratio is proxied by the
industry-average ratio of land to tangible …xed assets in 1995 and 1996.1

The book value of tangible assets (excluding land) is then converted to the current value of tangible assets
(or nominal tangible assets). The conversion rate is constructed from the Financial Statements Statistics of
Corporations by Industry published by the Ministry of Finance. The value of nominal tangible assets is then
de‡ated by the investment goods de‡ator:

                                                                  e
                                                              t (BK )it
                                                   e it =
                                                   K                                                        (B.2)
                                                              (PI )t

where K e it denotes real tangible assets for …rm i in year t (2000 constant prices), t is the conversion rate2
and (PI )t is the investment goods de‡ator, which is de…ned as industry-speci…c nominal investment ‡ows
divided by industry-speci…c real investment ‡ows. The latter is obtained from the JIP 2009 database. The
real value of tangible assets in the initial year is de…ned as the initial capital stock Ke i , where equals
1994 or the …rst year that a …rm appears in the BSJBSA. The perpetual inventory method is then used to
construct the real capital stock:
                                                                   Iit
                                           Kit = (1    t )Kit 1 +                                         (B.3)
                                                                  (PI )t
where Kit is the capital stock for …rm i in year t,      t the depreciation rate de…ned as the weighted average of
various assets in an industry and Iit investment.3        t is obtained from the JIP 2009 database.


The cost of capital is the user cost of capital multiplied by the real capital stock. The user cost of capital
is obtained from the JIP 2009 database and de…ned as the industry-speci…c nominal capital cost divided by
the industry-speci…c real capital stock.




  1 Therefore,the land ratio is constant throughout the period.
  2 Formore details on the conversion rate, see Tokui et al. (2008).
  3 We consider …rms that did not report investment as …rms with zero investment.




                                                             43
                                  Table B.1: Panel structure: Number of participations by country

                                     FRANCE                              JAPAN                       THE NETHERLANDS
# of participationsa)    # obs        % # …rms          %    # obs       % # …rms           %    # obs     % # …rms     %
          4               2,568     1.47     642      3.64    2,220    2.66     555       6.36    4,100  5.60  1,025 13.09
          5               4,910     2.81     982      5.56    3,200    3.84     640       7.33    3,065  4.19    613  7.83
          6              12,162     6.97   2,027     11.48    3,594    4.31     599       6.86    3,960  5.41    660  8.43
          7              13,972     8.00   1,996     11.31    4,620    5.54     660       7.56    4,634  6.34    662  8.46
          8              14,128     8.09   1,766     10.00    5,344    6.41     668       7.65    4,504  6.16    563  7.19
          9              14,346     8.22   1,594      9.03    6,660    7.99     740       8.48    5,310  7.26    590  7.54
         10              15,650     8.96   1,565      8.87    8,090    9.71     809       9.27    5,940  8.12    594  7.59
         11              13,926     7.98   1,266      7.17   10,043   12.05     913      10.46    6,292  8.60    572  7.31
         12              14,856     8.51   1,238      7.01   15,852   19.02   1,321      15.14    6,768  9.25    564  7.20
         13              13,000     7.45   1,000      5.66   23,699   28.44   1,823      20.89    6,929  9.47    533  6.81
         14              10,892     6.24     778      4.41                                        8,638 11.81    617  7.88
         15               8,910     5.10     594      3.36                                        5,265  7.20    351  4.48
         16              35,280    20.21   2,205     12.49                                        7,744 10.59    484  6.18
       Total            174,600    100.0  17,653     100.0   83,322   100.0      8,728   100.0   73,149 100.0  7,828 100.0
                             Note: a) Median number of observations per …rm: 9 [FR], 10 [JP] and 9 [NL].




                                                                 44
               Table B.2: Manufacturing-level estimates of output elasticities and market imperfection parameters by country
                                                                                                                                                        
                             OLS          FE       SYS-GMM          W-LP          OLS            FE        SYS-GMM         W-LP           OLS        FE      SYS-GMM     W-LP
                            0.343       0.304        0.181          0.287        0.178         0.128         0.055         0.159        0.353      0.322       0.323      0.306
          
          
                            (0.004)     (0.002)      (0.021)        (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.032)       (0.003)      (0.007)   (0.003)      (0.006)   (0.006)
                            0.597       0.573        0.617          0.580        0.781         0.809         0.845         0.710        0.562      0.518       0.572      0.442
          
          
                            (0.003)     (0.001)      (0.020)        (0.024)      (0.003)       (0.001)       (0.017)       (0.025)      (0.007)   (0.001)      (0.004)   (0.027)
                            0.061       0.070        0.065          0.163        0.051         0.047         0.078         0.277        0.113      0.080       0.115      0.393
          
          
                            (0.006)     (0.002)      (0.037)        (0.030)      (0.006)       (0.003)       (0.020)       (0.031)      (0.013)   (0.003)      (0.005)   (0.035)
                            1.001       0.947        0.863          1.030        1.009         0.985         0.978         1.146        1.028      0.920       1.009      1.141
           
                            (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.018)        (0.006)      (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.032)       (0.009)      (0.003)   (0.002)      (0.006)   (0.007)
                            0.079       0.159        0.643          0.208        0.202         0.490         0.908         0.192        -0.030    -0.012       0.104     -0.186
           
                            (0.017)     (0.007)      (0.100)        (0.051)      (0.021)       (0.011)       (0.163)       (0.042)      (0.039)   (0.011)      (0.025)   (0.067)
                             1.189       1.141        1.229          1.137        1.094         1.133         1.184         0.996        1.255      1.158       1.277      0.967
           
           
                            (0.007)     (0.002)      (0.040)        (0.048)      (0.004)       (0.002)       (0.024)       (0.034)      (0.015)   (0.003)      (0.008)   (0.059)
                             0.736       0.856        1.485          0.911        0.708         1.277         2.046         0.676                               2.254
           
           
                            (0.017)     (0.007)      (0.079)        (0.047)      (0.039)       (0.020)       (0.276)       (0.071)                             (0.006)
                            0.424       0.461        0.598          0.477        0.414         0.561         0.672         0.403                               0.693
           
                            (0.005)     (0.002)      (0.013)        (0.013)      (0.013)       (0.004)       (0.030)       (0.025)                             (0.001)
                                                                                                                                                                         0.839
           
                                                                                                                                                                         (0.057)
                                                                                                                                                                          5.210
          
          
                                                                                                                                                                         (2.199)
           
                            1.187       1.205         1.423         1.104        1.084         1.151         1.210         0.869        1.221     1.158        1.266     0.848
           
                           (0.007)     (0.003)       (0.046)       (0.052)      (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.039)       (0.034)      (0.016)   (0.003)      (0.009)   (0.056)
    Time dummies              yes         yes           yes           yes          yes           yes           yes           yes          yes       yes          yes       yes
  Industry dummies            yes         no            yes           yes          yes           no            yes           yes          yes       no           yes       yes
        # obs.              174,600     174,600       174,600       111,423      83,322        83,322        83,322        49,599       72,057    72,057       72,057    36,615
          2                 0.922                                   0.981        0.976                                     0.994        0.925                            0.982
                         0.659                                   0.181        0.371                                     0.108        0.661                            0.177
         2
                                  0.861                                                 0.915                                              0.903
                                        0.780                                                 0.650                                              0.790
        Sargan                                        0.000                                                   0.000                                             0.000
       Hansen                                         0.000          0.015                                    0.000        0.000                                0.002    0.135
   Dif-Hansen (lev)                                   0.015                                                   1.000                                             0.042
 Dif-Hansen (L2-dif )                                 0.000                                                   0.000                                             0.250
 Dif-Hansen (L3-dif )                                 0.000                                                   0.000                                             0.221
         m1                                           -36.92                                                 -19.85                                            -28.11
         m2                                            -7.68                                                  -5.37                                             -8.97
          Notes: Sargan, Hansen, Dif-Hansen: tests of overidentifying restrictions, asymptotically distributed as 2 . -values
are reported. Dif-Hansen (lev) tests the validity of the 1-year lag of the first-diﬀerenced inputs as instruments in the levels equation while
Dif-Hansen (L2-dif )/(L3-dif ) test the validity of the 2-/3-year lags of the inputs as instruments in the first-diﬀerenced equation. 1 and
    2: tests for first-order and second-order serial correlation in the first-diﬀerenced residuals, asymptotically distributed as (0 1).
                                                                       45
                                          Table B.3: Industry repartition by country
                                                                   FRANCE                                    JAPAN                             THE NETHERLANDS
                                                                            # Firms                                      # Firms                                    # Firms
Industry    Name                                      Code - NES 114 )                      Code - BSJBSA )                           Code - SBI)
                                                                            (# Obs.)                                     (# Obs.)                                   (# Obs.)
    1        Livestock, seafood and flour products     B01                 520 (4,794)        91-93                     276 (2,551)      151-152, 156              283 (2,688)
    2        Miscellaneous food and related products   B02, B04-B06        1,381 (13,636)     99, 102                   566 (5,488)      153-155, 157- 158         867 (7,649)
    3        Beverages and tobacco                     B03                 182 (1,854)        101                       130 (1,277)      159, 160                  37 (430)
    4        Textiles                                  F21-F23             881 (8,398)        111-113, 119              207 (1,901)      171-177                   208 (2,051)
    5        Clothing and skin goods                   C11-C12             1,267 (11,105)     121-122                   144 (1,134)      181-183                   76 (610)
    6        Wooden products                           F31                 840 (9,197)        131, 139                  82 (721)         201-205                   270 (2,606)
    7        Furniture                                 C41                 586 (5,723)        140                       88 (759)         361                       413 (3,680)
    8        Pulp, paper and paper products            F32-F33             546 (6,005)        151-152                   294 (2,892)      211-212                   229 (2,572)
    9        Publishing, (re)printing                  C31                 1,391 (12,973)     160, 413-414              561 (5,399)      221-222                   865 (7,222)
   10        Chemicals                                 F41, F43            372 (4,003)        171, 181, 189, 201, 209   229 (2,407)      231-233, 251              49 (495)
   11        Organic chemical products                 F42                 100 (1,046)        172-173                   154 (1,570)      241-243, 247              205 (2,040)
   12        Pharmaceuticals                           C31                 205 (2,041)        175                       181 (1,936)      244                       39 (373)
   13        Miscellaneous chemical products           C32                 189 (1,968)        174, 179                  293 (3,104)      245-246                   96 (949)
   14        Plastics                                  F45-F46             1,206 (12,572)     190                       470 (4,542)      252                       388 (3,928)
   15        Ceramic, stone and clay products          F13-F14             830 (8,474)        221-222, 229              408 (3,804)      261-267                   309 (2,963)
   16        Steel                                     F51, F53            326 (3,581)        231-232                   280 (2,733)      271-273, 2751-2752        48 (520)
   17        Metals                                    E22, F52, F55       1,376 (14,268)     241-242                   218 (2,204)      274, 2753-2754, 282-283   134 (1,415)
   18        Architectural metal products              E21                 256 (2,336)        251                       198 (1,762)      281                       619 (5,783)
   19        Other metal products                      F54                 1,747 (18,426)     259                       487 (4,741)      284-287                   689 (6,452)
   20        Special industrial machinery              E25, E27-E28        556 (5,278)        262                       252 (2,371)      291, 293, 295             555 (5,423)
   21        General industrial machinery              E24                 410 (3,647)        261, 263                  262 (2,439)      292                       475 (4,557)
   22        Miscellaneous machinery                   E23, E26            344 (3,498)        269                       506 (4,813)      294                       34 (342)
   23        Industrial apparatus                      E32                 85 (675)           271                       246 (2,208)      311                       42 (394)
   24        Household electrical appliances           C44-C46             204 (2,011)        272                       73 (630)         223, 297, 334-335         64 (627)
   25        Other electrical machinery                E31, E33            120 (882)          273, 281-282              404 (3,578)      300, 322-323              44 (347)
   26        Electronic parts and components           F61-F62             533 (4,825)        290                       505 (4,657)      314-316, 321              138 (1,109)
   27        Motor vehicles                            D01                 219 (2,104)        301                       673 (6,799)      341-343                   204 (1,984)
   28        Other transport equipment                 D02, E11-E14        345 (3,443)        309                       131 (1,214)      351-355                   148 (1,329)
   29        Precision instruments                     E34-E35             310 (2,541)        311-313, 319              237 (2,133)      331-333                   227 (1,920)
   30        Miscellaneous manufacturing products      C42-C43             326 (3,296)        310, 320                  173 (1,555)      362-366                   73 (691)
  Total                                                                    17,653 (174,600)                             8,728 (83,322)                             7,828 (73,149)
        Notes: a) NES 114: French industrial classification, “Nomenclature Economique de Synthèse - Niveau 3”,
                       b) BSJBSA: Basic Survey of Japanse Business Structure and Activities,
                         c) SBI: Dutch industrial classification, “Standaard Bedrijfsindeling”.



                                                                                              46
                     Table B.4: Underpinnings of common threshold of j0:30j for                  j   by country

                                                   FR                JP                NL
                                 (    N )j     0.294 [0.302]     0.196 [0.198]     0.263 [0.269]
                                 (   M )j      0.510 [0.516]     0.719 [0.723]     0.454 [0.459]
                                 (    K )j     0.196 [0.190]     0.085 [0.083]     0.283 [0.285]
                                     "Q
                                     bN        0.304 [0.295]     0.192 [0.185]     0.355 [0.325]
                                           j
                                  "Q
                                  bM           0.635 [0.651]     0.795 [0.791]     0.592 [0.592]
                                           j
                                     "Q
                                     bK        0.045 [0.041]     0.044 [0.046]     0.088 [0.087]
                                           j
                                     bj        0.362   [0.379]   0.625   [0.656]   0.214   [0.219]
                                     b         0.266   [0.275]   0.385   [0.396]   0.176   [0.180]
                                       j
                                     b         0.806   [0.808]   0.786   [0.785]   0.813   [0.811]
                                      j
                                     "N
                                     bw    j
                                               4.149   [4.204]   3.684   [3.646]   4.347   [4.299]
Notes: This table shows that when we choose a common threshold of j0:30j for j j0 j, the average and median values (in
 square brackets) of industry-speci…c labor market imperfection parameters are economically meaningful for the three
                                                                                      ( M )j ( N )j
             countries. E.g. the average value for bj in F R is computed as: bj = 0:30 Q             = 0:362.
                                                                                      (b"M )j ( K )j




                                                                 47
                               Table B.5: Details on industry classification 1 & 2 by country
                                                                  Classification 1                                               Classification 2
                                                                    Regime                                                                                 Regime 
Industry    Name                                                                                                                                             
    1        Livestock, seafood and flour products       -         -          -      ∗     ∗           ∗       ∗        ∗ - ∗
    2        Miscellaneous food and related products    -          -          -       ∗        ∗                 ∗ - ∗
    3        Beverages and tobacco                      -          -          -         ∗        ∗     ∗       ∗                      ∗ - ∗
    4        Textiles                                   -         -           -       ∗        ∗                   ∗
                                                                                                                                                     -   ∗

    5        Clothing and skin goods                    -          -           -      ∗    ∗     ∗     ∗     ∗       ∗       ∗ - ∗      ∗ -  ∗     ∗ - ∗
    6        Wooden products                            -          -          -       ∗        ∗                 ∗ - ∗
    7        Furniture                                  -         -           -       ∗        ∗    ∗         
    8        Pulp, paper and paper products             -          -           -      ∗    ∗        ∗     ∗       ∗
    9        Publishing, (re)printing                   -          -          -       ∗        ∗    ∗     ∗       ∗       ∗ - ∗                    ∗ - ∗
   10        Chemicals                                  -         -           -       ∗     ∗     ∗           
   11        Organic chemical products                   -        -           -          ∗     ∗       ∗      
   12        Pharmaceuticals                            -         -           -       ∗     ∗     ∗                 ∗ - ∗
   13        Miscellaneous chemical products            -         -            -      ∗          ∗         
   14        Plastics                                   -          -          -       ∗    ∗      ∗    ∗                              ∗ -  ∗
   15        Ceramic, stone and clay products           -          -          -       ∗        ∗    ∗     ∗       ∗         ∗
                                                                                                                                                     -   ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                  ∗ - ∗
   16        Steel                                      -          -          -       ∗        ∗       ∗            ∗ - ∗
   17        Metals                                     -         -           -       ∗        ∗    ∗     ∗            ∗ - ∗
   18        Architectural metal products               -          -          -             ∗            ∗                                    ∗ - ∗
   19        Other metal products                       -         -           -       ∗        ∗    ∗     ∗       ∗         ∗
                                                                                                                                                     -   ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                  ∗ - ∗
   20        Special industrial machinery               -          -          -       ∗        ∗       ∗       ∗                                    ∗ - ∗
   21        General industrial machinery               -          -          -         ∗      ∗    ∗                              ∗ -  ∗
   22        Miscellaneous machinery                    -          -          -               ∗     ∗      
   23        Industrial apparatus                        -        -           -      ∗      ∗     ∗                  ∗ - ∗
   24        Household electrical appliances            -          -          -       ∗             ∗            ∗ - ∗
   25        Other electrical machinery                 -          -          -             ∗    ∗         
   26        Electronic parts and components            -         -           -          ∗     ∗           
   27        Motor vehicles                              -        -           -          ∗     ∗                               ∗ - ∗
   28        Other transport equipment                  -         -           -       ∗        ∗       ∗      
   29        Precision instruments                      -         -           -       ∗        ∗    ∗         
   30        Miscellaneous manufacturing products       -         -           -       ∗     ∗       ∗     ∗       ∗
  Total                                                 -         -           -



                                                                                                 48
                                                                                      
 Table B.6: Industry-specific input shares ( ) ( =   ), output elasticities                                                                
                                                                                         , scale elasticity  , joint market imperfections parameter   , and
                                                                                                                             
                 corresponding price-cost mark-up                                           or labor supply elasticity 
                                                      and absolute extent of rent sharing                                     by country
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                       

                                                                                                                                                              FRANCE
                                                                                                                   Regime  =  - [43% of industries, 68% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                    
                                                                        (
                                                                           
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sargan      Hansen                                          m1         m2
                                                      )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                        H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  7       0 .3 1 0    0 .5 2 4    0 .1 6 6   0 .2 9 6 (0 .0 3 7 )   0 .6 7 1 (0 .0 2 7 )    0 .0 1 4 (0 .0 5 4 )    0 .9 8 0 (0 .0 2 1 )    0 .3 2 6 (0 .1 5 6 )   1 .2 8 0 (0 .0 5 2 )   0 .4 7 6 (0 .2 1 3 )   0 .3 2 2 (0 .0 9 8 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 1    0 .2 1 1    0 .4 2 2    -9 .4 8    -1 .9 7

  8       0 .2 4 3    0 .5 4 8    0 .2 0 9   0 .1 6 9 (0 .0 4 8 )   0 .6 6 8 (0 .0 4 9 )    0 .0 9 8 (0 .0 8 9 )    0 .9 3 5 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .5 2 3 (0 .2 7 2 )   1 .2 1 9 (0 .0 9 0 )   0 .5 0 0 (0 .2 2 8 )   0 .3 3 3 (0 .1 0 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .1 7 2    0 .3 9 8    0 .5 8 7    -7 .6 8    -3 .7 8

  6       0 .2 5 9    0 .5 4 9    0 .1 9 2   0 .2 0 1 (0 .0 3 0 )   0 .7 3 0 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .0 6 1 (0 .0 3 8 )    0 .9 9 3 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .5 5 1 (0 .1 3 8 )   1 .3 3 0 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .5 5 8 (0 .1 3 0 )   0 .3 5 8 (0 .0 5 4 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 5 0    0 .1 1 9   -1 1 .2 7   -0 .1 3

  15      0 .2 9 0    0 .4 8 5    0 .2 2 5   0 .2 1 7 (0 .0 3 0 )   0 .6 7 5 (0 .0 2 5 )    0 .1 0 1 (0 .0 4 3 )    0 .9 9 4 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .6 4 2 (0 .1 3 7 )   1 .3 9 1 (0 .0 5 2 )   0 .5 9 5 (0 .1 1 1 )   0 .3 7 3 (0 .0 4 4 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .2 6 0    0 .5 3 4   -1 1 .3 2   -1 .5 7

  28      0 .2 9 3    0 .5 2 1    0 .1 8 5   0 .2 4 5 (0 .0 4 9 )   0 .7 1 7 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .0 4 1 (0 .0 6 9 )    1 .0 0 3 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .5 3 9 (0 .2 1 2 )   1 .3 7 5 (0 .0 5 8 )   0 .6 1 9 (0 .2 2 3 )   0 .3 8 3 (0 .0 8 5 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 6   0 .3 0 5    0 .4 6 9    0 .7 9 5    -6 .9 2    -0 .9 4

  17      0 .3 4 3    0 .4 6 6    0 .1 9 2   0 .3 1 8 (0 .0 3 1 )   0 .6 8 6 (0 .0 2 4 )    0 .0 2 5 (0 .0 4 2 )    1 .0 2 9 (0 .0 1 9 )    0 .5 4 5 (0 .1 2 4 )   1 .4 7 3 (0 .0 5 1 )   0 .6 6 2 (0 .1 3 4 )   0 .3 9 8 (0 .0 4 9 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0    0 .5 8 4   -1 4 .5 3   -4 .8 8

  2       0 .2 4 5    0 .5 6 8    0 .1 8 8   0 .1 3 4 (0 .0 2 8 )   0 .7 3 1 (0 .0 2 1 )    0 .0 8 1 (0 .0 4 3 )    0 .9 4 5 (0 .0 1 6 )    0 .7 3 9 (0 .1 4 1 )   1 .2 8 7 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .7 5 0 (0 .1 2 7 )   0 .4 2 8 (0 .0 4 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 3    0 .0 3 6    0 .8 9 9    -9 .7 0    -2 .3 5

  9       0 .3 3 7    0 .4 7 4    0 .1 8 9   0 .2 6 1 (0 .0 2 7 )   0 .6 3 5 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .0 5 9 (0 .0 3 6 )    0 .9 5 5 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .5 6 6 (0 .1 0 8 )   1 .3 3 9 (0 .0 4 2 )   0 .7 5 5 (0 .1 2 6 )   0 .4 3 0 (0 .0 4 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .1 3 3    0 .4 5 4   -1 1 .5 0   -1 .3 8

  20      0 .3 4 5    0 .4 9 0    0 .1 6 5   0 .2 7 4 (0 .0 4 8 )   0 .6 4 1 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .0 7 7 (0 .0 6 7 )    0 .9 9 2 (0 .0 2 4 )    0 .5 1 3 (0 .1 8 6 )   1 .3 0 8 (0 .0 5 9 )   0 .8 1 9 (0 .2 6 7 )   0 .4 5 0 (0 .0 8 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 3   0 .0 1 2    0 .7 3 3    0 .0 7 1   -1 0 .6 2    1 .1 8

  4       0 .3 3 6    0 .4 9 2    0 .1 7 2   0 .2 4 6 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .6 5 2 (0 .0 2 4 )    0 .0 2 1 (0 .0 4 3 )    0 .9 1 9 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .5 9 2 (0 .1 3 3 )   1 .3 2 4 (0 .0 4 9 )   0 .8 7 2 (0 .1 7 6 )   0 .4 6 6 (0 .0 5 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .4 6 0    0 .3 7 8   -1 0 .5 3   -1 .9 8

  16      0 .2 9 7    0 .5 3 1    0 .1 7 2   0 .1 8 9 (0 .0 3 4 )   0 .7 3 7 (0 .0 2 2 )    0 .0 2 1 (0 .0 4 4 )    0 .9 4 7 (0 .0 1 7 )    0 .7 5 3 (0 .1 3 9 )   1 .3 9 0 (0 .0 4 2 )   0 .9 3 4 (0 .1 5 5 )   0 .4 8 3 (0 .0 4 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 9   0 .2 1 3    0 .7 3 9    0 .9 6 0    -7 .1 7    -0 .5 6

  19      0 .3 8 2    0 .4 4 2    0 .1 7 6   0 .2 9 5 (0 .0 2 3 )   0 .6 0 2 (0 .0 1 4 )    0 .0 4 8 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .9 4 4 (0 .0 1 5 )    0 .5 8 8 (0 .0 8 5 )   1 .3 6 1 (0 .0 3 2 )   0 .9 3 6 (0 .1 1 8 )   0 .4 8 3 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 4 9    0 .0 5 1   -1 9 .0 2   -2 .3 0

  5       0 .4 0 7    0 .4 2 0    0 .1 7 3   0 .2 3 9 (0 .0 3 8 )   0 .6 2 8 (0 .0 1 9 )    0 .0 3 3 (0 .0 4 0 )    0 .9 0 1 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .9 0 8 (0 .1 1 8 )   1 .4 9 6 (0 .0 4 4 )   1 .4 2 9 (0 .1 6 0 )   0 .5 8 8 (0 .0 2 7 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .1 4 2    0 .7 9 0   -1 1 .6 6   -1 .4 0

                                                                                                                   Regime  =  -  [33% of industries, 22% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                    
                                                                        (
                                                                           
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sargan      Hansen                                          m1         m2
                                                      )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  26      0 .3 1 7    0 .4 9 1    0 .1 9 1   0 .2 9 6 (0 .0 5 7 )   0 .5 5 6 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .1 3 0 (0 .0 5 8 )    0 .9 8 1 (0 .0 3 6 )    0 .2 0 1 (0 .2 0 8 )   1 .1 3 2 (0 .0 5 9 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 2    0 .0 5 9    0 .2 6 3    -6 .8 4    -1 .6 7

  18      0 .2 7 3    0 .5 8 0    0 .1 4 7   0 .2 5 6 (0 .0 5 3 )   0 .6 6 9 (0 .0 3 8 )    0 .0 2 1 (0 .0 6 4 )    0 .9 4 5 (0 .0 4 2 )    0 .2 1 7 (0 .2 2 6 )   1 .1 5 3 (0 .0 6 6 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .3 7 0   0 .9 0 3    0 .4 5 5    0 .6 9 0    -7 .0 0    -2 .0 8

  21      0 .3 0 8    0 .5 1 1    0 .1 8 2   0 .3 0 6 (0 .0 5 9 )   0 .5 9 8 (0 .0 4 9 )    0 .0 3 1 (0 .0 9 5 )    0 .9 3 5 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .1 7 8 (0 .2 6 8 )   1 .1 7 1 (0 .0 9 6 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 3 6   0 .0 7 8    0 .3 6 7    0 .6 2 6    -7 .9 9     0 .4 0

  25      0 .3 2 9    0 .4 0 4    0 .2 6 7   0 .4 3 0 (0 .0 6 6 )   0 .4 9 2 (0 .0 5 1 )    0 .0 9 6 (0 .0 8 2 )    1 .0 1 7 (0 .0 2 9 )   -0 .0 9 3 (0 .2 6 6 )   1 .2 1 6 (0 .1 2 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    -2 .2 3    -1 .0 9

  24      0 .3 2 4    0 .4 9 2    0 .1 8 4   0 .4 6 1 (0 .0 6 1 )   0 .6 0 0 (0 .0 4 2 )   -0 .0 3 4 (0 .0 8 8 )    1 .0 2 7 (0 .0 3 1 )   -0 .2 0 5 (0 .2 5 3 )   1 .2 1 9 (0 .0 8 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 7 5   0 .1 8 6    0 .4 3 3    0 .5 6 9    -5 .6 7    -0 .2 4

  14      0 .2 7 5    0 .5 4 2    0 .1 8 3   0 .2 7 1 (0 .0 2 3 )   0 .6 6 7 (0 .0 1 8 )    0 .0 6 7 (0 .0 3 2 )    1 .0 0 5 (0 .0 1 6 )    0 .2 4 4 (0 .1 0 5 )   1 .2 3 0 (0 .0 3 3 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 2 6    0 .8 0 4   -1 4 .0 5   -2 .0 6

  10      0 .2 2 5    0 .5 5 4    0 .2 2 1   0 .2 6 1 (0 .0 4 7 )   0 .6 8 5 (0 .0 4 2 )    0 .0 6 2 (0 .0 7 0 )    1 .0 0 8 (0 .0 2 3 )    0 .0 7 3 (0 .2 5 7 )   1 .2 3 6 (0 .0 7 6 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 7   0 .4 7 1    0 .6 6 9    0 .6 6 3    -7 .5 4    -1 .8 7

  13      0 .2 5 5    0 .5 4 3    0 .2 0 3   0 .3 5 0 (0 .0 6 2 )   0 .6 9 0 (0 .0 3 9 )   -0 .0 2 4 (0 .0 9 0 )    1 .0 1 6 (0 .0 2 6 )   -0 .1 0 1 (0 .3 0 2 )   1 .2 7 2 (0 .0 7 1 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .3 5 3   0 .4 4 1    0 .4 1 0    0 .7 8 4    -4 .7 2    -0 .9 6

  30      0 .3 2 8    0 .4 7 4    0 .1 9 8   0 .3 9 1 (0 .0 4 9 )   0 .6 0 7 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .0 0 5 (0 .0 6 3 )    1 .0 0 4 (0 .0 2 7 )    0 .0 9 0 (0 .1 9 1 )   1 .2 8 1 (0 .0 6 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 3 9   0 .0 0 1    0 .9 6 5    0 .6 5 3    -7 .8 9     1 .3 0

  29      0 .3 5 8    0 .3 9 1    0 .2 5 1   0 .4 2 9 (0 .0 6 7 )   0 .5 5 3 (0 .0 4 3 )    0 .0 2 8 (0 .0 9 1 )    1 .0 1 0 (0 .0 3 4 )    0 .2 1 6 (0 .2 6 2 )   1 .4 1 5 (0 .1 1 0 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 1   0 .1 4 3    0 .1 6 7    0 .6 6 6    -7 .3 4    -0 .3 6

                                                                                                                   Regime  =  - [10% of industries, 4% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                    
                                                                        (
                                                                           
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       )             Sargan      Hansen                                          m1         m2
                                                      )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                        H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  3       0 .1 8 1    0 .5 9 0    0 .2 2 9   0 .3 2 5 (0 .0 4 4 )   0 .6 9 4 (0 .0 3 6 )    0 .0 4 0 (0 .0 6 3 )    1 .0 5 9 (0 .0 2 1 )   -0 .6 2 4 (0 .2 7 6 )   1 .1 7 6 (0 .0 6 2 )   0 .6 5 3 (0 .1 0 8 )   1 .8 8 3 (0 .9 0 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .3 7 2   0 .6 4 0    0 .5 8 2    0 .9 6 9    -4 .8 3    -1 .8 7

  12      0 .2 3 0    0 .5 4 5    0 .2 2 5   0 .4 0 2 (0 .0 7 2 )   0 .6 5 8 (0 .0 4 5 )   -0 .0 4 6 (0 .1 0 6 )    1 .0 1 5 (0 .0 2 2 )   -0 .5 4 2 (0 .3 7 9 )   1 .2 0 7 (0 .0 8 3 )   0 .6 9 0 (0 .1 6 2 )   2 .2 2 6 (1 .6 9 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .1 6 6   0 .0 4 4    0 .5 8 2    0 .3 5 2    -4 .3 4    -0 .3 9

  22      0 .3 2 6    0 .4 8 2    0 .1 8 2   0 .5 0 5 (0 .0 7 5 )   0 .5 4 4 (0 .0 5 0 )   -0 .0 0 4 (0 .1 1 6 )    1 .0 4 5 (0 .0 2 8 )   -0 .4 1 9 (0 .3 2 1 )   1 .1 3 0 (0 .1 0 4 )   0 .7 3 0 (0 .1 6 8 )   2 .7 0 0 (2 .3 0 2 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 8   0 .0 0 3    0 .7 5 4    0 .8 1 0    -8 .9 4    -0 .7 9




                                                                                                                                                                      49
                                                                                           
Table B.6 (ctd): Industry-specific input shares ( ) ( =   ), output elasticities                                                                
                                                                                              , scale elasticity  , joint market imperfections parameter   , and
                                                                                                                               
                   corresponding price-cost mark-up                                           or labor supply elasticity 
                                                        and absolute extent of rent sharing                                      by country
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                          

                                                                                                                                                        FRANCE (ctd)
                                                                                                                    Regime  =   -  [10% of industries, 5% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                    )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

   23      0 .3 3 0    0 .4 2 3    0 .2 4 7   0 .3 9 0 (0 .0 8 7 )   0 .3 7 7 (0 .0 5 0 )    0 .1 8 6 (0 .1 1 1 )     0 .9 5 3 (0 .0 4 2 )   -0 .2 8 9 (0 .3 4 3 )   0 .8 9 2 (0 .1 1 7 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -3 .3 9   -0 .5 2

    1      0 .2 2 1    0 .6 0 2    0 .1 7 6   0 .2 7 3 (0 .0 4 2 )   0 .6 2 3 (0 .0 2 2 )    0 .0 4 4 (0 .0 5 6 )     0 .9 3 9 (0 .0 2 3 )   -0 .1 9 7 (0 .2 1 5 )   1 .0 3 4 (0 .0 3 7 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 4    0 .0 4 4    0 .1 1 1   -7 .2 0   -2 .0 5

   27      0 .2 5 7    0 .5 6 1    0 .1 8 2   0 .3 3 2 (0 .0 7 1 )   0 .6 1 3 (0 .0 3 9 )    0 .0 3 6 (0 .0 9 5 )     0 .9 8 1 (0 .0 2 5 )   -0 .2 0 2 (0 .3 2 6 )   1 .0 9 2 (0 .0 7 0 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .2 5 4   0 .7 8 7    0 .7 9 2    0 .5 4 5   -5 .7 3    1 .3 0

                                                                                                                    Regime  =   - [3% of industries, 1% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )             Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                    )                                                                                                                                                        H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

   11      0 .1 9 8    0 .6 1 0    0 .1 9 3   0 .3 4 8 (0 .0 6 6 )   0 .6 5 0 (0 .0 2 6 )    0 .0 4 2 (0 .0 7 7 )     1 .0 4 0 (0 .0 2 4 )   -0 .6 9 2 (0 .3 9 6 )   1 .0 3 5 (0 .3 5 9 )   0 .6 0 6 (0 .1 3 0 )   1 .5 4 0 (0 .8 4 0 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -3 .8 4   -2 .0 2

                                                                                                                                                                    JAPAN
                                                                                                                    Regime  =   -  [37% of industries, 42% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                    )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

    8      0 .1 6 6    0 .7 5 5    0 .0 7 9   0 .1 8 7 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .7 4 9 (0 .0 4 5 )    0 .0 9 5 (0 .0 7 5 )     1 .0 3 1 (0 .0 1 8 )   -0 .1 3 6 (0 .2 6 9 )   0 .9 9 3 (0 .0 5 9 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 4 6   0 .1 5 0    0 .1 8 7    0 .0 5 5   -4 .5 5   -0 .4 1

    5      0 .2 2 3    0 .7 1 7    0 .0 6 0   0 .2 8 4 (0 .0 4 4 )   0 .7 2 1 (0 .0 4 7 )    0 .0 2 7 (0 .0 8 6 )     1 .0 3 1 (0 .0 2 7 )   -0 .2 6 9 (0 .2 5 6 )   1 .0 0 5 (0 .0 6 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .6 8 7   0 .6 8 7    0 .7 1 5    0 .9 6 6   -3 .5 0   -1 .0 0

   21      0 .2 1 7    0 .6 8 6    0 .0 9 7   0 .2 8 7 (0 .0 5 9 )   0 .7 1 1 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .0 8 4 (0 .0 7 3 )     1 .0 8 2 (0 .0 2 4 )   -0 .2 8 8 (0 .3 0 0 )   1 .0 3 7 (0 .0 4 2 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 1 1   0 .7 4 0    0 .6 4 9    0 .9 1 9   -5 .3 1   -3 .3 6

   14      0 .1 7 6    0 .7 4 2    0 .0 8 2   0 .2 0 3 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .7 7 5 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .0 8 1 (0 .0 5 9 )     1 .0 5 9 (0 .0 1 7 )   -0 .1 0 9 (0 .2 3 2 )   1 .0 4 4 (0 .0 4 0 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 1   0 .0 0 0    0 .1 4 9    0 .0 4 3   -6 .7 7   -1 .5 7

   24      0 .2 0 1    0 .7 3 1    0 .0 6 9   0 .2 4 3 (0 .0 4 6 )   0 .7 6 7 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .0 4 5 (0 .0 5 1 )     1 .0 5 4 (0 .0 3 0 )   -0 .1 5 9 (0 .2 4 7 )   1 .0 5 0 (0 .0 4 3 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -3 .2 6   -1 .2 5

   15      0 .1 9 7    0 .7 1 4    0 .0 8 9   0 .2 6 6 (0 .0 3 7 )   0 .7 6 1 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .0 7 5 (0 .0 5 6 )     1 .1 0 2 (0 .0 2 4 )   -0 .2 5 8 (0 .2 1 4 )   1 .0 6 6 (0 .0 4 4 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 1 0    0 .0 0 1    0 .1 4 9   -5 .6 0   -2 .9 3

    9      0 .2 4 9    0 .6 6 4    0 .0 8 7   0 .2 6 6 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .7 1 1 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .0 5 3 (0 .0 5 9 )     1 .0 3 1 (0 .0 1 6 )    0 .0 0 3 (0 .1 7 8 )   1 .0 7 2 (0 .0 4 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 2   0 .0 3 6    0 .0 9 3    0 .4 1 2   -7 .4 7   -2 .5 9

   16      0 .1 6 5    0 .7 5 2    0 .0 8 3   0 .1 7 1 (0 .0 4 5 )   0 .8 1 8 (0 .0 4 2 )    0 .0 2 6 (0 .0 8 3 )     1 .0 1 5 (0 .0 0 9 )    0 .0 4 7 (0 .3 2 3 )   1 .0 8 8 (0 .0 5 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 1 6   0 .0 3 9    0 .7 2 9    0 .8 9 9   -4 .9 1   -2 .0 0

   22      0 .2 3 8    0 .6 6 9    0 .0 9 2   0 .2 6 1 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .7 3 1 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .0 4 6 (0 .0 4 2 )     1 .0 3 7 (0 .0 1 6 )   -0 .0 0 2 (0 .1 6 3 )   1 .0 9 2 (0 .0 3 0 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .1 6 5    0 .4 8 4   -6 .6 2   -1 .3 4

   25      0 .2 2 8    0 .6 9 4    0 .0 7 9   0 .3 1 3 (0 .0 5 4 )   0 .7 5 9 (0 .0 2 9 )   -0 .0 0 3 (0 .0 7 0 )     1 .0 6 9 (0 .0 2 8 )   -0 .2 8 3 (0 .2 6 7 )   1 .0 9 4 (0 .0 4 2 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 1    0 .0 9 3    0 .9 4 8   -4 .1 9   -0 .7 5

   20      0 .2 0 3    0 .7 1 6    0 .0 8 1   0 .1 6 5 (0 .0 4 8 )   0 .7 8 4 (0 .0 3 8 )    0 .0 5 7 (0 .0 7 9 )     1 .0 0 6 (0 .0 1 7 )    0 .2 8 3 (0 .2 7 8 )   1 .0 9 5 (0 .0 5 4 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 3 7   0 .5 2 9    0 .4 7 4    0 .1 9 7   -5 .3 8   -2 .0 1

                                                                                                                    Regime  =  -  [33% of industries, 25% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                    )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

   19      0 .2 2 9    0 .6 7 9    0 .0 9 2   0 .2 0 6 (0 .0 3 1 )   0 .7 4 9 (0 .0 1 9 )    0 .0 7 3 (0 .0 4 0 )     1 .0 2 8 (0 .0 1 7 )   0 .2 0 4 (0 .1 5 1 )    1 .1 0 3 (0 .0 2 8 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 5 6    0 .7 3 3   -7 .4 9   -1 .1 2

    4      0 .2 2 6    0 .6 9 2    0 .0 8 2   0 .1 8 5 (0 .0 2 8 )   0 .7 7 3 (0 .0 2 0 )    0 .0 4 4 (0 .0 3 9 )     1 .0 0 2 (0 .0 1 5 )   0 .2 9 7 (0 .1 4 0 )    1 .1 1 7 (0 .0 2 9 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .3 4 1   0 .3 4 5    0 .7 5 7    0 .8 1 9   -4 .0 9    1 .1 8

   17      0 .1 6 9    0 .7 4 4    0 .0 8 7   0 .1 8 4 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .8 3 8 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .0 1 0 (0 .0 5 6 )     1 .0 3 3 (0 .0 1 7 )   0 .0 3 4 (0 .2 3 8 )    1 .1 2 7 (0 .0 4 1 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 0 9   0 .1 9 3    0 .9 6 4    0 .7 2 0   -2 .6 2    0 .2 5

   28      0 .2 3 8    0 .6 8 5    0 .0 7 7   0 .2 4 6 (0 .0 3 1 )   0 .7 7 3 (0 .0 2 8 )    0 .0 0 1 (0 .0 5 1 )     1 .0 2 1 (0 .0 1 6 )   0 .0 9 6 (0 .1 5 9 )    1 .1 2 9 (0 .0 4 1 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .6 2 7   0 .8 5 3    0 .9 2 3    0 .8 0 3   -3 .3 6   -1 .1 2

   29      0 .2 2 7    0 .6 7 8    0 .0 9 5   0 .2 4 9 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .7 6 9 (0 .0 2 7 )    0 .0 4 0 (0 .0 5 4 )     1 .0 5 8 (0 .0 1 6 )   0 .0 4 0 (0 .1 8 6 )    1 .1 3 5 (0 .0 4 0 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 5 2   0 .3 3 5    0 .1 4 2    0 .1 2 8   -4 .6 2   -2 .2 5

    7      0 .1 9 9    0 .7 2 7    0 .0 7 4   0 .2 2 6 (0 .0 5 8 )   0 .8 2 6 (0 .0 3 0 )   -0 .0 2 7 (0 .0 7 7 )     1 .0 2 5 (0 .0 2 6 )   0 .0 0 1 (0 .3 2 2 )    1 .1 3 6 (0 .0 4 2 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -3 .2 6    0 .8 3

   13      0 .1 7 2    0 .7 2 8    0 .1 0 0   0 .1 8 0 (0 .0 3 2 )   0 .8 2 9 (0 .0 2 3 )    0 .0 4 7 (0 .0 4 0 )     1 .0 5 7 (0 .0 2 1 )   0 .0 9 3 (0 .2 0 2 )    1 .1 4 0 (0 .0 3 2 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .0 7 3   0 .0 1 8    0 .2 3 8    0 .7 7 6   -5 .4 4   -4 .0 8

   12      0 .2 1 2    0 .6 4 8    0 .1 4 0   0 .2 2 3 (0 .0 3 9 )   0 .7 6 6 (0 .0 3 2 )    0 .0 6 8 (0 .0 6 4 )     1 .0 5 6 (0 .0 1 7 )   0 .1 3 0 (0 .2 2 2 )    1 .1 8 2 (0 .0 4 9 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .2 3 9   0 .7 4 3    0 .8 4 9    0 .8 9 4   -4 .7 7   -2 .4 8

   30      0 .1 9 3    0 .7 1 9    0 .0 8 8   0 .1 8 6 (0 .0 4 4 )   0 .8 6 5 (0 .0 2 0 )   -0 .0 2 3 (0 .0 4 8 )     1 .0 2 7 (0 .0 2 1 )   0 .2 4 0 (0 .2 4 2 )    1 .2 0 2 (0 .0 2 8 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .4 0 7   0 .6 7 6    0 .9 1 4    0 .8 1 4   -3 .0 0   -2 .5 7

   11      0 .1 3 8    0 .7 5 8    0 .1 0 3   0 .1 4 0 (0 .0 2 6 )   0 .9 1 9 (0 .0 2 2 )   -0 .0 2 7 (0 .0 3 6 )     1 .0 3 1 (0 .0 1 2 )   0 .2 0 3 (0 .1 9 7 )    1 .2 1 2 (0 .0 3 0 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .3 2 2   0 .1 0 1    0 .9 8 0    0 .8 7 2   -2 .9 6   -0 .1 2



                                                                                                                                                                          50
                                                                                           
Table B.6 (ctd): Industry-specific input shares ( ) ( =   ), output elasticities                                                                
                                                                                              , scale elasticity  , joint market imperfections parameter   ,
                                                                                                                               
              and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                            or labor supply elasticity 
                                                        and absolute extent of rent sharing                                      by country
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                            

                                                                                                                                                          JAPAN (ctd)
                                                                                                                   Regime  =   - [17% of industries, 14% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.     (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sargan      Hansen                                          m1       m2
                                                       )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                       H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  18       0 .1 8 9    0 .7 4 4    0 .0 6 7   0 .1 5 0 (0 .0 4 0 )   0 .8 1 5 (0 .0 3 8 )   0 .0 4 9 (0 .0 7 3 )     1 .0 1 4 (0 .0 1 5 )   0 .3 0 0 (0 .2 5 7 )   1 .0 9 6 (0 .0 5 1 )   0 .7 6 9 (0 .6 2 6 )   0 .4 3 5 (0 .2 0 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .4 6 6   0 .7 4 2    0 .8 8 5    0 .8 2 8   -3 .6 8   -1 .2 1

   6       0 .1 5 5    0 .7 8 4    0 .0 6 1   0 .1 1 5 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .8 5 2 (0 .0 1 8 )   0 .0 3 6 (0 .0 4 5 )     1 .0 0 3 (0 .0 1 4 )   0 .3 4 7 (0 .2 4 5 )   1 .0 8 7 (0 .0 2 3 )   0 .8 1 5 (0 .5 6 3 )   0 .4 4 9 (0 .1 7 1 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -4 .0 0   -1 .1 5

   1       0 .1 5 0    0 .7 9 0    0 .0 6 0   0 .1 0 7 (0 .0 3 0 )   0 .8 4 3 (0 .0 1 9 )   0 .0 5 8 (0 .0 2 8 )     1 .0 0 7 (0 .0 2 4 )   0 .3 5 7 (0 .2 0 8 )   1 .0 6 7 (0 .0 2 4 )   0 .8 4 7 (0 .4 8 9 )   0 .4 5 8 (0 .1 4 3 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 3 2   0 .8 5 3    0 .1 3 8    0 .6 7 5   -4 .4 4   -1 .8 1

   2       0 .1 8 6    0 .7 3 8    0 .0 7 6   0 .1 1 9 (0 .0 2 2 )   0 .7 9 8 (0 .0 2 5 )   0 .1 0 0 (0 .0 4 1 )     1 .0 1 7 (0 .0 1 6 )   0 .4 3 8 (0 .1 4 2 )   1 .0 8 0 (0 .0 3 4 )   0 .9 9 7 (0 .2 9 9 )   0 .4 9 9 (0 .0 7 5 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 2 4    0 .1 1 9   -5 .9 0   -1 .5 4

   3       0 .1 2 9    0 .7 8 6    0 .0 8 6   0 .0 3 5 (0 .0 3 3 )   0 .8 0 5 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .1 3 4 (0 .0 3 2 )     0 .9 7 4 (0 .0 1 5 )   0 .7 5 6 (0 .2 5 1 )   1 .0 2 5 (0 .0 4 5 )   1 .1 1 0 (0 .3 6 9 )   0 .5 2 6 (0 .0 8 3 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .7 7 5   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    0 .9 9 8   -3 .2 1    0 .2 1

                                                                                                                   Regime  =  - [13% of industries, 19% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.     (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sargan      Hansen                                          m1       m2
                                                       )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                       H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  10       0 .1 7 1    0 .7 3 0    0 .0 9 9   0 .1 2 0 (0 .0 2 6 )   0 .8 4 5 (0 .0 2 1 )   0 .0 4 1 (0 .0 3 3 )     1 .0 0 6 (0 .0 1 4 )   0 .4 5 2 (0 .1 6 0 )   1 .1 5 7 (0 .0 2 9 )   0 .6 7 3 (0 .2 3 1 )   0 .4 0 2 (0 .0 8 3 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 4   0 .1 0 5    0 .8 1 4    0 .8 4 7   -5 .6 1   -3 .3 9

  26       0 .2 1 0    0 .6 8 1    0 .1 1 0   0 .1 6 0 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .8 1 6 (0 .0 2 4 )   0 .0 5 1 (0 .0 4 4 )     1 .0 2 7 (0 .0 1 4 )   0 .4 3 3 (0 .1 8 3 )   1 .1 9 9 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .6 8 8 (0 .2 8 1 )   0 .4 0 8 (0 .0 9 9 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .0 6 3    0 .5 2 7   -6 .8 1   -2 .0 0

  27       0 .1 8 7    0 .7 3 1    0 .0 8 2   0 .1 2 5 (0 .0 1 9 )   0 .8 5 3 (0 .0 1 5 )   0 .0 4 3 (0 .0 2 9 )     1 .0 2 1 (0 .0 0 8 )   0 .4 9 6 (0 .1 1 6 )   1 .1 6 7 (0 .0 2 0 )   0 .9 6 6 (0 .2 1 5 )   0 .4 9 1 (0 .0 5 6 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 0   0 .0 0 0    0 .2 4 7    0 .8 4 1   -7 .3 5   -4 .3 2

  23       0 .2 2 5    0 .7 0 2    0 .0 7 3   0 .1 6 8 (0 .0 3 7 )   0 .8 3 3 (0 .0 3 2 )   0 .0 2 7 (0 .0 6 6 )     1 .0 2 8 (0 .0 1 6 )   0 .4 4 1 (0 .2 0 4 )   1 .1 8 6 (0 .0 4 6 )   1 .1 4 8 (0 .4 9 5 )   0 .5 3 4 (0 .1 0 7 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .1 4 4   0 .3 2 6    0 .8 1 9    0 .3 0 7   -5 .4 9   -2 .9 2




                                                                                                                                                                       51
                                                                                           
Table B.6 (ctd): Industry-specific input shares ( ) ( =   ), output elasticities                                                                
                                                                                              , scale elasticity  , joint market imperfections parameter   ,
                                                                                                                               
              and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                            or labor supply elasticity 
                                                        and absolute extent of rent sharing                                      by country
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                           

                                                                                                                                             THE NETHERLANDS
                                                                                                                   Regime  =  -  [30% of industries, 37% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                    
                                                                        (
                                                                           
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sargan      Hansen                                           m1        m2
                                                      )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  4       0 .2 6 8    0 .4 6 1    0 .2 7 1   0 .3 2 8 (0 .0 5 7 )   0 .5 9 2 (0 .0 3 5 )    0 .0 9 4 (0 .0 7 7 )    1 .0 1 5 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .0 6 3 (0 .2 7 0 )   1 .2 8 5 (0 .0 7 6 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .3 5 7   0 .2 1 1    0 .6 6 0    0 .6 5 3    -4 .5 9    -1 .3 2

  27      0 .2 4 7    0 .5 4 5    0 .2 0 8   0 .2 7 8 (0 .0 4 9 )   0 .7 0 8 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .0 2 7 (0 .0 7 5 )    1 .0 1 4 (0 .0 1 4 )    0 .1 7 3 (0 .2 4 7 )   1 .2 9 9 (0 .0 5 7 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 1 8   0 .1 4 0    0 .9 0 1    0 .5 4 6    -4 .8 9    -2 .5 3

  17      0 .2 6 9    0 .4 6 6    0 .2 6 6   0 .3 0 4 (0 .0 5 2 )   0 .6 1 0 (0 .0 3 4 )    0 .0 8 8 (0 .0 6 7 )    1 .0 0 1 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .1 7 9 (0 .2 3 5 )   1 .3 1 0 (0 .0 7 3 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .3 7 8   0 .7 5 4    0 .0 4 7    0 .4 2 4    -4 .6 9    -0 .4 9

  19      0 .3 2 3    0 .3 5 7    0 .3 2 0   0 .4 7 4 (0 .0 3 2 )   0 .4 7 8 (0 .0 2 3 )    0 .0 8 2 (0 .0 5 2 )    1 .0 3 3 (0 .0 1 7 )   -0 .1 3 1 (0 .1 5 5 )   1 .3 3 6 (0 .0 6 4 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 0 9   0 .2 3 5    0 .1 8 9    0 .3 4 6   -1 0 .8 8   -3 .6 1

  14      0 .2 4 0    0 .4 5 1    0 .3 1 0   0 .2 7 6 (0 .0 3 1 )   0 .6 0 4 (0 .0 2 2 )    0 .1 1 1 (0 .0 4 0 )    0 .9 9 0 (0 .0 1 7 )    0 .1 8 9 (0 .1 5 6 )   1 .3 4 0 (0 .0 4 8 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 8 0   0 .4 3 0    0 .2 8 6    0 .1 5 5    -7 .3 9    -0 .5 3

  20      0 .3 0 7    0 .4 3 2    0 .2 6 1   0 .4 1 7 (0 .0 3 1 )   0 .5 8 1 (0 .0 2 4 )    0 .0 7 8 (0 .0 5 1 )    1 .0 7 6 (0 .0 1 5 )   -0 .0 1 0 (0 .1 4 7 )   1 .3 4 5 (0 .0 5 6 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 6 9   0 .3 1 9    0 .2 6 3    0 .3 4 7    -9 .3 4    -2 .3 4

  21      0 .3 1 3    0 .4 2 9    0 .2 5 7   0 .3 5 2 (0 .0 3 0 )   0 .5 8 7 (0 .0 2 2 )    0 .0 8 6 (0 .0 4 9 )    1 .0 2 5 (0 .0 1 3 )    0 .2 4 5 (0 .1 3 8 )   1 .3 6 8 (0 .0 5 1 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .1 5 8   0 .1 1 6    0 .6 2 2    0 .4 1 2    -8 .2 3    -2 .4 5

  11      0 .1 7 1    0 .5 0 5    0 .3 2 4   0 .2 0 3 (0 .0 6 3 )   0 .7 0 5 (0 .0 3 3 )    0 .1 2 1 (0 .0 6 8 )    1 .0 2 8 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .2 1 3 (0 .3 9 7 )   1 .3 9 7 (0 .0 6 6 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .7 5 7   0 .1 9 3    0 .9 9 8    0 .9 9 5    -4 .5 3    -2 .4 8

  25      0 .2 6 6    0 .4 7 2    0 .2 6 2   0 .4 1 9 (0 .1 7 1 )   0 .6 6 0 (0 .1 0 1 )   -0 .0 2 3 (0 .1 8 0 )    1 .0 5 6 (0 .0 6 9 )   -0 .1 7 3 (0 .7 2 4 )   1 .3 9 9 (0 .2 1 5 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    -1 .8 5     0 .8 1

                                                                                                                   Regime  =  - [33% of industries, 36% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D if-       D if-       D if-

Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                    
                                                                        (
                                                                           
                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sargan      Hansen                                           m1        m2
                                                      )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                        H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

  7       0 .2 9 9    0 .4 5 0    0 .2 5 1   0 .3 2 2 (0 .0 2 4 )   0 .6 2 5 (0 .0 1 9 )    0 .1 0 0 (0 .0 3 5 )    1 .0 4 6 (0 .0 0 9 )    0 .3 1 4 (0 .1 0 6 )   1 .3 9 0 (0 .0 4 3 )   0 .4 7 8 (0 .0 7 2 )   0 .3 2 7 (0 .0 3 2 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .2 5 1   0 .6 5 1    0 .1 6 5    0 .3 8 3    -6 .0 2    -1 .8 9

  2       0 .2 4 2    0 .4 8 8    0 .2 7 0   0 .2 6 7 (0 .0 1 9 )   0 .7 1 2 (0 .0 1 4 )    0 .0 6 8 (0 .0 2 8 )    1 .0 4 7 (0 .0 0 9 )    0 .3 5 3 (0 .0 9 7 )   1 .4 5 8 (0 .0 2 8 )   0 .5 8 2 (0 .0 4 0 )   0 .3 6 8 (0 .0 1 6 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 2 1   0 .0 3 2    0 .3 7 8    0 .3 2 0    -8 .0 5    -3 .2 9

  16      0 .2 7 1    0 .4 4 1    0 .2 8 8   0 .2 7 3 (0 .0 6 8 )   0 .6 7 4 (0 .0 5 5 )    0 .0 3 6 (0 .1 1 3 )    0 .9 8 3 (0 .0 5 1 )    0 .5 2 0 (0 .3 3 9 )   1 .5 2 8 (0 .1 2 6 )   0 .6 3 6 (0 .1 4 1 )   0 .3 8 9 (0 .0 5 3 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    -2 .5 2     1 .7 4

  10      0 .2 2 4    0 .4 7 8    0 .2 9 8   0 .1 8 1 (0 .1 6 8 )   0 .6 2 7 (0 .0 5 8 )    0 .2 5 0 (0 .1 3 4 )    1 .0 5 7 (0 .0 7 7 )    0 .5 0 4 (0 .7 7 9 )   1 .3 1 1 (0 .1 2 1 )   0 .6 4 4 (0 .2 9 7 )   0 .3 9 2 (0 .1 1 0 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    -1 .2 7    -1 .0 2

  26      0 .2 8 6    0 .4 2 9    0 .2 8 5   0 .2 6 4 (0 .0 7 1 )   0 .5 9 0 (0 .0 4 9 )    0 .1 2 1 (0 .1 0 3 )    0 .9 5 7 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .4 5 3 (0 .3 3 4 )   1 .3 7 5 (0 .1 1 5 )   0 .7 6 4 (0 .1 5 5 )   0 .4 3 3 (0 .0 5 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .9 6 8   0 .9 4 9    0 .8 4 0    0 .9 7 7    -3 .9 6    -1 .4 2

  6       0 .2 7 1    0 .4 9 4    0 .2 3 5   0 .2 3 3 (0 .0 3 6 )   0 .6 3 4 (0 .0 3 0 )    0 .1 1 3 (0 .0 5 9 )    0 .9 8 0 (0 .0 2 1 )    0 .4 2 3 (0 .1 7 9 )   1 .2 8 4 (0 .0 6 1 )   0 .7 8 3 (0 .1 0 8 )   0 .4 3 9 (0 .0 3 4 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .3 1 0   0 .4 1 9    0 .2 9 6    0 .8 5 6    -7 .1 5    -1 .6 3

  29      0 .3 5 9    0 .3 4 4    0 .2 9 7   0 .3 7 1 (0 .0 5 8 )   0 .5 2 4 (0 .0 3 4 )    0 .1 2 2 (0 .0 8 0 )    1 .0 1 7 (0 .0 2 7 )    0 .4 9 3 (0 .2 3 9 )   1 .5 2 4 (0 .1 0 0 )   0 .8 1 3 (0 .1 2 5 )   0 .4 4 9 (0 .0 3 8 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .2 9 1   0 .8 9 5    0 .7 6 6    0 .6 5 2    -5 .0 5    -1 .1 5

  28      0 .2 7 0    0 .4 8 8    0 .2 4 2   0 .2 1 4 (0 .0 4 8 )   0 .6 6 6 (0 .0 2 6 )    0 .1 2 7 (0 .0 6 4 )    1 .0 0 6 (0 .0 2 7 )    0 .5 7 1 (0 .2 1 4 )   1 .3 6 4 (0 .0 5 3 )   0 .9 2 2 (0 .1 1 5 )   0 .4 8 0 (0 .0 3 1 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .8 2 0   0 .6 0 2    0 .7 8 2    0 .7 8 6    -4 .4 6    -1 .3 0

  18      0 .2 9 2    0 .4 7 4    0 .2 3 4   0 .2 3 9 (0 .0 3 7 )   0 .6 6 9 (0 .0 2 5 )    0 .0 8 9 (0 .0 5 8 )    0 .9 9 7 (0 .0 1 4 )    0 .5 9 1 (0 .1 7 2 )   1 .4 1 1 (0 .0 5 3 )   0 .9 9 6 (0 .0 9 7 )   0 .4 9 9 (0 .0 2 4 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 0 1   0 .2 0 7    0 .0 7 4    0 .1 0 9    -9 .7 4    -2 .2 0

  23      0 .2 8 8    0 .4 6 6    0 .2 4 6   0 .1 7 3 (0 .1 7 5 )   0 .7 0 1 (0 .1 0 3 )    0 .1 4 6 (0 .2 1 3 )    1 .0 2 0 (0 .0 7 7 )    0 .9 0 7 (0 .7 4 3 )   1 .5 0 6 (0 .2 2 2 )   1 .1 0 2 (0 .3 8 0 )   0 .5 2 4 (0 .0 8 6 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    -1 .4 5     1 .5 4




                                                                                                                                                                      52
                                                                                            
 Table B.6 (ctd): Industry-specific input shares ( ) ( =   ), output elasticities                                                                
                                                                                               , scale elasticity  , joint market imperfections parameter   ,
                                                                                                                                
               and corresponding price-cost mark-up                                            or labor supply elasticity 
                                                         and absolute extent of rent sharing                                      by country
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                             

                                                                                                                              THE NETHERLANDS (ctd)
                                                                                                                    Regime  =  - [27% of industries, 22% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )             Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

   3       0 .1 4 8    0 .4 5 8    0 .3 9 4   0 .5 5 5 (0 .2 1 9 )   0 .5 4 0 (0 .1 1 2 )    0 .0 4 1 (0 .2 9 0 )     1 .1 3 5 (0 .0 8 3 )   -2 .5 7 0 (1 .6 6 3 )   1 .1 7 9 (0 .2 4 5 )   0 .3 1 5 (0 .1 7 6 )   0 .4 5 9 (0 .3 7 6 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -2 .2 9   -0 .9 0

   30      0 .3 0 5    0 .4 0 7    0 .2 8 8   0 .6 0 7 (0 .0 9 8 )   0 .4 6 6 (0 .0 7 5 )    0 .0 5 2 (0 .1 6 2 )     1 .1 2 6 (0 .0 2 9 )   -0 .8 4 4 (0 .4 8 4 )   1 .1 4 5 (0 .1 8 4 )   0 .5 7 6 (0 .1 7 7 )   1 .3 5 8 (0 .9 8 6 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -3 .0 1   -1 .3 0

   1       0 .1 4 6    0 .6 4 6    0 .2 0 8   0 .2 5 2 (0 .0 4 6 )   0 .7 1 2 (0 .0 3 6 )    0 .0 5 8 (0 .0 7 2 )     1 .0 2 2 (0 .0 1 8 )   -0 .6 2 8 (0 .3 5 4 )   1 .1 0 2 (0 .0 5 6 )   0 .6 3 7 (0 .1 4 0 )   1 .7 5 5 (1 .0 5 9 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .3 1 8   0 .2 2 3    0 .2 6 7    0 .2 2 4   -4 .4 2   -3 .5 0

   12      0 .2 3 1    0 .3 8 3    0 .3 8 6   0 .5 4 1 (0 .1 9 6 )   0 .5 9 2 (0 .1 2 5 )    0 .0 3 1 (0 .2 7 6 )     1 .1 6 3 (0 .0 9 6 )   -0 .7 9 5 (1 .0 9 2 )   1 .5 4 7 (0 .3 2 6 )   0 .6 6 0 (0 .3 4 7 )   1 .9 4 5 (3 .0 1 4 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -0 .3 8   -0 .8 6

   24      0 .2 6 4    0 .4 0 9    0 .3 2 7   0 .4 3 3 (0 .1 0 8 )   0 .4 8 0 (0 .0 6 5 )    0 .0 8 7 (0 .1 5 5 )     1 .0 0 0 (0 .0 5 0 )   -0 .4 7 0 (0 .5 4 3 )   1 .1 7 3 (0 .1 6 0 )   0 .7 1 4 (0 .2 6 1 )   2 .4 9 6 (3 .1 8 3 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -2 .6 4    0 .6 9

   22      0 .2 8 8    0 .4 1 6    0 .2 9 6   0 .5 5 0 (0 .2 1 1 )   0 .5 7 7 (0 .1 8 2 )   -0 .0 7 2 (0 .3 7 5 )     1 .0 5 5 (0 .1 0 2 )   -0 .5 2 0 (1 .1 3 7 )   1 .3 8 8 (0 .4 3 9 )   0 .7 2 8 (0 .4 9 4 )   2 .6 7 2 (6 .6 6 1 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -2 .5 3   -1 .4 2

   9       0 .3 2 2    0 .3 7 0    0 .3 0 9   0 .5 2 9 (0 .0 3 5 )   0 .4 7 4 (0 .0 2 5 )    0 .0 3 6 (0 .0 5 6 )     1 .0 4 0 (0 .0 1 5 )   -0 .3 6 1 (0 .1 6 8 )   1 .2 8 4 (0 .0 6 8 )   0 .7 8 1 (0 .0 8 8 )   3 .5 6 0 (1 .8 3 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .0 8 0   0 .2 3 4    0 .4 5 9    0 .4 4 7   -8 .2 5   -1 .3 4

   15      0 .2 5 0    0 .4 1 5    0 .3 3 5   0 .4 0 1 (0 .0 3 0 )   0 .5 3 1 (0 .0 2 9 )    0 .0 8 8 (0 .0 4 6 )     1 .0 1 9 (0 .0 1 7 )   -0 .3 2 6 (0 .1 5 8 )   1 .2 8 0 (0 .0 7 0 )   0 .7 9 7 (0 .0 8 5 )   3 .9 2 8 (2 .0 5 7 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .1 7 9   0 .1 2 5    0 .2 7 5    0 .5 1 8   -6 .6 9   -0 .9 7

                                                                                                                    Regime  =   - [7% of industries, 4% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )             Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                         H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

   8       0 .2 4 0    0 .4 7 5    0 .2 8 5   0 .5 0 0 (0 .0 5 1 )   0 .4 6 5 (0 .0 5 1 )    0 .1 2 8 (0 .0 9 0 )     1 .0 9 3 (0 .0 2 1 )   -1 .1 0 3 (0 .2 9 3 )   0 .9 7 9 (0 .1 0 7 )   0 .4 7 0 (0 .0 9 0 )   0 .8 8 7 (0 .3 2 0 )    0 .0 0 0    0 .2 1 8   0 .0 2 6    0 .1 8 3    0 .3 0 4   -6 .1 7   -2 .5 4

   5       0 .2 8 7    0 .4 9 7    0 .2 1 6   0 .4 4 1 (0 .1 1 5 )   0 .4 6 8 (0 .0 5 9 )    0 .1 1 0 (0 .0 9 5 )     1 .0 2 0 (0 .0 5 7 )   -0 .5 9 5 (0 .4 2 4 )   0 .9 4 3 (0 .1 1 9 )   0 .6 1 3 (0 .1 8 1 )   1 .5 8 4 (1 .2 1 2 )    0 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0    1 .0 0 0   -2 .0 6   -0 .8 3

                                                                                                                     Regime  =   -  [3% of industries, 1% of firms]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D if-       D if-       D if-

 Ind.    (  )     (  )     (  )         (
                                                     
                                                                         (
                                                                            
                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sargan      Hansen                                         m1        m2
                                                       )                    )                   )                                                                                                                                                          H ansen    H ansen     H ansen

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (lev)     (L2-dif )   (L3-dif )

   13      0 .1 9 8    0 .4 8 2    0 .3 2 0   0 .2 6 6 (0 .0 7 2 )   0 .5 2 0 (0 .0 5 5 )    0 .2 5 1 (0 .1 0 5 )     1 .0 3 7 (0 .0 4 2 )   -0 .2 6 3 (0 .4 4 2 )   1 .0 7 9 (0 .1 1 4 )                                                  0 .0 0 0    0 .9 0 5   0 .9 9 9    0 .9 9 5    1 .0 0 0   -3 .0 6   -1 .0 7


 Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. Time dummies are included but not reported. Sargan, Hansen, Dif-Hansen: tests of overidentifying
   restrictions, asymptotically distributed as 2 . -values are reported. Dif-Hansen (lev) tests the validity of the 1-year lag of the first-diﬀerenced
inputs as instruments in the levels equation while Dif-Hansen (L2-dif )/(L3-dif ) test the validity of the 2-/3-year lags of the inputs as instruments in
  the first-diﬀerenced equation. 1 and 2: tests for first-order and second-order serial correlation in the first-diﬀerenced residuals, asymptotically
 distributed as (0 1). Industries within  =   -  and  =  -  are ranked according to    , industries within  =   - and  =  - are
                        ranked according to   and industries within  =   - and  =  - are ranked according to         .
                                                                                                                                  




                                                                                                                                                                        53
