                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MAKING COLLEGE WORTH IT:
         A REVIEW OF RESEARCH ON THE RETURNS TO HIGHER EDUCATION

                                           Philip Oreopoulos
                                           Uros Petronijevic

                                         Working Paper 19053
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19053


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




A version of this article first appeared in The Future of Children, Postsecondary Education, Volume
23, No. 1, Spring 2013, Eds. Cecilia Rouse, Lisa Barrow, and Thomas Brock. Future of Children sponsored
this book project. We are grateful to our discussant, Amanda Pallais, the issue editors, and to participants
at the Future of Children authors conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Any errors are
those of the authors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Philip Oreopoulos and Uros Petronijevic. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Making College Worth It: A Review of Research on the Returns to Higher Education
Philip Oreopoulos and Uros Petronijevic
NBER Working Paper No. 19053
May 2013
JEL No. I21,J24

                                              ABSTRACT

Recent stories of soaring student debt levels and under-placed college graduates have caused some
to question whether a college education is still a sound investment. In this paper, we review the literature
on the returns to higher education in an attempt to determine who benefits from college. Despite the
tremendous heterogeneity across potential college students, we conclude that the investment appears
to payoff for both the average and marginal student. During the past three decades in particular, the
earnings premium associated with a college education has risen substantially. Beyond the pecuniary
benefits of higher education, we suggest that there also may exist non-pecuniary benefits. Given these
findings, it is perhaps surprising that among recent cohorts college completion rates have stagnated.
We discuss potential explanations for this trend and conclude by succinctly interpreting the evidence
on how to make the most out of college.


Philip Oreopoulos
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
philip.oreopoulos@utoronto.ca

Uros Petronijevic
150 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M5S3G7
uros.petronijevic@utoronto.ca
I. Introduction


       Pressure continues on young Americans to attend and complete college.             President

Obama calls college an "economic imperative that every family in America has to be able to

afford" and has set as a goal that by 2020, “America will once again have the highest proportion

of college graduates in the world."1 A quick search of the popular press reveals many of the

standard arguments in favor of college. Recent articles in The Washington Post and Education

Week, for example, show that unemployment rates are much lower for those with a college

degree and that college graduates also realize higher lifetime earnings.2 Yet, while policy makers

and parents continue to push for college, recent trends also reveal that costs are increasing and

students are borrowing more than ever before to finance the investment.3 Among those students

who do go to college, average study times have fallen and completion rates have stagnated, as

those who eventually do acquire a degree take longer to do so than in the past.4 Given these facts,

how should today's high school students approach college, and how can they make the most out

of it if they go? This chapter aims to address these questions by summarizing what we credibly

know about the varying costs and benefits of higher education.


       In the next section, we explain the 'classic' theory that describes the decision to go to

college and the evidence on other factors that likely play a role. Section Three addresses what

we know about the return to college and the types of benefits college graduates enjoy. We note

that the relative returns to a college education are rising—in terms of lifetime earnings—but are

not constant for everyone who decides to attend. They depend, instead, on program of study and

the eventual occupation one pursues.      We also describe a substantial amount of empirical

evidence, almost all of which points to a positive earnings return from the investment in higher

education. Section Four describes the leading explanation for the recent rise in college earnings.

                                                2
Like many others, we suggest that the increase has largely been driven by technological change,

which has led to an increase in demand for workers with skills that complement the use of new

technologies. In Section Five, we briefly address the intensifying debate over whether college

acts merely as a signal of skill that already exists at school entry or whether it fosters new skills.

Next we discuss the possibility of non-pecuniary benefits stemming from college. Returning to

the economic benefits of the college premium, Section Seven turns to a discussion of the

positive payoffs associated with two-year colleges, while Section Eight covers the returns

accruing to 'marginal' students—those students who are on the edge of going and not going. We

mention that, despite some concerns about the benefit of college for these students, recent

evidence typically shows that their returns are at least as high as the average. Given the positive

returns to college, Section Nine tries to explore the rather concerning facts that college

completion rates have stagnated and that time to completion has risen. We also examine how

college completion and school quality affect the premium. In closing we discuss the costs of

different levels of higher education and student debt, and show that the cost of college is

properly considered as a long-term investment. The chapter concludes by offering some concrete

advice for making the most out of the college experience, given the evidence we have to date.




II. How Do Individuals Think About College?


       Whether or not someone should go to college is not an easy question to answer since the

decision to attend is not the same for everyone. Costs and benefits of college can differ

tremendously across individuals and, therefore, it is important to consider the 'worth' of college

on a case-by-case basis. The earnings associated with a college degree will be different for each


                                                  3
individual as people differ in the way they are affected by higher education. 5 Individuals also

differ with respect to the costs of college. For example, a student who is relatively impatient

may find it particularly unappealing to delay entrance into the labor market in favor of pursuing

additional schooling. If we assume that each individual is aware of his or her private benefits

and costs, then the standard theory for college attendance has individuals simply weighing the

returns of the college investment against the costs. The returns consist primarily of the present

value of lifetime earnings associated with a college degree, while the costs consist of both direct

costs, such as tuition, and the indirect cost of forgone earnings while in college. If the difference

between the benefits and costs is larger than present value of the stream of earnings the

individual would realize in the absence of college, we would expect this individual to attend.6 If

everyone followed this simple investment model, and properly took any uncertainty into account,

we could deduce that for those who attend, on average, the present value of the returns to college

exceeds the costs and that each individual is therefore making the correct decision.


       There are several reasons to believe that individuals do not follow the recipe prescribed

by this model.     Recent studies have shed light on some factors that are missing from the

framework. The most obvious one is the existence of credit constraints. The theory described

above assumes that individuals can perfectly borrow against their future incomes and have no

aversion holding large amounts of debt. Some recent evidence, however, suggests that over the

last two decades an increasing number of potential college students have been pushed against

their credit limits.7 One study of recent cohorts from the late 1990s and early 2000s found, even

after controlling for cognitive achievement, family composition, race, and residence, that youth

from high-income families were still 16 percentage points more likely to attend college than

youth from low-income families.8 Individuals who are constrained will either under-invest in


                                                 4
higher education, stopping before it would be optimal to do so, or will not invest at all. Students

who do take on college in the presence of credit constraints may also work while in college,

thereby reducing the amount of time available for studying. This seems to be a particularly

plausible explanation for the increase in student average hours of work from 1993 to 2005. The

fraction of high school graduates combining work and school steadily rose from 1970 and

peaked in 2005, as college prices continued to rise but sources of financial aid did not follow

suit.9


         Even in the absence of formal credit constraints, individuals may be averse to the idea of

holding debt. That is, even though an individual has the option to borrow the amount needed to

finance college, he or she may choose not to because the thought of being debt burdened is too

troubling. Behavior of this type can be thought of as reflecting the existence of an internal

borrowing constraint—a constraint self-imposed because an individual is averse to holding

debt.10 Although these constraints do not reflect the existence of borrowing constraints in the

credit market, they still have real consequences in the sense that they prevent some people who

have a positive college payoff from attending.


         Recent evidence has shown that the prospect of having to carry debt indeed has behavior

altering consequences. In an effort to examine the affect of debt on career choices, a 2009 study

analyzed an experiment conducted by New York University's School of Law.11 The University

offered students two distinct financial aid options: the first option consisted of tuition loans that

the student could take out when entering law school, which the University would repay if, upon

graduation, that student accepted employment in the low-paying public sector; the second option

consisted of tuition waivers that were issued by the University, which the student would have to

repay upon graduation if they did not accept employment in the low-paying public sector. The

                                                 5
key feature of the experimental design was that the two aid packages were equivalent in

monetary value, but differed in the horizon over which a student was considered to be in debt.

The results showed that those who had their tuition waived had a significantly higher rate of first

job placement in the public sector, and had an increased likelihood of actually enrolling into the

law school.


       Several other deviations from the simple investment theory of college attainment give

reason to believe that some individuals are missing out on welfare-improving opportunities. One

example is incomplete information. If students are not completely informed about costs and

benefits of higher education, they may not correctly invest. Most studies that examine this issue

conclude that potential students are aware of the benefits of a postsecondary education, but tend

to persistently overestimate costs and are uniformed about sources of financial aid.12 In addition

to being misinformed about costs, potential students may lack information about their own

ability to succeed in college. 13 Students may be over (or under)-confident about their ability to

perform well in college. In this respect, there is an option value to college as students use

college to learn about their individual abilities, about the costs of college, and about labor market

conditions and future earnings prospects.14 While in college, students also gain the valuable

option to act on that new information. Some students who enroll may learn that they would be

better off by dropping out; some who do not enroll would have learned that they have the

capacity to succeed in college.


       Even with perfect information, the complexity of popular financial aid programs may

prevent their use. A recent experimental study explored the significance of the complexity of

financial aid programs as obstacles to college attendance.15 The study divided low-income

families who visited a tax preparation center into three groups. The full treatment group was

                                                 6
assisted with completing a Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) form and given

information about their financial aid eligibility and tuition prices for nearby colleges. The

information only group was given information on their eligibility and college tuition, but was

only encouraged to complete the FAFSA. Finally, the control group was only given a brochure

with basic information about college and financial aid. The experiment revealed that high school

seniors whose parents received FAFSA assistance were substantially more likely to go to, and

stay in, college than those who did not (a 25% increase in enrolment and retention).


       The finding that such a small intervention makes the difference between going and not

going to college suggests that not all individuals follow the straight-forward investment model

when making attainment decisions. Even in the absence of complexity, students appear to be

sensitive to how financial aid offers are framed. One study discovered that students tended to be

more responsive to aid packages that included the word 'scholarship' instead of the word 'grant,'

even though both packages were of equal size.16


       This discussion illustrates three important issues about the college decision: (1) it would

be inappropriate to treat all individuals similarly when thinking about optimal attainment

decisions: individuals differ in terms of what they are likely to get out of higher education; (2)

individuals may face financial constraints that prohibit them from taking advantage of more

education; and (3) even in the absence of debt concerns, information problems and behavioral

idiosyncrasies can cause individuals to behave in a manner that makes them worse off. The

evidence suggests we cannot always presume that each individual is doing what is best for them,

whether they go or not. This leaves open possibilities for policies aimed at relaxing constraints,

providing information, narrowing program choice, or simplifying the application process to

improve well-being.

                                                7
III. College Premia, Returns, and Measurement Issues


A. Descriptive Differences


       It is well documented that those with college education earn more relative to those with a

high school degree, and that the difference has been persistently growing over the past few

decades.17 Over a career, a study from the Georgetown University Center on Education and the

Workforce calculated that in 1999 the average lifetime earnings of a bachelor's degree holder

was 75 percent more than the earnings of a high school graduate, and that by 2009 the premium

grew to 84 percent.18 Another study estimated lifetime earnings for an average individual who

graduated from college in 2009 to be worth about $1.2 million net of tuition expenses compared

to $780,000 for an average individual who graduated from high school.19 Aside from just the

monetary gain associated with a college degree, college graduates tend to have a larger

probability of being employed.     In November of 2011 the unemployment rate for college

graduates was 4.4 percent, compared to 8.5 percent for high school graduates.20


       Although college graduates generally earn more than those who have only high school

degrees, their earnings nevertheless vary significantly across occupations. Median lifetime

earnings for bachelor's degree holders are highest in the managerial, health professional, and

Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) occupation sectors.21 They tend to

be lowest in the health support, education, and personal services sectors. The median lifetime

earnings in 2009 for a bachelor's degree holder working in the STEM sector, for example, was a

little over $3 million, compared with about $1.2 million for a peer in the health support sector.

Although they earned much less than in the STEM sector, college educated workers in health

support still earned more than those with only high school.


                                                8
       Figure 1 shows these patterns by displaying average earnings in 2010 for full-time

workers, aged thirty to fifty, from the Current Population Survey.22 As noted, the largest average

earnings for college graduates are experienced by those in the managerial, STEM, and health

professional sectors. The earnings of those with post-bachelor degrees are also highest in these

fields. Furthermore, the figure reveals that earnings for bachelor's degree holders are lowest in

the health support, education, and personal service sectors. Therefore, it is clear that both

education and choice of occupation are important determinants of labor market outcomes.

Without necessarily indicating direct causal relationships, occupational differences in the

earnings of those with and without postsecondary education are at least worth considering for

prospective students contemplating the choice of college major and eventual sector of

employment. 23


       To provide a different perspective on the evidence, Figure 2 presents the 10th, 25th, 50th,

75th, and 90th percentiles of the earnings distributions in 2011 for three different education

levels (high school degree, college degree, and graduate degree) among full-time workers, aged

thirty to fifty. Several items about this figure are worth noting. First, the median annual earnings

for high school graduates is about $34,000, compared to $57,000 for bachelor's degree holders.

That is, at the middle of the earnings distributions in 2011 those with a bachelor's degree earned

about 67 percent more than those with only a high school education. The earnings differences

increase when comparing individuals in the same percentile further up the distribution across

each education category—the gap in average earnings between the highest college earners and

the highest high school earners is substantially more than the gap between the lowest college and

high school earners. When separating out the overall premium by type of degree, it is apparent

that while the premium to a bachelor's degree is high, the premium to a graduate degree is even


                                                 9
higher. Some studies suggest that a significant part of the rise in the college premium can be

attributed to the increased earnings among those with post-bachelor degrees.24


       In short, a college education is associated with higher labor market earnings across all

major occupation sectors. Caution must, of course, be taken when interpreting the evidence as a

causal effect of college on earnings. The evidence presented in this section thus far should not

lead one to conclude that if any high school graduate went to college, he or she should expect to

realize these labor market benefits. Individuals differ widely with respect to costs and benefits of

college. Researchers often worry that those who stand to benefit the most from college are the

students who decide to enroll, or that workers who would earn higher wages at any level of

schooling often tend to acquire more schooling.25 This leads to the well-recognized problem of

self-selection: since individuals choose whether or not to attend college, if those with the highest

propensity to succeed are the ones who usually choose to attend, we cannot claim that college

explains their outcomes, nor can we claim that encouraging more youth to attend college will

generate similar outcomes.




B. Causal Estimates of Returns to College


       To circumvent issues of selection, a common approach has been to exploit natural

experiments—for example, circumstances or policy changes beyond individuals' control—that

cause one group to obtain more college relative to another group. One such natural experiment

compares individuals who live within commuting distance to a college with others who do not.

Those who grow up near a college face lower costs of higher education and are more likely to

attend than individuals who have similar characteristics but live farther away. The conditions of


                                                10
this natural experiment enable researchers to estimate how much college proximity affects

college going and, in turn, how much college proximity affects eventual earnings. Thus it is

possible to estimate the average gain from college attendance for those for whom college

proximity makes the difference between getting a postsecondary education and not getting it.

One study using this technique in 1995 found that the earnings gain for each year of additional

schooling ranged from 10 to 14 percent.26


       Other studies have based a natural experiment on war veteran status and the GI Bill, a

policy that induced some cohorts to obtain more college than others by providing financial aid

and institutional support for war veterans who attended postsecondary institutions.27 Using year

2000 census data, a recent study examined the returns to college using the GI Bill and the

Vietnam War.28 This study exploited the fact that starting in December of 1969, draft lotteries

were held to determine conscription. In each annual draft lottery, random sequence numbers

(RSN) were assigned to all dates of birth for men in the relevant cohorts. Each lottery had an

associated draft-eligibility cut-off, where men with a RSN below the cut-off were draft-eligible

and those with RSNs above the cut-off were not. As one would expect, being draft-eligible was

highly correlated with Vietnam veteran status, but since eligibility was randomly determined, it

was independent of unobserved ability factors that might influence earnings potential. Using

variation in veteran status and the availability of GI Bill benefits to veterans, the researchers

were able to isolate variation in schooling that is driven by random draft-eligibility and not

unobserved individual factors.    The study showed that randomly drafted veterans indeed

acquired more years of college and that, on average, each year led to an increase in earnings of

about 9 percent. A related study analyzed the Canadian version of the GI Bill, the Veteran's




                                               11
Rehabilitation Act (VRA), and found that an extra year in higher education improved earnings

for veterans by about 15 percent.29


       A problem with these estimates is that they apply only to older cohorts affected by

college proximity or draft lotteries several decades ago. As such, they are quite outdated, as the

fraction and types of individuals enrolling in college has since dramatically changed. It may,

therefore, not be prudent to extrapolate these returns and conclude they apply to different types

of individuals or more recent cohorts.


       A study looking at more recent cohorts uses a matching approach to estimate college

returns for individuals with different predicted probabilities of completing. Its nationally

representative sample included individuals aged twenty-nine to thirty-two in 1994, thirty-three

to thirty-six in 1998, and thirty-seven to forty in 2002.30 The study used observable individual

and family characteristics to calculate individual probabilities for completing college. It grouped

individuals according to the different probabilities, so that those within each group had similar

observable characteristics, on average. For each probability group, the researchers estimated the

economic return to college completion. For both men and women, those who were least likely to

complete college based on their observed characteristics benefited the most from completion.

For example, for men with a 0 to 10 percent predicted probability of completing college,

completion raised earnings about 30 percent; for those with a 60 to 100 percent predicted

probability, it raised earnings only about 10 percent.    A concern with this study's approach,

however, is that it relies on the assumption that, for those with similar probabilities of

completing college, reasons for actual attendance do not account for the earnings differences

observed.



                                                12
        Unfortunately, there exists room for skepticism with all of the estimated returns

mentioned above. More research is needed to generate consensus on what college does to more

recent cohorts and different types of students. A more convincing analysis on the recent returns

to college, in particular for students at the margin of going, comes from a study comparing high

school seniors from Florida who barely qualified to attend one of the state's public colleges to

those who barely missed the academic cut-off.31 Using data from the Florida State University

System (FSUS) on six cohorts of 12th grade students representing the high school graduating

classes from 1996 to 2002 (the 1997 cohort was omitted), the study compares the earnings for

those who barely crossed the grade threshold and attended the university as a result with the

earnings for those who did not attend because they barely fell short of the threshold. The

intuition is that barely falling above or below the cut-off is essentially randomly determined, and

that as a result, students on either side of the cut-off are not systematically different.


        The study looked at students who barely crossed the threshold at a particular university,

Florida International University. Since this school had lower admissions standards than any other

postsecondary institution in the system, students who barely fell short of the cut-off typically did

not attend any FSUS school. The results are therefore interpreted as the gain marginal students

experience by attending a four-year institution relative to those who do not attend, but possibly

do attend a community college. The results suggest that the return to these marginal students of a

year at a four-year college was about 11 percent, and that each marginal admission yields

earnings gains of 22 percent eight to fourteen years after high school graduation.32


IV. An Increase in the Demand for College-Related Skills?




                                                  13
       Arguably the most important piece of evidence on the generally positive benefits from

college comes not from exploiting natural experiments, but from noting the remarkable rise in

the earnings premium associated with a college degree, despite an equally impressive rise in the

number of students obtaining a college degree. Many economists have conjectured that the

integration of computers and information technology over the last few decades has led to a

general reorganization of the way that firms produce and a corresponding change in worker

demand towards those with more abstract, multi-level, and non-cognitive skills. Think of this,

for example, as a race between education attainment, a proxy measure for the supply of skilled

workers, and skill-biased technology used by firms, representing the demand for skilled

workers.33 Changes in technology are said to be skill-biased when they demand, or are more

complementary to, highly skilled workers.34 Around 1980, the growth in demand for college-

related skills started to outpace supply and has been winning the race ever since. For the past

three decades, technological change has led to increased growth in the demand for skilled

workers, and because the supply of college educated workers has not increased at the same rate,

employers have bid up the wages of college graduates causing the rise in the college earnings

premium.


       Figure 3 provides graphical evidence of this phenomenon for full-time workers who are

thirty to fifty years old. The figure shows the evolution of the wage premium for college

graduates, along with the evolution of the relative supply of college educated workers and those

with only high school. Relative supply is calculated as the proportion of workers who have a

college degree or more, divided the proportion who have only high school, minus one. It reveals

how many more college educated workers (in percentage terms) there are than workers with only

a high school diploma. Figure 3 shows that the college to high school wage premium has been


                                              14
steadily increasing over the past three decades, peaking in 2010 at around 81 percent. What's

more, the relative supply of college educated workers has also been steadily increasing

throughout the same time period. In 2010 there were about 36 percent more college educated

workers than those with only high school. The fact that the relative supply and the wage

premium have grown over the period suggests that the growth in relative demand for college

educated workers must have outpaced the growth in supply.


       Throughout the past three decades there has also been a growing polarization of both

employment and earnings. Employment opportunities and earnings have been increasing in

high-education professional, technical, and managerial occupations, as well as in low-education

food service, personal care, and protective service occupations. However, throughout the same

period, employment and earnings have been falling in middle-skill, clerical, administrative, and

sales occupations, as well as in middle-skill production, craft, and operative occupations.35

Leading explanations for these polarization patterns are the computer automation and off-shoring

of middle-skilled, routine tasks. These are often the tasks that were previously performed

primarily by workers with a high school diploma, but less than a four-year college degree, and

were present in activities such as bookkeeping, clerical work, and repetitive production.36


       Understanding how technological advancement increases the college premium may help

improve our understanding of the college production function. If technological change increases

relative earnings for college graduates, it does so through an increase in relative demand for the

skills of college graduates.   Under this theory, college students have superior non-routine,

abstract skills that require problem solving, multi-tasking, and creativity. Individuals with no

more than high school attainment, however, may still benefit from an increase in demand for

manual skills that cannot be automated.        However, since the qualifications necessary for

                                                15
performing manual tasks often do not extend beyond a high school diploma, there is a large

potential supply of workers who can perform these tasks. As a result, despite the increase in

relative demand, wage growth has not been as rapid for less-educated workers. This point is

emphasized by Figure 3, as it shows the persistent rise in the earnings premium of college

workers over both high school graduates and those with only some college.


       Some have questioned the conclusion of an undersupply of college graduates today and

countered that many workers with a bachelor's degree are ending up in jobs that do not require

these credentials. A study entitled, "The Undereducated American," conducted by Anthony P.

Carnevale and Stephen J. Rose for the Georgetown University Center on Education and the

Workforce further explored this claim.37 The results indicated that within occupations, those

with a bachelor's degree almost always earn significantly more, on average, than those with only

a high school diploma. This was true even in the low-skilled occupation tier comprised of labor,

sales, operative, or service workers. If employers are acting rationally, then they must be paying

for some added benefits that are associated with hiring college educated workers. As we saw

above, these added benefits likely represent the higher analytic and technical skills that college

degree holders possess.


       Another counter to the argument that changes in technology favor the college educated is

that a decline in average ability among leftover high school graduates would also produce a rise

in the college premium, without college itself affecting earnings. As noted, the last few decades

have witnessed an increase in college attainment rates, which affects the composition of both

college and high school graduates, probably by decreasing average measures of innate ability for

both groups. A significant enough drop in average high school graduate productivity levels

could then account for the rise in relative earnings of college graduates. A 2010 study attempts to

                                                16
measure the rise in demand for college-related skills after controlling for shifts in initial high

school and college student ability from 1960 to 2000.38 The study compared individuals working

in the same region, but who were born in regions with differing levels of college enrolments, to

measure the extent to which workers among a larger pool of college graduates or a smaller pool

of high school graduates were paid less. The study concluded that, the evolution of the college

wage premium from 1960 to 2000 would actually have been 6 percentage points higher had

college quality remained constant.39 It can therefore likely be ruled out that cohorts of college

graduates today are more able or that a drop in high school graduate ability is driving the rise in

the college premium.

V. Signaling


       An ongoing debate exists over the extent to which college itself improves skill or simply

signals the presence of skill.       The debate has intensified recently with the release of

Academically Adrift, a book that presents extensive research pointing toward the fact that a large

portion of undergraduate students do not actually demonstrate an improvement in skills while in

college.40 With falling study time, and pressure on faculty to pass most students, some wonder

whether college actually develops new skills or produces a signal of skill already acquired before

the college experience.     While evidence generally exists that both stories play a role in

generating higher earnings, it has proven frustratingly difficult to determine which theory matters

more, and when.


       We note here the subtle distinction between the signaling concern and the self-selection

problem described earlier. Because students self-select into college, it may be that those who

choose to pursue more schooling are the most likely to benefit from college or earn higher wages

at any level of schooling.      Despite the empirical challenges that self-selection poses, the

                                                  17
assumption has been that students develop new skills throughout the college experience.

According to the signaling hypothesis, however, students do not actually develop new skills as

they move through college, but rather use a college degree to signal their innate ability to the

labor market. If there is little or no skill development throughout college, and if skill-biased

technological change is driving the rise in college earnings, then pushing students into college

who do not already possess substantial abstract thinking skills will not necessarily lead to the

returns described above.


           Recent research on signaling focuses on how quickly employers learn about true skill.

One study conducted in 2010, using data from 1979 to 2004 on individuals with either a high

school or college degree, found that employers recognize from the start the ability of applicants

coming out of college, but not the ability of those coming from high school.41 As a measure of

ability, the authors used each individual's Armed Forces Qualification Test (AFQT) score. To

test the signaling hypothesis, they reasoned that if an employer does not fully recognize an

employee’s ability initially, the relationship between AFQT score (which is correlated in part

with unobserved ability) and wages should grow over time. As an employer learns about a

worker’s ability, he will pay accordingly, and as a result, the AFQT score should become more

relevant in explaining wages as the worker’s experience increases. Conversely, if an employer

fully and immediately observes ability, then the relationship between AFQT and wages should

remain constant over time because the employer will learn nothing further about unobserved

ability.

           The study found that AFQT for college-educated workers was closely related with wages

from the start and that the relationship remained unchanged with experience; for high-school

educated workers AFQT, became progressively more important in explaining wages. These


                                                  18
findings suggest that employers know fully the skills of college graduates as soon as they enter

the job market but that they need time to recognize the ability of high school graduates. That

initial earnings within the pool of college graduates vary, and that the variation is strongly

correlated with proxies for individual ability, suggests that college educated workers are not

simply separating themselves from those who have only a high school degree. Workers in the

college labor market engage in a higher level of separation as they reveal their ability through

grades that appear on transcripts, the major they complete, standardized test score results, and the

name of the college from which they graduate.42

       The fact that employers seem to eventually ascertain an employee's true ability for both

college and high school graduates does not necessarily imply signaling is unimportant. In

particular, this test for the importance of signaling comes into question if initial job placement

affects not only one’s wage level but also how one’s wage changes over time. An employer may

realize exceptional talents in a high school graduate within a year or two after she enters the job

market, but if obtaining positions that offer more training or promotion opportunities depends on

the first impression (or signal) that potential employers receive, it may be too late for her to

follow these other, more lucrative, career tracks. For example, being at a large firm or in a

particular occupation immediately after graduation may allow her to realize wage growth that

would not be possible if her career had had a different starting point. In this sense, while the

initial signal is important only for a brief period of time, it still may have long-lasting

consequences.

       Some college programs teach more specific skills than others. Section Three showed that

students who graduated from computer science, engineering, and math programs had the highest

estimated average lifetime earnings. Graduates with these degrees working in their fields are



                                                  19
likely applying skills acquired from higher education. The signaling argument might be more

convincing for workers who graduate from general arts or humanities programs. For these

graduates, the link between the occupational tasks they perform and the skills they develop in

college is perhaps less evident. It is more plausible that they already possessed the productivity

employers value prior to college, and simply used college to signal these skills to the labor

market. However, as there is no general consensus on how much students actually learn in

different college programs, the exact role of signaling still remains to be determined.


VI. Non-pecuniary Benefits from college?


       The evidence presented above generally suggests that there are significant pecuniary

returns to college. It is worth mentioning the possibility of non-pecuniary benefits as well, both

while in college and after graduation. College life itself offers more than classroom experiences.

Students enjoy spending time in the company of others of their age, participating in clubs and

sports that they would not easily have access to otherwise, and satisfying their intellectual

curiosity. After completing college, students may be able to anticipate other non-pecuniary

benefits both inside and outside of the labor market. For example, recent evidence shows that

even after controlling for different measures of family background and income, workers with

more schooling hold jobs that offer a greater sense of accomplishment, more independence and

opportunities for creativity, and more social interactions than jobs available to non-college

graduates.43 Several studies have also shown that college graduates tend to enjoy better health

outcomes on average.44

       The non-pecuniary benefits of attending college, like the pecuniary effects, are linked

with personal characteristics such as family background. Any convincing study must isolate the

effect of schooling alone. A second complication, specific to the analysis of non-pecuniary

                                                 20
effects, is that more schooling tends to generate higher income, which itself affects certain

aspects of individuals' lifestyles. Isolating the effect of schooling requires separating schooling

from any effects stemming from the higher income brought about by more schooling.45

       A 2011 study used two strategies to capture the causal effects of schooling on non-

pecuniary outcomes.46 The first used rich Norwegian administrative data to compare life

outcomes between siblings with different levels of schooling. That approach helped control for

differences in family background and, to the extent that the reasons underlying different levels of

siblings’ schooling are unrelated with later socioeconomic outcomes, provides a useful

estimation strategy. Even after controlling for income, the study found that siblings with an

average of one more year of education married spouses with more education, were less likely to

be divorced or be receiving health disability payments, and were less likely to have a teenage

birth. The second strategy used a natural experiment involving changes in compulsory schooling

laws across the states. Because individuals have no control over how long they are legally

required to be in school, any variation in schooling caused by changes in compulsory schooling

is not likely to be related to unobserved individual characteristics. This strategy too revealed

positive non-pecuniary benefits: individuals with more schooling were less likely to have a

teenage birth, be divorced, suffer mental ailments, or have a child be retained a grade level.

       Although credibly measuring these benefits is even more difficult than measuring

economic rewards from college, it is important to recognize the potential for college to affect a

wide array of outcomes over one's lifetime, not just through earnings.


VII. Returns to Two Year Colleges


       Some research has specifically attempted to looked at returns to two-year community

colleges. A 1995 study using a sample of individuals who were fourteen to twenty-one years

                                                 21
old in 1979 found that the average person realized about a 4 to 7 percent return to a year of

community college, compared to a return of about 6 to 9 percent for a year completed at a four-

year college.47 To provide a causal interpretation for their estimate, the researchers controlled

for several variables that may be related an individual's family background and ability. While we

may worry that remaining selection bias cannot be ruled out, similar results were obtained in an

earlier version of the study, which used the method described above of comparing individuals by

distance to college in an effort to eliminate any unobserved personal characteristics that may

confound the results.48


       A more recent study used detailed administrative data from Kentucky that tracked two

cohorts of students that entered the state's community college system during the 2002-2003 and

the 2003-2004 school years.49 The researchers used changes in individuals' own education

attainment to estimate that, on average, high school educated women gained nearly 40 percent

higher earnings after obtaining associates degrees or diplomas, while men gained approximately

18 to 20 percent higher earnings. The returns to certificates were found to be around 9 percent

for men and 3 percent for women. To alleviate additional concerns that unobserved reasons

behind choosing to go back to school drive the results, the researchers controlled for variables

designed to capture students' labor market intentions.


       Another 2011 study adopting a similar before-after comparison analyzed returns to two-

year colleges for individuals between the ages of twenty-four and thirty in 2008.50 To further

identify any additional boost to completing a private two-year college, a comparison was made

between the before and after gains of private sector students to the before and after gains of

public sector students. The results suggested that students who complete an associate's degree at

a public or private college experienced an earnings return of about 15 to 17 percent, or 8 percent

                                                22
per year of education. However, the study did not find any additional benefit to completing a

private community college, which may be a little concerning given the higher costs of private

for-profit education.


VIII. Marginal Students


       Individuals at the margin of going to college are particularly interesting from a policy

perspective. If we believe that individuals make decisions about college attendance based on the

cost-benefit analysis described above, then it follows that those who are most likely to go to

college are the ones who are most likely to benefit from college. This idea is formalized in a

2011 study, which explains why we might want to be careful when considering college

enrolment expansion policies.51 In particular, unless the policy change in question is the same

one we are using to estimate college returns, the individuals pushed into college by the policy

may experience very different returns than those documented above. The paper demonstrates

this by considering three different hypothetical policy changes and shows that for each policy

change, the specific policy-relevant treatment effect of college is lower than the return to college

estimated by using the common techniques previously described. The intuition can be framed as

follows: If we believe that the college decision is made based on a cost-benefit analysis, then

those students who choose to go are the ones with the largest returns, while those who opt not to

go have the lowest returns. It is because they have the least to gain that the marginal students are

least likely to attend. Since the policies induced these students to attend, it is natural that we see

them realizing lower returns.52


       While this study raises important concerns that should be kept in mind, the majority of

the empirical literature suggests that the returns to marginal students are at least as high as the


                                                 23
average, if not higher.53 The previous argument relies on the idea that the probability of college

attendance is determined primarily by economic factors. We may also believe, however, that

college attendance is determined by cultural or social circumstances. This adds a dimension of

complexity to the college decision, and if we adopt this view, then it may very well be that

factors other than the potential economic gains of college are causing a low probability of

attendance for some students.     If individuals with low levels of social or cultural capital face

especially poor labor market outcomes in the absence of college, then, as a result of this different

college selection mechanism, students who are least likely to go to college may actually have the

highest potential returns.54 Developing policies to target marginal students may then lead to large

private and social gains.


 IX. The Importance of Completion and School Quality


       Labor economists have long documented the existence of so-called 'diploma' or

'sheepskin' effects, which imply that the year of schooling in which individuals complete a

degree is associated with an increase in earnings above the increase observed for each previous

year.55 Put differently, over and above the number of years one attends college, possessing a

college degree provides an additional boost to one’s earnings. Graphical evidence consistent

with diploma effects can be seen in Figure 4. The figure displays annual earnings at select

percentiles of the earnings distributions and compares bachelor's degree holders to those with

only high school and those who completed some college but failed to obtain a degree. We see

that workers with a bachelor's degree earn more at every percentile than those who completed

some college but did not graduate. What's more, at every percentile, the earnings of workers who

only complete some college are only marginally higher than the earnings of high school

graduates, suggesting that there may be significant benefits to completion. Evidently, relative to

                                                24
a high school diploma, only completing some college and then dropping out is not associated

with the same earnings boost as a bachelor's degree.


       Deciding to pursue a degree and failing to obtain one is also associated with real costs.

Not only do these students incur the financial loss associated with enrolling in college, but they

also pass up the opportunity to enter the job market sooner, gain experience, and potentially find

better jobs.56 Likewise, longer completion times are also associated with additional tuition fees

and missed labor market experience.        Given that there are real costs associated with not

completing college or prolonging time to completion and large benefits to obtaining a college

degree, it appears to be quite counter-intuitive that, among recent cohorts, completion rates have

stagnated and time to completion is rising. Several hypothesis have been put forth to explain this

paradox and we discuss a few in this section.


       First, it can be argued that if individuals are behaving optimally, some students should

drop out of college. College can be thought of as an 'experience good,' the benefits of which are

difficult to predict in advance.57 Potential students differ in their ability to succeed in college

and translate a college education into labor market earnings, and their individual-specific ability

is not fully known before they enroll.58 By attempting college, students can learn about their true

ability and then act on this newly acquired information, deciding either to complete the program

or to drop out. As noted, when the likelihood of success in college is initially uncertain, there is

an option value to attending: receiving new information about true ability is certainly valuable,

but it can only be obtained after enrolment. A 2009 study used unique survey data to explore the

extent to which learning about true ability affects the decision to drop out of college.59 The study

found that at the time of entry, students tended to discount the possibility that they would

perform poorly. After starting college, however, they updated their thinking to reflect their new

                                                25
insights based on their experience in college, and the updating played an important role in the

drop-out decision. As long as the time spent in college before dropping out is relatively short,

one could argue that the benefit of acquiring new information—and having the option to act on

it—actually outweighs the costs associated with failing to complete.


       To put the recent college completion trends into perspective, between 1970 and 1999 the

college enrolment rates of students aged twenty-three who were pursuing a bachelor’s degree

rose substantially but completion rates fell by 25 percent.60 The completion rates of older groups,

however, remained relatively stable, which suggests that the time it took individuals in this group

to complete increased. We have already mentioned one possible explanation for these trends—

financial constraints. Individuals who are unable to borrow or who have limited access to credit

may be forced to work while in college, thereby extending the time required to finish a degree.

Likewise, students may exhaust financial aid too quickly and be forced to put college on hold

while they work and accrue more funds.61


       Another hypothesis suggests that perhaps a decline in institution quality or a reduction in

resources per student at public colleges and universities is to blame for the decline in completion

rates. For example, a 2010 study using data on the 1972 and 1992 high school classes reported

that time to completion has increased most among students who start college at less-selective

public universities and community colleges.62 The idea is that students are taking longer to

complete their studies not because of changes in their own preparedness or demographic

characteristics, but rather because public colleges and universities are providing fewer resources

per student. A 2007 study suggests that public colleges and universities do not fully offset

increases in student demand for higher education with increases in resources.63          Increased

enrolment that is not accompanied by additional resources leads to increased time to completion

                                                26
through crowding and course enrolment constraints. Students in a particularly large cohort at a

given institution may find it difficult to accumulate the required number and distribution of

credits in an appropriate timeframe. That increased time to completion seems to be concentrated

at the least-selective institutions led another study to hypothesize that one way the top-tier

schools avoid reductions in resources per student is by regulating enrolment size.64


       Research has also investigated the extent to which attending a highly selective institution

increases the college premium.      The empirical challenge in answering this question is that

students who attend top institutions may realize higher earnings regardless of where they attend

school. To address the challenge, a 2002 study matched students who applied to, and were

accepted by, similar colleges of varying quality.65 When the study analyzed the earnings

differences between students who attended more selective institutions and those who were

accepted by the same institutions but chose to attend less selective schools, it found no broad

discernible earnings effect from attending a highly selective institution. The only significantly

positive effects were concentrated among a subgroup of students from low-income families.


       The 2002 study, however, is the exception in a large body of research that typically does

find significant economic returns to school quality.66 A 2009 study by Mark Hoekstra, for

example, found that attending a flagship state university had large positive earnings effects for

twenty-eight- to thirty-three-year-old individuals.67 It compared the earnings of students who

attended the school after falling just above the academic admissions cut-off to the earnings of

students who were just below the cut-off and did not attend. Because picking students who fall

just below or just above the cut-off is essentially equivalent to random sampling, there could be

few systematic differences in unobservable characteristics between the two groups. The study

found that attending the most selective state university causes earnings to be approximately 20

                                                27
percent higher for white males. Although Hoekstra could not confirm that students who were

rejected attended college elsewhere, he presented suggestive evidence that they did so. If the

majority of these students did indeed attend another institution, the findings could be confidently

interpreted as the effect of attending a flagship over another university.


       In summary, researchers have found that both completing college and attending an

institution of high quality increase the returns to attending college. A direct corollary of these

findings is that state and federal policies aimed only at increasing access to higher education may

not be enough to combat earnings inequality. As college enrolment rates have risen over the past

few decades, but completion has not followed suit, policymakers have thus begun to place more

emphasis on college completion.




X. Costs and Student Debt


A. College Costs

       Having reflected at length about the benefits associated with college completion, we now

consider how cost and student debt figure in the college investment. Recent statistics provided by

the College Board indicate that average annual tuition and fees for four-year colleges are

approximately $8,200 for in-state students and $20,770 for out-of-state students.68 For the two

groups considered together, the median annual tuition was $8,274 in 2011–12, with about 19

percent of students enrolled in institutions charging less than $6,000, and 8.2 percent in

institutions charging more than $18,000 a year.69 Costs at private four-year institutions average

around $28,500. At private non-profit four-year institutions, median annual tuition in 2011–12

was $29,242, with about 28 percent of students enrolled in institutions charging $36,000 or more


                                                 28
a year. Finally, students attending public two-year colleges faced average annual fees of about

$2,900.

       Clearly costs vary widely across institutions, and discrepancies between public and

private tuition figures are large. Costs to students also vary depending on how much financial aid

each is eligible to receive. Net tuition fees are often lower than students think. One study, for

example, reviews the literature and reports evidence suggesting that high school students

overestimated the tuition cost of public four-year institutions by 65 percent; their parents, by 80

percent.70 Just as the benefits associated with college completion can be large, so can the payoff

to properly researching both the costs of, and financial aid available at, each school.

          The appropriate way to assess the cost of college is as an investment to be paid for over

time. Just as with a housing property, the primary question is not the total price of the property,

but whether the buyer can support mortgage payments over the long run with enough resources

left over for other necessities.71 Like the benefits of purchasing a house, the benefits of obtaining

a college degree are spread over the long run—certainly much longer than the period a student is

in school paying annual tuition fees. The basis for establishing acceptable levels of tuition fees

and appropriate levels of debt financing is earnings expected after graduation.

          Such an assessment would begin with the cost of tuition. An average student attending an

in-state public four-year college or university in 2011 faced net tuition and fees estimated at

approximately $2,490, once grant aid and federal education tax credits and deductions were

taken into account.72 Based on that, and not accounting for books and other supplies, the average

tuition cost for a student who completes college in four to five years will be between $9,960 and

$12,450. To cover these costs, suppose a student took out a loan which he was, upon graduating,

required to repay in annual increments of $2,500 over ten years. In the case of debt financing,



                                                  29
this repayment figure is the first piece of relevant information in evaluating the college

investment. Another is the earned income expected upon graduation. Deciding whether college

is a prudent investment requires comparing the difference between the hypothetical student’s

expected earnings as a college graduate and as a high school graduate, with the annual repayment

figure. In 2010, workers with only a high school diploma earned $32,000 a year, on average.73

Therefore, if our hypothetical student is likely to earn the average high school graduate income

without attending college, his or her college earnings would need to be least $34,500 a year

($32,000 plus the annual repayment figure) to justify the college investment. That figure

translates into 7.8 percent a year more than the earnings of the average high school graduate. In

2010, bachelor's degree holders earned approximately $56,000 a year, on average, or 75 percent

more a year than high school graduates. In this specific hypothetical scenario, going to college

would cover the annual repayment figure and leave $21,000 in excess of annual high school

earnings. Such an investment in college would clearly be a sound one. In fact, since the earnings

premium of college continues beyond the ten-year repayment period, the investment could be

considered optimal with an even lower level of expected college earnings.

       The preceding exercise is a (simplified) demonstration of how to begin to assess the

college investment. Of course, earnings after college are uncertain and any calculations need to

be conducted using reasonable predictions of future earnings. In addition, as noted, costs vary

for in- and out-of-state students, public and private institutions, and by whether a student is

eligible for, or takes advantage of, financial aid. Annual tuition, and therefore repayment figures

in the event of debt financing, can be higher or lower than the hypothetical example of $2,500

used above.

B. Debt Levels



                                                 30
       Student borrowing has drawn much media attention of late, including reports of

staggering figures of student debt and stories of debt-burdened students unable to make loan

repayments. How does student debt affect the college investment? Do students borrow too much

or too little? A 2012 study by Christopher Avery and Sarah Turner addressed these questions.74

As background, from 1989 to 2008 the total volume of federal student loans expanded sevenfold,

although the average size loan per student remained fairly constant. The share of undergraduate

students taking out loans increased from 19 to 35 percent over the same period. As we have

shown, the college investment often comes with a high earnings payoff, and that payoff has

markedly increased in the past few decades. The increasing return to college could justify an

increasing willingness to borrow in order to reap the higher returns. It may actually be the case

that some students borrow too little and do not obtain enough schooling.

       When Avery and Turner analyzed total accumulated student debt six years after college

enrolment from 2004 to 2009, they found that the median accumulated debt among students at

public four-year institutions was $6,000. Among those who completed a bachelor's degree, the

median was $7,500; the 90th percentile was $32,000. Less than half of a percent of graduating

students, excluding those in the for-profit sector, had more than $100,000 of student debt.

Among student borrowers who were in repayment six years after initial college enrolment, the

average ratio of monthly repayment to income was about 10.5 percent.

       The authors concluded that the popular media claim that levels of student borrowing are

universally too high is simply not accurate. It may even be the case that some students borrow

too little and that students may, as a result, under-invest in their education. We have already

shown that some individuals are averse to holding debt and may avoid taking out loans, while

others may avoid making use of popular federal aid programs because they are too complicated



                                                31
to use effectively. Ultimately, the manner in which college costs and student debt affect the value

of the college investment depends on an array of factors, including individual- and institution-

specific calculations involving variations in earnings by field of study and occupation, by

whether students attend highly selective or less selective institutions, and by whether they finish

their studies and earn a degree. All these factors must be taken into account to predict the return

on the college investment and determine the 'appropriate' amount of debt.


XI. Conclusion


       The evidence presented above suggests that there are, in general, significant returns to a

college degree.    While these benefits are not constant across all college programs and

occupations, college graduates do enjoy an earnings premium across all major occupation

sectors. The empirical evidence also suggests that those at the margin of attending (whether due

to financial constraints or otherwise) benefit at least as much as those from the more general

college population. Students with high risk of failing out, however, may be wise to not to attend

as the evidence suggests that those who only obtain some college do not realize significantly

higher average earnings over workers with only high school. Although the option value of

college should be given fair consideration, if an individual expects to be unable to obtain a

degree, the investment might not generate enough of a return to justify tuition and other

expenses. The facts that academically marginal students seem to realize earnings returns that are

at least as high as the average, while college dropouts do not benefit nearly as much may appear

to contradict one and other. However, in the Florida study discussed above, the graduation rate

of marginal students who barely received college admission was similar to that in the broader

student population. This accords with the evidence discussed in Section Nine, which suggests



                                                32
that changes in academic preparedness cannot explain much of the recent decline in college

completion rates.


       Throughout the past three decades, the college earnings premium has increased rapidly.

Many researchers believe skill-biased technological change has caused a large growth in demand

for workers with abstract and cognitive reasoning skills, and skills that cannot easily be

automated. Despite the large returns from completion, overall college completion rates have

stagnated and students who are finishing are taking longer to do so than in the past. The most

recent evidence suggests that this is likely due to financially constrained low-income students,

and falling resources per-student at non-selective institutions.    If we are to reduce earnings

inequality in America, policies designed for producing more college graduates must receive

serious consideration.


       So how does a high school graduate make the most out of college? Since the 1980s we

have seen technologically driven changes to the structure of the American labor market. Middle-

skilled routine tasks are fading, while non-routine, abstract and manual task employment

opportunities are growing.     Correspondingly, the earnings benefits of college vary across

undergraduate majors, as students graduating from programs that foster—or signal— abstract

thinking skills realize the largest earnings premiums. Therefore, prior to applying to college, one

should carefully consider both the college program and the eventual occupational sector he or

she intends to purse. Given that there appears large benefits to completion, students would also

be wise to research past completion rates at their schools of interest in order to minimize the

likelihood of dropping out. While evaluating program and school choices, graduate school is

worth considering as a future option: as we saw, the largest increase in earnings associated with

college completion is for those with post-bachelor degrees.

                                                33
         Potential students who are not convinced that a four-year program is right for them may

want to consider a two-year institution. We saw that, relative to only a high school diploma,

there is a positive earnings gain to completing community college.             In light of recent

technological changes, community college programs that foster non-repetitive manual skills

would be worth considering.


         Finally, evidence suggests that potential students often overestimate the costs associated

with a college education. We have also seen that financial aid programs can be extremely

complex and that students sometimes give too much weight to details that should be irrelevant in

the college decision. Therefore, it is important to be as well informed as possible about the

expenses associated with college and the potential options for financial aid. This may require a

little more research, but they payoff can be substantial.           High school counselors and

administrators also have a role in offering assistance in getting through the application process

and helping students better understand options available to them. High school graduates should

also reflect on their personal likelihood of success in the college program they would like to

pursue and foster the motivation to complete. The more informed and aware a student becomes

about the expected costs and benefits, the better opportunity he or she will have to make the most

out of college.


1
    "Obama Renews Push For Higher Education, Hints at Santorum ‘Snob’ Comment," ABC News,

February 27 2012 (http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2012/02/obama-renews-push-for-

higher-education-hints-at-santorum-snob-comment/); and President Barack Obama, Address to

Joint Session of Congress, February 24, 2009.




                                                 34
2
    "Education and unemployment." The Washington Post, February 27, 2012

(http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/education-and-

unemployment/2012/02/27/gIQARNmzeR_graphic.html); and "New Study Tracks Lifetime

Income Based on College Major." Education Week, March 24 2011

(http://blogs.edweek.org/edweek/college_bound/2011/05/new_study_tracks_lifetime_income_ba

sed_on_college_major.html?qs=lifetime+college+earning).
3
    Christopher Avery and Sarah E. Turner, "Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too

Much Or -- Not Enough?" Journal of Economic Perspectives 26, no.1 (2012): 165-192.
4
    John Bound, Michael Lovenheim and Sarah E. Turner (2010), Increasing Time to

Baccalaureate Degree in the United States, report prepared for the Population Studies Center

(University of Michigan Institute for Social Research, April 2010); Sarah E. Turner, "Going to

College and Finishing College: Explaining Different Educational Outcomes," in College

Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go, and How to Pay For It, edited by

Caroline M. Hoxby (University of Chicago Press, 2004), pp. 13-61; and Philip Babcock and

Mindy Marks, Leisure College, USA: The Decline in Student Study Time, report prepared for the

American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research (August 2010).
5
    For a discussion of how benefits may differ across individuals, see: Pedro Carneiro, James J.

Heckman, and Edward J. Vytlacil, "Estimating Marginal Returns to Education," American

Economic Review 101 (2011): 2754–81.
6
    This discussion largely follows Turner, "Going to College and Finishing College " (See note 4).
7
    Lance Lochner and Alexander Monge-Narnjo, "Credit Constraints in Education," Annual

Review of Economics, forthcoming.




                                                  35
8. Philippe Belley and Lance Lochner, "The Changing Role of Family Income and Ability in

Determining Educational Achievement." Journal of Human Capital 1, no.1 (2007): 37–89.
9
    Judith Scott-Clayton, "What Explains Trends In Labor Supply Among U.S. Undergraduates,

1970-2009?" Working Paper 17744 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research,

January 2012).
10
     Ibid.
11
     Erica Field, "Educational Debt Burden and Career Choice: Evidence from a Financial Aid

Experiment at NYU Law School." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1, no.1

(2009): 1-21.
12
     For a more complete discussion of information constraints see: Judith Scott-Clayton,

"Information Constraints and Financial Aid Policy," Working Paper 17811 (Cambridge, Mass.:

National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2012).
13
     James J. Heckman, Lance J. Lochner, and Petra E. Todd, "Earnings Functions, Rates of Return

and Treatment Effects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond," in Handbook of the Economics of

Education, vol. 1, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis Welch (Elsevier, 2006), pp. 307–458.
14
     For an empirical analysis of the option value of college, see: Kevin M. Stange, "An Empirical

Examination of the Option Value of College Enrollment," American Economic Journal: Applied

Economics, forthcoming.
15
     Eric P. Bettinger, Bridget T. Long, Philip Oreopoulos and Lisa Sanbonmatsu , "The Role of

Simplification and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA

Experiment," Working Paper 15361 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research,

September 2009).




                                                 36
16
     Christopher Avery and Caroline M. Hoxby, "Do and should Financial Aid Packages Affect

Students' College Choices?" in College Choices: The Economics of Where to Go, When to Go,

and How to Pay For It, edited by Caroline M. Hoxby (University of Chicago Press, 2004): 239-

302.
17
     For a description of the trend in the college premium throughout the 20th century and into the

21st see: Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, " The Race between Education and Technology:

The Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005." Working Paper 12984

(Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March 2007).
18
     Anthony P. Carnevale, Stephen J. Rose, and Ban Cheah, The College Payoff: Education,

Occupations, Lifetime Earnings, report prepared for the Center on Education and the Workforce

(Georgetown University, 2011).
19
     Avery and Turner, "Student Loans" (See note 3).
20
     Ibid.
21
     Carnevale and Rose, "The College Payoff" (See note 18).
22
     In each figure appearing in this chapter, annual earnings are approximated by multiplying

weekly earnings by fifty-two. In order to focus on the more recent cohorts, all figures analyze

workers aged thirty to fifty, while Figures 1, 2 and 4 analyze only the years 2010 or 2011.

Consequently, none of the figures should be interpreted as making statements about the

"lifetime" earnings of individuals.
23
     Avery and Turner, "Student Loans" (see note 3).
24
     David Autor, "The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications

for Employment and Earnings." report prepared for the Hamilton Project prepared and the Center

of American Progress (April, 2010).


                                                  37
25
     Thomas Lemieux and David Card, "Education, Earnings, and the 'Canadian G.I. Bill'."

Canadian Journal of Economics 34, no. 2 (2001): 313-344.
26
     David Card, "Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return to

Schooling," in Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp,

edited by Louis N. Christofides, E. Kenneth Grant and Robert Swidinsky, (Toronto: University

of Toronto Press, 1995), pp. 201-222.
27
     John Bound and Sarah E. Turner, "Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II and

the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?" Journal of Labor

Economics 20, no.4 (2002): 784-815; Marcus Stanley, "College Education and the Midcentury

GI Bills." Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no.2 (2003): 671-708; and Joshua D. Angrist

and Stacey H. Chen, "Schooling and the Vietnam-Era GI Bill: Evidence from the Draft Lottery."

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (April 2011): 96-119.
28
     Joshua D. Angrist and Stacey H. Chen, "Schooling and the Vietnam-Era GI Bill: Evidence

from the Draft Lottery" (See note 27).
29
     Lemieux and Card, "Education, Earnings, and the 'Canadian G.I. Bill'" (See note 25).
30
     Jennie E. Brand and Yue Xie, " Who Benefits Most from College? Evidence for Negative

Selection in Heterogeneous Economic Returns to Higher Education." American Sociological

Review 75, no. 2 (2010): 273-302. .
31
     Seth Zimmerman, "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students,"

Journal of Labor Economics, forthcoming.

32. Since some students just below the threshold attended a community college, the estimate of

11 percent can be understood as a lower bound on the return to college over obtaining only a

high school diploma.


                                                 38
33
     Goldin and Katz, " The Race between Education and Technology: The Evolution of U.S.

Educational Wage Differentials, 1890 to 2005" (See note 17).
34
     Daron Acemoglu and David Autor, "What Does Human Capital Do? A Review of Goldin and

Katz's The Race between Education and Technology." Working Paper 17820 (Cambridge, Mass.:

National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2012).
35
     Autor, "The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market: Implications for

Employment and Earnings." (See note 24).
36
     Ibid.
37
     Anthony P. Carnevale and Stephen J. Rose, The Undereducated American, report prepared for

the Center on Education and the Workforce (Georgetown University, 2011).
38
     Pedro Carneiro and Sokbae Lee, "Trends in Quality-Adjusted Skill Premia in the United

States, 1960-2000." Discussion Paper 6107 (Bonn, Germany: The Institute for the Study of

Labor (IZA), October 2010).
39
     While higher college enrolment led to a decline in the average quality of college graduates, the

authors are unable to distinguish between two competing interpretations of their finding. On one

hand, an enrolment expansion draws in less prepared students, which results in a decline in

average student quality. On the other, increased enrolment that is not accompanied by an

increase in institutional resources will likely result in a lower-quality learning experience in

college.
40
     Richard Arum and Jospia Roksa, Academically Adrift: Limited Learning on College Campuses

(The University of Chicago Press, 2011).




                                                  39
41
     Peter Arcidiacono, Patrick Bayer, and Aurel Hizmo, "Beyond Signaling and Human Capital:

Education and the Revelation of Ability," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2

(October 2010): 76–104.
42
     For a recent analysis on earnings differences by institutional quality see: Mark Hoekstra, "The

Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: A Discontinuity-Base Approach."

Review of Economics and Statistics 91 no.4 (2009): 717–24.
43
     Philip Oreopoulos and Kjell G. Salvanes, "Priceless: The Non-pecuniary Benefits of

Schooling." Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, no.1 (Winter 2011): 159–84.
44
     Michael Hout, "Social and Economic Returns to College in the United States." Annual Review

of Sociology 38 (2011): 379-400.
45
     Oreopoulos and Salvanes, "Priceless: The Non-pecuniary Benefits of Schooling." (See note

43).
46
     Ibid.
47
     Thomas J. Kane and Cecilia Elena Rouse, "Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year

College." The American Economic Review 85, no.3 (1995): 600-614.
48
     Thomas J. Kane and Cecilia Elena Rouse, "Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year

Colleges: Is A Credit A Credit And Do Degrees Matter?" Working Paper 4286 (Cambridge,

Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January 1993).
49
     Christopher Jepsen, Kenneth Troske, and Paul Coomes, "The labor-market returns to

community college degrees, diplomas, and certificates," report prepared for the Center for

Poverty Research (University of Kentucky, October 2009).
50
     Stephanie Riegg Cellini and Latika Chaudhary, " The Labor Market Returns to a Private Two-

Year College Education." George Washington University Working Paper (April 2011).


                                                  40
51
     Carneiro, Heckman and Vytlacil, "Estimating Marginal Returns to Education." (See note 5).
52
     While this study raises important concerns, the evidence that is presented may be outdated.

The data employed by the study track the cohort of students that were 14-22 years old in 1979.

Since then, college student composition has changed, and as a result, one may wonder if the

same results would prevail with more recent data.
53
     Hout, "Social and Economic Returns to College in the United States" (See note 44).
54
     For a discussion of the two perspectives on the factors that determine the probability of

attending college see: Brand and Xie, " Who Benefits Most from College?" (See note 30).
55
     Fabian Lange and Robert Topel, "The Social Value of Education and Human Capital" in

Handbook of the Economics of Education Volume 1, edited by Eric A. Hanushek and Finis

Welch (Elsevier, 2006), pp. 459-509.
56
     Carnevale and Rose, "The Undereducated American" (See note 37).
57
     John Bound and Sarah E. Turner, “Dropouts and Diplomas: The Divergence in Collegiate

Outcomes,” in Handbook of the Economics of Education, volume 4, edited by Eric A. Hanushek,

Stephen Machin, and Ludger Woessmann (Elsevier, 2011), pp. 573–613.
58
     This discussion follows: Lange and Topel, "The Social Value of Education and Human

Capital" (See note 55).
59
     Todd R. Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner, "Learning About Academic Ability and the

College Drop-out Decision," Working Paper 14810 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of

Economic Research, March 2009).
60
     This discussion largely follows Turner, "Going to College and Finishing College" (See note 4).
61
     For a more elaborate discussion on student employment and its consequences see: Bound and

Turner, "Dropouts and Diplomas: The Divergence in Collegiate Outcomes" (See note 57); and


                                                   41
Scoot-Clayton "What Explains Trends in Labor Supply Among U.S. Undergraduates, 1970 –

2009?" (See note 9).
62
     Bound, Lovenheim and Turner, "Increasing Time to Baccalaureate Degree in the United

States" (See note 4).
63
     John Bound and Sarah E. Turner, “Cohort Crowding: How Resources Affect Collegiate

Attainment.”Journal of Public Economics 91 no.5-6 (2007): 877-899.
64
     Bound, Lovenheim, and Turner, "Understanding the Decrease in College Completion Rates

and the Increased Time to the Baccalaureate Degree" a report prepared for the Population

Studies Center (University of Michigan Institute for Social Research (November 2007).
65
     Stacey Berg Dale and Alan B. Krueger, "Estimating the Payoff To Attending A More

Selective College: An Application of Selection on Observables and Unobservables" The

Quarterly Journal of Economics November 2002: 1491 - 1527.
66
     Bound and Turner, "Dropouts and Diplomas: The Divergence in Collegiate Outcomes" (See

note 57).
67
     Hoekstra, "The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings" (See note 42).

Due to data confidentiality reasons, the study only refers to the institution in question as the

"state flagship university."
68
     College Board, Advocacy and Policy Center, 2011, "Trends in College Pricing"

http://trends.collegeboard.org/downloads/College_Pricing_2011.pdf
69
     College Board, Advocacy and Policy Center, 2011, "Trends in College Pricing," figure 2.
70
     Scott-Clayton, "Information Constraints and Financial Aid Policy" (See note 12).
71
     Sandy Baum and Saul Schwartz, "Is College Affordable? In Search of a Meaningful

Definition" (Institute for Higher Education Policy, 2012)


                                                 42
72
     College Board, Advocacy and Policy Center, 2011, "Trends in College Pricing," figure 7.
73
     Carnevale and Rose, "The Undereducated American" (See note 37).
74
     Avery and Turner, "Student Loans" (See note 3).




                                                 43
                                                                                Making College Worth It Figures

                                                                                                              Figure 1


                                                          Average Earnings by Occupation and Education
         20,000 40,000 60,000 80,000 100000
             Average Annual Earnings
                           0




                                              Managers & Professionals           Education                          Health Support                 Protective Service                    Blue Collar
                                                                         STEM                Health Professionals              Community Service & Arts                 Sales & Office                 Personal Service



                                                                                 High School                                                               Bachelor's Degree
                                                                                 Graduate Degree



Source: Authors' calculations using the 2010 Current Population Survey Monthly Outgoing
Rotation Groups.
Notes: The sample is restricted to full-time workers between ages 30-50. Graduate Degree
consists of workers with Master's and Doctorate degrees.
                                                    Figure 2

                                        Annual Earnings Percentiles in 2011


                       150000
                          100000
                 Annual Earnings
              50,000   0




                                   10         25             50     75            90
                                           High School            Bachelor's Degree
                                           Graduate Degree



Source: Authors' calculations using the 2011 Current Population Survey Monthly Outgoing
Rotation Groups.
Notes: The sample is restricted to full-time workers between ages 30-50.
                                                                                             Figure 3

                                    Premium Evolution                                                                                              Relative Supply Evolution
        .8




                                                                                                                    .4
                                                                                                R elative S u pp ly of C o lleg e G ra ds
                                                                                                                                 .2
        .6
  Premium




                                                                                                                   0
        .4




                                                                                                   -.2
        .2




             1980                1990                      2000                      2010




                                                                                                                    -.4
                                                    Year
                    College - High School Premium           College - Some College Premium                                                  1980    1990             2000      2010
                                                                                                                                                             Year




Source: Authors' calculations using the 1981 - 2011 Current Population Survey Monthly
Outgoing Rotation Groups.
Notes: Sample consists of full-time workers between ages 30-50. The college to high school
premium is calculated as the average earnings for those with a BA or more divided by the
average earnings of those with only a high school degree, minus one. The college to some
college premium is calculated as the average earnings for those with a BA or more divided by
the average earnings of those with some college or an associate's degree, minus one. The year
1992 marks an important change in the education category definitions. Post 1992 we use highest
degree attained as level of education. Prior to 1992, those with exactly 12 years of completed
education are classified as high school, those with more than 12 but less than 16 are classified as
some college, and those with 16 or more are classified as college. The relative supply of college
grads represents the proportion of workers with a college degree divided by the proportion with
only a high school diploma, minus one .
                                                Figure 4

                                   Annual Earnings Percentiles in 2011
                  150000
                     100000
            Annual Earnings
         50,000   0




                              10         25           50      75             90
                                       High School            Some College
                                       Bachelor's Degree


Source: Authors' calculations using the 2011 Current Population Survey Monthly Outgoing
Rotation Groups.
Notes: The sample is restricted to full-time workers between ages 30-50. Some College consists
of individuals who reported completing anywhere between one and four or more years of college
but did not obtain a degree.
