NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADJUSTING NATIONAL ACCOUNTING FOR HEALTH:
IS THE BUSINESS CYCLE COUNTERCYCLICAL?
Mark L. Egan
Casey B. Mulligan
Tomas J. Philipson
Working Paper 19058
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19058
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

Previously circulated as "Adjusting Measures of Economic Output for Health: Is the Business Cycle
Countercyclical?." We thank Ralph S.J. Koijen and William H.J. Hubbard for their valuable input.
Tomas Philipson acknowledges financial support from the George Stigler Center for the Study of The
Economy and The State, The University of Chicago. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Mark L. Egan, Casey B. Mulligan, and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Adjusting National Accounting for Health: Is the Business Cycle Countercyclical?
Mark L. Egan, Casey B. Mulligan, and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 19058
May 2013, Revised January 2014
JEL No. E01,I1
ABSTRACT
Many national accounts of economic output and prosperity, such as gross domestic product (GDP) or
net domestic product (NDP), offer an incomplete picture by ignoring, for example, the value of leisure,
home production, and the value of health. Previous discussed shortcomings of such accounts have
focused on how unobserved dimensions affect GDP levels but not their cyclicality, which affects the
measurement of the business cycle. This paper proposes a new methodology to measure economic
fluctuations that incorporates monetized changes in health of the population in the United States and
globally during the past 50 years. In particular, we incorporate in GDP the dollar value of mortality,
treating it as depreciation in human capital analogous to how net domestic product (NDP) treats
depreciation of physical capital. Because mortality tends to be procyclical, we find that adjusting
for mortality reduces the measured deviations of GDP from trend during the past 50 years by about
30% both in the United States and internationally.
Mark L. Egan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
egan@uchicago.edu
Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

Tomas J. Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu

1.

Introduction
It has long been recognized that gross domestic product (GDP) is an incomplete

measure of economic output. Among other things, GDP excludes the value of leisure, home
production, and health. Yet GDP and net domestic product (NDP) prevail as measures of
economic output. This is in part for a pragmatic reason; alternative approaches cannot be
adopted in a simple and transparent manner across time and countries. The measure of an
economy’s well‐being has enormous implications not only for attempts to understand
fluctuations, but also for its impact on national policies that are grounded in the belief that
currently measured recessions are welfare reducing and booms are welfare enhancing.
An important dimension of an economy’s welfare concerns the health of its
population. Indeed, recent research indicates that, in terms of overall trends, health has
been one of the most important components of the advances in U.S. welfare during the last
century (Murphy and Topel 2006). In this paper, we analyze whether incorporating health
into measures of short‐term macroeconomic fluctuations in GDP or NDP—i.e., deviations
from trends—alters assessments of the magnitude of macroeconomic fluctuations.
We incorporate health into macroeconomic fluctuation measures by valuing in U.S.
dollars any cyclical changes in health surrounding booms and recessions. In particular, we
incorporate mortality into output measures as depreciation in human capital in a way
analogous to how NDP treats physical depreciation. We then construct mortality‐adjusted
GDP and NDP measures to reexamine the U.S. and international fluctuations during the past
50 years. We find that mortality covaries positively with traditional GDP and NDP
measures over time across ages and countries, extending an existing literature on the
positive covariance between mortality and employment (Ruhm 2000). When we monetize
these counter‐cyclical levels of health, we find that they are quantitatively important and
the U.S. fluctuations look milder than traditionally presumed with GDP or NDP. We find
that incorporating the value of mortality potentially reverses one third of “recessions”
during the past 50 years, and that adjusting for mortality reduces measured output
volatility in both the United States and in the group of developed countries considered by
about 30%.
2

To illustrate the quantitative magnitude of the value of mortality in a year, consider
2010, when there were approximately 2.5 million deaths in the United States. The
Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. Department of Transportation estimates the
value of a life at roughly $9 million (in 2010 dollars) in recent regulatory impact analyses
(Viscusi 2014, U.S. Department of Transportation 2013). This implies a mortality cost of
approximately $22.5 trillion in 2010. The GDP of the United States that year was
approximately $15.8 trillion. Although there is ongoing debate regarding whether the
monetary value of life for older individuals should be larger or smaller than that of younger
individuals, the magnitudes of these back‐of‐the‐envelope calculations suggest they are of
first order importance.
The importance of health lost in a year relative to GDP carries over when we look at
changes in deviations from trend which we henceforth refer to as “fluctuations.” 1 To
illustrate our main results, figure 1 compares the severity of the nine U.S. recessions
between 1950 and 2010 as measured by both GDP and our mortality‐adjusted GDP, which
as noted takes into account depreciation in human capital.2 We measure the magnitude of
each recession as the peak to trough relative to GDP, as dated by the National Bureau of
Economic Research (NBER 2013). Each bar represents the difference in actual output at the
end of recession minus the implied trend output level between the years 1950 to 2010. In
every recession other than in 1962 and 2002, adjusting for the value of mortality suggests
that the total output fluctuations were milder than what is implied by unadjusted GDP
because of the positive correlation between mortality and traditional GDP. A remarkable
result is that offsets in health were large enough to essentially reverse one third of these
recessions. From the perspective of total economic output, including full depreciation,
these “recessions” were not associated with a decline in total output after adjusting for
health.
Our paper looks at all deviations from trend, regardless of their frequency. It is beyond the scope of this
paper (and our data) to further subdivide the deviations into, say, low frequencies, medium frequencies,
seasonal frequencies, etc.

1

In addition to calculating mortality adjusted GDP we also calculated mortality adjusted NDP. We replicated
the proceeding analysis using both GDP and NDP and found quantitatively similar results. We report the
results for GDP rather than NDP to facilitate comparisons across countries.

2

3

FIGURE 1: RECESSION – PEAK TO TRROUGH (% OF GDP)

Notes on Figures
F
1 and 3:
3









Eaach bar measu
ures the differrence in actual output at thee end of recesssion minus the trend outpu
ut
leevel. The differrence in outpu
ut is normalizeed by the tren
nd GDP level in
n the correspo
onding year. O
Output
iss measured in constant U.S. dollars (2000
0 base).
We
W compute trend GDP and mortality
m
adju
usted GDP by aassuming both GDP and thee value of morrtality
grrow at some constant,
c
but potentially
p
diffferent rates. T
Trend mortalitty adjusted GD
DP and GDP arre
co
omputed using the average GDP and valu
ue of mortalityy growth ratess over the periiod 1950 to 20
010.
Seee footnote 11
1 for further details.
d
Recessions are dated as per the
t NBER. Con
nsequently, it is possible thaat the peak to trough for an
ny
giiven recession
n, as measured
d using GDP, iss positive (e.gg., 1955 and 19
962 recessions).
Real GDP data is
i from the U.S
S. Bureau of Economic Anallysis and the W
World Bank.
We
W calculate th
he value of mo
ortality in the year
y
2000 usin
ng the age speecific value of statistical lifee
esstimates from
m Aldy and Visccusi (2008) (S
See section IV of Aldy and V
Viscusi 2008 fo
or further detaails).
The VSL in otheer years is scaaled by trend per
p capita GDP
P as discussed
d in Section 3.

As illlustrated in Figure 1, ou
ur main find
ding is that incorporatiing health m
makes
fluctuations less sig
gnificant. We
W believe, th
herefore, th
hat more ressearch is waarranted on
n the
cyclicalitty of unmeaasured comp
ponents of national
n
outtput.
Our paper
p
relatees to severaal other strands of workk. Cutler and
d Richardso
on (1997),
Nordhau
us (2002), and Murphy and Topel (2006)
(
havee documentted the centtral role of
4

health in overall economic well‐being gains in the United States. Becker et al. (2005) have
examined the impact of valuing health for world inequality and economic convergence.
Jones and Klenow (2010) have examined the impact of including other nonmarket
measures into international comparisons of welfare. This literature may be interpreted as
addressing the value of the overall trends in health and other measures. In contrast, our
research relates to the behavior of deviations from trends over time by assessing the cyclical
nature of health and how it relates to standard measurements of fluctuations.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 illustrates how physical depreciation is
handled in NDP measures and outlines how human capital depreciation can be handled in
an analogous manner. Section 3 describes how we construct the mortality adjusted GDP
series. Section 4 adjusts recessions in the United States and abroad for human capital
depreciation, looking at how peak‐to‐trough changes are affected. Section 5 provides
estimates for how the cyclicality of the U.S. and international output measures are altered
by including the depreciation of health. Finally, Section 6 concludes by outlining research
issues we believe need to be addressed. These include more complete measures of the
cyclical nature of human capital fluctuations, such as changes in fertility (entry versus exits
from the health capital stock) and educational investments (appreciation versus
depreciation of the stock). We argue that these unobserved components of human capital
are likely to be counter‐cyclical, thereby reinforcing the documented counter‐cyclical value
of health examined here.
2.

Human and Physical Capital Depreciation in the National Accounts
Part of measuring economic activity over a specific time frame (hereafter, a calendar

year) involves recognizing the value of capital is different at the end of the time frame than
it was at the beginning. Structures have been built or destroyed, water has been polluted or
cleaned, etc. For many purposes it is desirable to have measures of economic activity that
include the net change in the capital stock.
For this reason, national accounts include estimates of physical investment: the
value of additions to the nation’s private physical capital stock. In the expenditure account,
physical investment is sometimes measured net of depreciation, that is, the “depreciation”
5

value of the destruction, aging, or economic obsolescence of pre‐existing physical assets is
subtracted from the value of new assets created during the year.3 In the income account,
the same depreciation (as used in the expenditure account) is excluded from the incomes of
the owners of domestic physical capital. Either way, the result is NDP, or Net (of
depreciation) Domestic Product.
It is also understood that there are valuable human and environmental assets and
that, in principle, their accumulation and depreciation would be counted too (Hartwick
1990, Nordhaus and Kokkelenberg 1999, Jorgenson 2009). Human and environmental
capital data has traditionally been lacking, but economists are making progress, for
example, including environmental depreciation in their measures of economic activity
(Carson 1994). Ideally, national accounts would include the creation and destruction of
human assets in the same way as it includes the creation and destruction of physical assets.
For the purpose of measuring macroeconomic fluctuations, these measures will only be
important if they are correlated with the cycle because if they are not, traditional measures
are sufficient in measuring deviations. The purpose of our paper is to measure economic
activity over time in a way that begins to include the depreciation of human capital by
estimating the amount of deprecation and subtracting it from estimates of national product
that are gross of human depreciation.
The BEA’s ideal method for measuring depreciation – the loss in an asset’s value
solely from the passage of time – is to infer an age‐value profile from purchase price data in
a well‐function resale market for used assets (Fraumeni 1997). Depreciation over the year
would then be inferred by moving each asset one year further down the profile. For
example, if two‐year old automobiles sell for 90 percent of the price of one‐year old
automobiles, then automobiles would be assumed to depreciate 10 percent during their
second year.
In practice, physical asset resale market data is imperfect for this purpose. The
assets sold in the resale market are not a random sample of the assets in existence the year
The BEA defines depreciation as “the decline in value due to wear and tear, obsolescence, accidental
damage, and aging.” (Fraumeni, 1997).

3

6

before. For example, some automobiles are totaled as the result of accidents, etc., and
thereby excluded from resale markets but their destruction is nonetheless depreciation.4
When the resale data is poor enough, as it is for a great many of the physical assets tracked
in the national accounts, a depreciation schedule is parameterized and calibrated for each
type of asset and then assumed to apply to all investments of that type (Fraumeni 1997).
Geometric depreciation is commonly used for physical assets. Earlier versions of the
national accounts sometimes used a one‐hoss‐shay schedule based on data on normal asset
lifetimes: no depreciation during the normal asset life and then 100 percent depreciation
when the asset life is reached.
We don’t have a resale market in humans, so we follow the parametric approaches
that have been used to estimate physical depreciation. We take an approach which
calibrates a parametric age profile to recognize that the value lost at a person’s death
depends on the age of the person who died (Murphy and Topel 2006; Aldy and Viscusi
2008). Specifically we use existing age specific value of statistical life (VSL) tables to
calculate the value of depreciation in the human capital stock resulting from death.
3.

Constructing Mortality Adjusted GDP Series
We define mortality adjusted GDP as the value of GDP minus the value of lost life

(mortality) over the corresponding period. The value of mortality reflects the total value of
life lost in the corresponding period due to death. We compute the value of mortality as the
sum of the number of deaths in the period weighted by the corresponding VSL.
We use two VSL methodologies to compute the value of mortality. The first method
uses the VSL estimates from Aldy and Viscusi (2008) who use a minimum distance
estimator in conjunction with hedonic wage regressions to estimate the VSL conditional on
ages 18‐62.5 We extrapolate their estimates for the non‐working age populations.
The BEA usually measures expected or “normal” depreciation rather than actual depreciation. For example,
automobile depreciation in the national accounts does not reflect the actual number of car crashes during the
year but rather a normal rate. However, special disaster loss charges are included in the national accounts
when a natural or man‐made disaster’s destruction exceeds 0.1 percent of GDP.
4

5

See section IV of Aldy and Viscusi 2008 for further details.

7

Following Viscusi and Hersch (2008) we calculate the VSL for individuals over the age of 63
by treating the VSL as the present discounted value of future value of statistical life years
(VSLY).6 For individuals under the age of 18, we assume a constant VSL of $3.43mm (which
corresponds to the estimated VSL for 18 year olds).7 The second VSL methodology uses the
age and gender specific VSL profiles from Murphy and Topel (2006). Murphy and Topel
calibrates an age‐profile for the VSL for a life‐cycle model which incorporates multiple
dimensions of health. The VSL profile is then calibrated using consumption and income
data and scaled according to existing EPA VSL estimates.
Figure 2 plots our extrapolated VSL profile from Aldy and Viscusi (2008) along with
the VSL profile from Murphy and Topel (2006). Both age‐VSL profiles follow an inverse U
shape. The Murphy and Topel age‐VSL profile places a higher value on younger individuals
and lower value on elderly individuals than the corresponding Aldy and Viscusi profile. In
choosing between the Aldy and Viscusi and Murphy and Topel estimates we face the trade‐
off of using an extrapolated age‐VSL profile estimated from observed data versus a
complete age‐VSL profile constructed from economic theory. Regardless of which age‐VSL
profile we use to compute mortality adjusted GDP, the primary results remain the same:
mortality adjustment dampens the observed fluctuations and overall volatility of measured
output.
Both the Aldy and Viscusi and Murphy and Topel age‐VSL profiles are calibrated to
the year 2000. To calculate the value of life in other years we simply scale the VSL by the

Viscusi and Hersch (2008) treat VSL as the discounted constant stream of future VSLY. Using the VSL
estimates from Aldy and Viscusi (2008) we calculate the VSLY at age as

6

where
is the remaining life expectancy in years at age (as per the CDC National Vital Statistics Report
and the Social Security Administration) and is the discount rate (assumed to be 3%). We construct the VSL
for ages 63+ using the implied VSLY for 62 year olds.
As a robustness check, we replicate the proceeding analysis by assuming a VSL of zero for individuals 0‐17
and find quantitatively similar results.
7

8

trend GDP per capita in the given year relative to the trend GDP per capita in 20008. This
methodology implicitly assumes the elasticity of VSL with respect to income is one. While
there is some debate in the literature about the elasticity of VSL with respect to income, our
unit elastic assumption is in line with prior research and current guidelines. Viscusi and
Aldy (2003) and Doucouliagos et. al (2014) estimate an elasticity of roughly 0.5 while
research from Kneiser et. al (2010) and Costa and Kahn (2004) estimate the elasticity is
closer to 1.5. We specify a VSL income elasticity of one which is in accordance with current
guidelines set by the U.S. Department of Transportation (2013) and the estimates from
Miller (2000). 9

8

Trend GDP is calculated using the Hodrick Prescott Filter with a smoothing parameter of 6.5

See the U.S. Department of Transportation Memorandum (2013) for further discussion regarding the
elasticity of the VSL with respect to income.

9

9

FIGUREE 2: VALUE OFF A STATISTICCAL LIFE BY AGE

Notes on Figure
F
2:




Due to data avaailability issuees, we extrapo
olate the VSL eestimates from
m Aldy and Visscusi (2008) fo
or
ag
ges 0‐17 and greater
g
than 63.
6 Following Viscusi
V
and Heersch (2008) w
we calculate tthe VSL for
in
ndividuals oveer the age of 63 by treating the
t VSL as thee present disco
ounted value o
of future valuee of
sttatistical life years
y
(VSLY). For
F individualls under the agge of 18, we asssume a consttant VSL of
$3
3.43mm (whicch correspond
ds to the estim
mated VSL for 18 year olds)..
The figure repo
orts the age‐VS
SL profile for males from M
Murphy and To
opel (2006).

The
T proceeding analysiss is easily reeplicated wiith any VSL profile. Witth more
extensiv
ve data one could
c
allow for heteroggeneous values of life b
beyond conttrolling for aage
and sex. Valuing a death
d
at the correspond
ding averagee VSL condiitional on agge could be
matic to the extent
e
the value
v
of life for
f an indivvidual at maargin of livin
ng and dyingg is
problem
less than
n the averag
ge value of a statistical life.
l Howeveer, such issu
ues are not unique to
calculating human depreciation
d
n. Due to daata availabil ity and for p
purposes off calculatingg
human depreciation
d
n in a manner analogou
us to physicaal capital deepreciation,, we calculaate
human deprecation
d
conditionaal on age.

10

4.

Adjusting Individual Recessions for Changes in the Value of Health
This section performs an analysis of the degree to which the cyclical nature of health

affects the measurement of individual recessions in the U.S. and internationally. We
consider the peak‐to‐trough of the measured GDP levels and adjust them for the value of
health destroyed in these recessions.
Figures 1 and 3 indicate the peak to trough of the nine U.S. recessions occurring
over the period 1950‐2010. We calculate peak to trough as the difference in actual output
at the end of recession minus the output level implied by the trend. The difference in
output is normalized by the implied trend GDP level in the corresponding year. We
compute trend GDP and mortality adjusted GDP by assuming both GDP and the value of
mortality grow at some constant, but potentially different rates.10 Figure 1 is calculated
using the Aldy and Viscusi (2008) age‐VSL profile while figure 3 is calculated using the age
and gender specific VSL estimates from Murphy and Topel (2006). Under both measures
mortality adjustment essentially negates the 1955 and 1976 U.S. “recessions”. Although
comparable, mortality adjustment appears to have a slightly bigger impact when calculated
using the Aldy and Viscusi age‐VSL profile than when calculated using the Murphy and
Topel age and gender specific VSL profile. This is likely due to the fact that the Aldy and
Viscusi age‐VSL profile puts a higher value on individuals over the age 35 than the Murphy
and Topel profile. Due to the comparability of the results and for convenience, the
remaining analysis is conducted using the Aldy and Viscusi age‐VSL profile.

10

We calculate peak to trough for mortality adjusted GDP as

where
is the actual level of mortality adjusted GDP at the end of the recession (time t) and
level of mortality adjusted GDP. Trend mortality adjusted GDP is computed as

is the trend

where
and
are the pre‐recession levels of GDP and value of mortality,
and
are the
average GDP and value of mortality growth rates over the period 1950‐2010, and is the length of the
recession. The peak to trough calculations for unadjusted GDP are calculated in an analogous manner.

11

FIGURE 1: RECESSION – PEAK TO TRROUGH (% OF GDP)

FIGURE 3: RECESSION – PEAK TO TRROUGH (% OF GDP)

Notes on Figures
F
1 and 3:
3




Eaach bar measu
ures the differrence in actual output at thee end of recesssion minus the trend outpu
ut
leevel. The differrence in outpu
ut is normalizeed by the tren
nd GDP level in
n the correspo
onding year.
Trend mortality
y adjusted GD
DP and GDP are computed u
using the averaage GDP and vvalue of mortaality
grrowth rates ov
ver the period
d 1950 to 2010
0. See footnotte 11 for furth
her details.
Recessions are dated as per the
t NBER. Con
nsequently, it is possible forr the peak to ttrough of any given
reecession, as measured
m
usingg GDP, to be positive (i.e. 19
955 and 1962 recessions).

12

The implications of mortality adjustment when measuring economic output are not
unique to the United States. We replicate the preceding peak to trough analysis for our
unbalanced sample of twenty‐one other developed countries covering the period 1960‐
2010. Recessions across countries are dated using an algorithm in‐line with Jorda,
Schularick, and Taylor (2011), Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2011) and Bry and Boschan
(1971)11. The value of mortality is calculated across countries by scaling Aldy and Viscusi’s
(2008) VSL estimates by trend GDP per capita12

Where

is the value of a statistical life for an individual at age , time in country

and

is the value of a statistical life as per Aldy and Viscusi (2008). As discussed in

Section 3 this methodology implies an income VSL elasticity of one which is line with the
across‐country elasticity estimates from Miller (2000).
Although not uniformly, figure 4 and table 1 indicate that the general finding, that
recessions appear less severe when adjusting for mortality, seems to persist across
countries. The first row of table 1 indicates that in Australia output fell, on average, by
2.90% below trend during recessions when measured using GDP. When measured using
mortality‐adjusted GDP, Australian output, on average, only fell by 1.24% below trend
during recessions. For uniformity and ease of exposition we calculate the peak to trough of
each recession in each country using the same methodology as described above. This
approach computes trend GDP and mortality adjusted GDP under the assumption that both
mortality and GDP grow at constant rates within a given country. Overall, we find that
adjusting for mortality reduces the depth of the recession, on average, by over three
absolute percentage points of GDP and essentially negated one in four recessions in our
sample.

Peaks are defined as the year preceding a year over year decline in real per capita GDP with the year(s)
proceeding the peak defined as a recession. The end of the recession is marked by the year in which real GDP
per capita exceeds the real GDP per capita level in the peak year prior to the start of the recession.

11

12

Trend GDP is calculated using the Hodrick Prescott Filter with a smoothing parameter of 6.5

13

FIGURE 4: RECESSION – PEAK TO TRROUGH (% OF GDP)

Notes on Figure
F
4:



Eaach bar measu
ures the differrence in actual output at thee end of recesssion minus the implied tren
nd
ou
utput level. Th
he difference in
i output is no
ormalized by tthe trend GDP
P level in the correspondingg year.
Trend mortality
y adjusted GD
DP and GDP are computed u
using the averaage GDP and vvalue of mortaality
grrowth rates ov
ver the period
d 1950 to 2010
0 (see table 1 notes and foo
otnote 11 for ffurther detailss).

14

TABLE 1:AVERAGE RECESSION DEPTH (AVERAGE PEAK TO TROUGH, % OF GDP)

Country

GDP

Mortality‐adjusted
GDP (Age Specific VSL)

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Hungary
Iceland
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
U.K.
U.S.

‐2.90%
‐2.34%
‐3.42%
‐4.93%
‐1.40%
‐8.35%
‐3.40%
‐5.65%
‐6.21%
‐2.90%
‐9.06%
‐3.47%
‐9.13%
‐9.99%
‐3.82%
‐1.09%
‐4.72%
‐8.52%
‐7.38%
‐5.67%
‐6.74%
‐3.41%

‐1.24%
‐1.37%
‐2.21%
‐2.21%
‐3.50%
2.63%
‐3.01%
2.92%
‐3.52%
‐0.23%
‐6.04%
‐1.92%
‐4.83%
‐3.58%
‐2.89%
1.26%
‐2.37%
‐0.41%
‐1.45%
1.14%
‐3.78%
‐1.00%

Notes on Table 1










The peak to trough of each recession is calculated as the difference in actual output at the end of
recession minus the trend output level. The difference in output is normalized by the trend GDP level
in the corresponding year.
Trend mortality adjusted GDP and GDP are computed using the average GDP and value of mortality
growth rates over the period 1950 to 2010. See footnote 11 for further details. Due to concerns about
compounding trend estimation error, recessions lasting greater than 10 years are dropped from the
data set when computing the average peak to trough.
For each country table 1 displays the average peak to trough across all defined recessions in the
respective country.
U.S. recessions are defined as per the NBER. Non‐U.S. recessions are defined using the algorithm
described previously
Data for the U.S., Ireland, Israel and New Zealand covers the periods (1950‐2010), (1970‐2009),
(1983‐2009), and (1977‐2008) respectively. Data for Austria, Denmark, France, Iceland and Sweden
covers the period (1960‐2010). Data for all other countries is from 1960‐2009.
Countries were selected based on the availability (at least 25 continuous years) of mortality data
from Mortality.org and population and GDP data from the World Bank.

15

5.

Adjusting the Cyclicality of GDP Measurements to Changes in Health
In this section we adjust the U.S. and international fluctuations to include the value

of mortality. We first extend the existing evidence related to mortality and employment in
the U.S. to the business cycle, as well as extend that analysis across ages and countries. We
then incorporate these estimates into adjusting the cyclicality of standard GDP fluctuations.
Our main finding is that adjusting for mortality reduces the measured output volatility by
about 30% in the U.S. and internationally.
5.1.

Mortality and fluctuations
If unmeasured components such as health remained constant over time, calculating

mortality‐adjusted GDP would offer little value from a macroeconomic policy perspective
in terms of analyzing fluctuations. However, we extend previous work by showing that the
value of mortality is pro‐cyclical, exhibiting a strong positive correlation with GDP.
Previous literature identifies the negative relationship between mortality and employment.
Without taking an explicit stance on the causality of the relationship, we extend their
results, showing that there is a positive relationship between mortality and GDP which may
have equally or even more important implications when monetized using our methods.
We examine the relationship between mortality and GDP further by regressing log
mortality on log GDP as displayed in table 2. The estimated relationship between log
mortality and log GDP is positive and significant in each specification. When we examine
mortality by age group, the results indicate that mortality among the elderly may propel
the positive relationship between total mortality and output. This finding is in accordance
with the earlier findings from Stevens et al. (2011), which find that overall positive
relationship between unemployment and mortality is generated by the elderly population.

16

TABLE 2: REGRESSION OF LOG MORTALITY ON LOG GDP

Age Group

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

All

0.4071***
(0.0772)

0.2670***
(0.0825)

0.2337***
(0.0859)

0.2135**
(0.0894)

65+

0.7567***
(0.1155)

0.3228***
(0.1045)

0.2911***
(0.1040)

0.2293**
(0.1045)

25‐64

0.1006
(0.1507)

0.1429
(0.0943)

0.1495
(0.0941)

0.1874*
(0.0967)

0‐24

0.1942
(0.1893)

0.2066
(0.1316)

0.2004
(0.1315)

0.1627
(0.1363)

X

X

Time Trend
AR(1) Correction

X

X

First Differences

X

X

Notes on Table 2:


Each age group coefficient is estimated in a separate regression with log age‐group mortality as the
dependent variable. Reported coefficients are the coefficients on log GDP. “AR(1) correction” indicates
Prais‐Winsten AR(1) regressions.



One, two and three stars indicate significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.



The data set spans 1950‐2010 with annual observations.

17

5.2

Adjusting U.S. macroeconomic fluctuations for health
At first glance, mortality‐adjusted GDP and GDP exhibit similar patterns over the

past fifty years in the U.S. However, upon further examination, there are several distinct
differences between the GDP and mortality‐adjusted GDP. We compare and contrast
mortality unadjusted and adjusted GDP by formally decomposing them both into their
trend and deviations from trend.
We decompose log GDP and the log value of mortality into additive trend and
deviation from trend components using both a linear trend and the Hodrick Prescott Filter
to calculate the corresponding trends. GDP,
deaths multiplied by the corresponding VSL),

, and the value mortality (the number of
, can be written in terms of their trend and

cyclical components such that

where

As discussed previously, mortality adjusted GDP,

, is defined as GDP in a given year

minus the corresponding value of mortality

We define the cyclical component of mortality‐adjusted GDP and GDP,

and

respectively, as deviations from trend

Note that we refer to these type of deviations from trend as “fluctuations” in mortality‐
adjusted GDP and GDP. Assuming that both
the

and

and

follow a log linear trend, we regress

on a time trend to recover the cyclical and trend components of both

18

GDP as well as value of mortality.13 We also estimate the cyclical and trend components of
GDP and mortality using the Hodrick Prescott filter.
Figure 5 plots the estimated cyclical components of GDP and NDP as a fraction of
GDP, denoted

and

respectively.

Though the two series exhibit a strong positive correlation over the past fifty years, the
cyclical component of GDP appears more volatile than that of mortality‐adjusted GDP,
especially prior to 1990. Statistically speaking, the measured volatility of GDP is almost 1.5
times that of mortality‐adjusted GDP, 4.42% relative to 3.12%. Table 3 summarizes the
volatility of GDP as calculated using the two decomposition methods (log linear trend and
the Hodrick Prescott Filter). Note that since the trend component, as calculated as per the
Hodrick Prescott Filter, fluctuates over time, we calculate the volatility of the trend
component about a log linear trend. Under all three measures, the volatility of output
decreases when we adjust for mortality.

13

Formally, we assume that

and

are normally distributed such that

The trend and cyclical components are estimated from the regression results as

19

TABLE 3: VOLATILITY OF MEASURED OUTPUT

Measure

Std. Dev. of
the Cycle

Std. Dev. of
the Cycle

Std. Dev. of
the Trend

GDP

4.42%

1.45%

4.07%

Mortality‐adjusted GDP

3.12%

1.30%

2.63%

X

X

Log Linear Trend

X

Hodrick Prescott Filter

Notes on Table 3:


The cyclical and trend components of GDP and mortality
linear trend and the Hodrick Prescott Filter.



The standard deviation of the trend component expresses the standard deviation of the trend (as
calculated using the Hodrick Prescott Filter) about a linear time trend.



Mortality‐adjusted GDP is calculated using the age specific VSL estimates from Aldy and Viscusi (2008)
described in Section 3.



The data set spans 1950‐2010 with annual observations

are estimated using a log

20

FIGURE 5: CYCLLICAL COMPONENTTS OF GDP AND MORTALITY‐ADJUUSTED GDP

N
Notes on Figure 5:


The cyclical an
nd trend compone
ents of GDP and mortality
m
are estim
mated using a log liinear trend.



Mortality‐adju
usted GDP is calcu
ulated using the ag
ge specific VSL esttimates from Aldy
y and Viscusi (20088) as described in
n Section 3.

21

5.3

Adjusting international fluctuations for health
This section extends the previous analysis for the U.S. to the twenty‐one other

industrialized countries. Our analysis confirms previous findings suggesting that the
positive relationship mortality and GDP extends beyond the United States to other
industrial countries though the relationship is fairly heterogeneous. Our results suggest
that the implications of adjusting fluctuations for mortality may actually be more important
for other parts of the industrialized world relative to the United States.
Previous research focused on the pro‐cyclicality of mortality by examining the
relationship between the mortality and unemployment rates across countries. Using panel
data from 21 OECD countries, Gerdtham and Ruhm (2006) find that mortality rates are
negatively correlated with unemployment rates. We find qualitatively similar results when
examining the relationship between mortality and GDP overall though we find there is
substantial heterogeneity across countries which reinforces the need for mortality
adjustment in national accounts.
Using our panel of twenty‐two countries over the period 1960‐2010, we regress the
log of a country’s total mortality on log GDP while controlling for country time and fixed
effects. The results of the regressions of log mortality on log GDP are displayed in table 4.
Although the estimated relationship between log mortality and log GDP is positive in three
specifications, and positive and significant in two of the specifications, the pooled country
elasticity estimates are substantially lower than the corresponding U.S. estimates in table 2.
We run additional specifications where we allow the effect of log GDP on log mortality to
vary at the country level while still using country fixed and trend effects. The estimated
mortality/GDP elasticity estimates are positive and significant for over half of the countries
in the sample. However, the relationship between GDP and mortality is heterogeneous
across countries with estimated elasticities ranging from ‐0.30 to 0.80.

22

TABLE 4: REGRESSION OF LOG MORTALITY ON LOG GDP

Log GDP

Time Trend
AR(1) Correction
First Differences

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.0910***
(0.0143)

0.0525**
(0.0239)

0.0051
(0.0316)

‐0.0236
(0.0352)

X

X

X

X
X

X

Notes on Table 4:


Reported coefficients are the coefficients on log GDP. “AR(1) correction” indicates Prais‐Winsten AR(1)
regressions.



One, two and three stars indicate significance at 10, 5 and 1 percent levels.



All specifications include country specific dummy variables. When included, time trends are country
specific



Data for the Ireland, Israel and New Zealand covers the periods (1950‐2010), (1970‐2009), (1983‐2009),
and (1977‐2008) respectively. Data for Austria, Denmark, France, Iceland, Sweden and the U.S. covers the
period (1960‐2010). Data for all other countries is from 1960‐2009. Observations are annual.



Countries were selected based on the availability (at least 25 continuous years) of mortality data from
Mortality.org and population and GDP data from the World Bank.

Following Section 5.2, we formally decompose mortality‐adjusted GDP and GDP into
their trend and deviation from trend components for each country in our sample.14 Figures
6‐8 summarize the volatility of GDP as calculated using the two decomposition methods
(log linear trend and the Hodrick Prescott Filter). The gray and black bars plot the standard
deviation of the cyclical component of mortality‐adjusted GDP and GDP respectively over
the past fifty years. Since the trend component, as calculated as per the Hodrick Prescott
Filter, fluctuates over time, we calculate the volatility of the trend component about a log
14

Mortality‐adjusted GDP is calculated using the gender and age specific VSL estimates from Aldy and Viscusi
(2008) described in Section 3.

23

linear trend in figure 8. Mortality adjustment reduces the magnitude of deviations from a
log linear trend for 17 of the 22 countries in the sample. However, when calculating a
business cycle as per the Hodrick Prescott Filter, mortality adjustment reduces the
variance of the cyclical component of GDP for only four of the countries in the sample.
Figures 7 and 8 indicate that mortality adjustment appears to have a bigger impact on the
volatility of the trend component of GDP relative to the cyclical component of GDP. This
suggests that the low frequency procyclical movements in mortality are what helps buffer
the business cycle. The international results indicate the importance of understanding the
effect mortality and other unmeasured components of output have on fluctuations extends
beyond the U.S.

24

FIGURE 6: VOLATILITY OFF GDP VS MORTALITY‐ADJUUSTED GDP ((LOG LINEAR TREND)

FIGUREE 7: VOLATILITY OF GDP VS MORTALITYY‐ADJUSTED G
GDP (CYCLICAAL COMPONEN
NT –HP FILTE
ER)

FIGURRE 8: VOLATILLITY OF GDP VS
V MORTALIT
TY‐ADJUSTED GDP (TREND
D COMPONENT
T –HP FILTER
R)

25

6.

Concluding Remarks
We examined the macroeconomic fluctuations in the United States and globally

during the past 50 years taking into account the depreciation of health (human capital) in
GDP measures. Because mortality tends to be pro‐cyclical, fluctuations in standard GDP are
in part offset by human depreciation; booms are not as valuable because of greater
mortality, and recessions are not as bad because of lower mortality. Consequently, the
fluctuations in the United States and elsewhere appear milder than commonly measured.
We found that many “recessions” during the past 50 years were not actually recessions,
and that adjusting for mortality, on average, reduces the severity of both U.S. and
international recessions by more than 2% of GDP and reduces measured fluctuations
around trend by 30%.
Our analysis raises important issues for more fully incorporating human capital
components into output measures. Our measure of mortality adjusted GDP only accounted
for deaths, thereby implicitly only considering a diminishing rather than a potentially
appreciating stock of human capital. Further analysis should consider replenishments of
the stock in terms of fertility and immigration/emigration. It should also consider
appreciation through human capital investments such as education. Previous empirical
work remains inconclusive regarding the cyclicality of fertility rates given that they depend
on counteracting income and substitution effects induced by the business cycle (Butz and
Ward 1979; Mocan 1990; Ahn and Mira 2002). Incorporating births presents further
challenges as it is not obvious how to incorporate the value of a new life. Does one include
the parents’ value, the child’s, or both? Similar challenges exist in valuing net immigration
in assessing the value of resident aliens versus citizens. Dellas and Sakellaris (2003) have
documented the counter‐cyclical nature of formal human capital investments. These should
be incorporated into fluctuations measures as appreciation during recessions and thus may
offset traditional measures, just as our mortality‐based analysis did. Nevertheless, we view
this effort as too speculative at this point both in methods and data availability, particularly
so valuing newborns through potentially cyclical fertility. Furthermore, one may note here
that our approach is consistent with current government practice in valuing human life, e.g.

26

in assessing EPA or FDA policies, which also only focuses on the value of the lives lost as
opposed to valuing those still alive.
Future analysis should also consider the full life cycle of depreciation in human
capital. Our analysis depreciated the human capital stock only at death, as opposed to
depreciating or appreciating a life still not lost. Future research should also investigate
whether gradual depreciation in human capital affects our results on how fluctuations in
mortality and market GDP are correlated. For a given age‐profile of the value of a human
life, the analog to depreciation profiles of physical assets, one may envision valuing the
current human capital stock based on the age distribution in the population. This will be
contingent on morbidity patterns by age. Cyclical patterns in morbidity, for example caused
by mental health or heart disease, may amplify fluctuations and should also be
incorporated.
Our main argument is that there are clear ways of extending traditional measures of
fluctuations and the effects of policies aimed at curbing them, beyond simply counting
market transactions. More work is needed to make such extensions operational.
In general, the existing evidence on the cyclicality of human capital may suggest that
unobserved components of value are also indeed counter‐cyclical, in which case they
reinforce rather than counteract the documented counter‐cyclical value of health examined
here. Examining the cyclicality of previously unmeasured components differs from
previous research that has focused on missing components in the level of economic output.
However, what matters for assessing the value of policies trying to mitigate fluctuations is
not the level of the unmeasured components of output (such as leisure, health, and
education, for example), but their cyclicality. If unmeasured components do not vary with
the measured components, the much of the costs of fluctuations is captured by measured
GDP. We believe, therefore, that more research is warranted on the quantitative
importance of fluctuations in unmeasured components of national output.

27

References
Ahn, Namkee, and Pedro Mira. 2002. "A Note on the Changing Relationship between
Fertility and Female Employment Rates in Developed Countries." Journal of
Population Economics 15(4): 667‐682.
Aldy, Joseph E., and W. Kip Viscusi. 2008. “Adjusting the Value of a Statistical Life for Age
and Cohort Effects.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90(3): 573‐581.
Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2005. “The Quantity and Quality
of Life and the Evolution of World Inequality.” The American Economic Review 95(1):
277‐291.
Bry, Gerhard, and Charlotte Boschan. 1971 . “Programmed Selection Of Cyclical Turning
Points.” Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected Procedures and Computer
Programs: 7‐63.
Butz, William P., and Michael P. Ward. 1979. “The Emergence of Countercyclical US
Fertility.” The American Economic Review 69(3): 318‐328.
Carson, Carol S., and J. Steven Landefeld. 1994. “Integrated Economic and Environmental
Satellite Accounts.” Survey of Current Business 74(4): 33‐49.
Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones. 2011. “Financial Cycles: What?
How? When?. “ International Seminar on Macroeconomics 7(1): 303‐344.
Costa, Dora L., and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. "Changes in the Value of Life, 1940–
1980." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 29(2): 159‐180.
Cutler, David M., Elizabeth Richardson, Theodore E. Keeler, and Douglas Staiger. 1997.
“Measuring the Health of the US Population.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Microeconomics: 217‐282.
Dellas, Harris, and Plutarchos Sakellaris. 2003. On the Cyclicality of Schooling: Theory and
Evidence. Oxford Economic Papers 55(1): 148‐172.

28

Doucouliagos, Hristos, T.D. Stanley and W. Kip Viscus. 2014. “Publication Selection and the
Income Elasticity of the Value of a Statistical Life.” Journal of Health Economics 33:
67‐75.
Fraumeni, Barbara. 1997. “The Measurement of Depreciation in the US National Income
and Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business – United States Department of
Commerce 77: 7‐23.
Gerdtham, Ulf‐G., and Christopher J. Ruhm. 2006. “Deaths Rise in Good Economic Times:
Evidence from the OECD.” Economics & Human Biology 4(3): 298‐316.
Hartwick, John M. 1990. “Natural Resources, National Accounting and Economic
Depreciation.” Journal of Public Economics 43(3): 291‐304.
Human Mortality Database. University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck
Institute for Demographic Research (Germany). [www.mortality.org] (accessed on
4/24/2013)
Jones, Charles I., and Peter J. Klenow. 2010.” Beyond GDP? Welfare Across Countries and
Time.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w16352.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms,
and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review 59(2): 340‐
378.
Jorgenson, Dale W. 2009. “Human Capital and the National Accounts.” Paper presented to
the China Center for Human Capital and Labor Market Research, Central University
of Finance and Economics.
Kniesner, Thomas J., W. Kip Viscusi, and James P. Ziliak. 2010. "Policy Relevant
Heterogeneity in the Value of Statistical Life: New Evidence from Panel Data
Quantile Regressions." Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 40(1): 15‐31.
Miller, Ted R. 2000 "Variations Between Countries in Values of Statistical Life." Journal of
Transport Economics and Policy 34(2): 169‐188.
29

Mocan, Naci H. 1990. “Business Cycles and Fertility Dynamics in the United States.” Journal
of Population Economics 3(2): 125‐146.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity.” Journal
of Political Economy 114(5): 871‐904.
National Bureau of Economic Research, "US Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions,"
[www.nber.org/cycles.html] (accessed May 5, 2013)
Nordhaus, William D., and Edward C. Kokkelenberg. 1999. Nature's Numbers: Expanding
the National Economic Accounts to Include the Environment. National Academies
Press.
Nordhaus, William D. 2002. “The Health of Nations: the Contribution of Improved Health to
Living Standards.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w8818.
Ravn, Morten O., and Harald Uhlig. 2002. “On Adjusting the Hodrick‐Prescott Filter for the
Frequency of Observations.” Review of Economics and Statistics 84(2): 371‐376.
Ruhm, Christopher J. 2000. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 115(2): 617‐650.
Stevens, Ann Huff, Douglas L. Miller, Marianne E. Page, and Mateusz Filipski. 2011. “The
Best of Times, the Worst of Times: Understanding Pro‐cyclical Mortality.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper w17657.
U.S. Department of Transportation. 2013. “Guidance on Treatment of the Economic Value
of a Statistical Life in U.S. Department of Transportation Analyses.” Memorandum to
Secretarial Officers Modal Administrators from Polly Trottenberg, under Secretary
for Policy, and Robert S. Rivkin, General Counsel, [http://www.dot.gov/office‐
policy/transportation‐policy/guidance‐treatment‐economic‐value‐statistical‐life]
(accessed January 16, 2014).
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “National Economic Accounts,”
[www.bea.gov/national/index.htm#gdp] (accessed May 6, 2013)
30

Viscusi, W. Kip. 2014 “The Value of Individual and Societal Risks to Life and Health.” In:
Mark J. Machina and W. Kip Viscusi (eds), Handbook of the Economics of Risk and
Uncertainty, vol. 1. North‐Holland, Amsterdam.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joseph E. Aldy. 2003. "The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
of Market Estimates Throughout the World." Journal of risk and uncertainty 27(1): 5‐
76.
Viscusi, W. Kip, and Joni Hersch. 2008. “The Mortality Cost to Smokers.” Journal of Health
Economics 27(4): 943‐958.
The World Bank, “World DataBank.” [http://databank.worldbank.org/data/] (accessed
May 6, 2013)

31

