                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               BORROWING HIGH VS. BORROWING HIGHER:
SOURCES AND CONSEQUENCES OF DISPERSION IN INDIVIDUAL BORROWING COSTS

                                            Victor Stango
                                          Jonathan Zinman

                                        Working Paper 19069
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19069


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




Thanks to Anna Lunn and Gordon Vermeer for research assistance, and to John Driscoll, Charles Sprenger,
David Silberman, Justin Sydnor, Jeremy Tobacman, and conference/seminar participants at the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau, 2012 American Economic Association Meetings, Berkeley (Haas), Boston
University School of Management, Cornell (Dyson School), the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia,
the Federal Reserve Board/George Washington Financial Literacy Seminar Series, ITAM, the NBER
(Behavioral Economics, Household Finance), the UC-Boulder Conference on Consumer Financial
Decision Making, UC-Davis, and Wharton (Decision Processes) for comments. Thanks to Filene Research
Institute, the Federal Bank of Chicago, the Rockefeller Center at Dartmouth College and the Graduate
School of Management at UC-Davis for research support. Special thanks to Bob Hunt and Steph Wilshusen,
of the Payments Cards Center of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and to Geng Li of the Federal
Reserve Board, for sharing data and expertise. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Victor Stango and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Borrowing High vs. Borrowing Higher: Sources and Consequences of Dispersion in Individual
Borrowing Costs
Victor Stango and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 19069
May 2013
JEL No. D14,D22,D4,D83,G21,G23

                                              ABSTRACT

We document cross-individual variation in U.S. credit card borrowing costs (APRs) that is large enough
to explain substantial differences in household saving rates. Borrower default risk and card characteristics
explain roughly 40% of APRs. The remaining dispersion exists because a borrower can receive offers
and hold cards with wide-ranging APRs, as different issuers price the same observable risk metrics
quite differently. Borrower debt (mis)allocation across cards explains little dispersion. But self-reported
borrower search/shopping (along with instruments for shopping implied by Fair Lending law) can
explain APR differences comparable to moving someone from the worst credit score decile to the
best.


Victor Stango
Graduate School of Management
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
vstango@ucdavis.edu

Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
314 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jzinman@dartmouth.edu
I. Introduction
    Asset-side research on financial decision-making and wealth accumulation
asks both whether individuals “under-save,” and whether savers maximize asset
returns.1 In contrast, liability-side research on decision-making and wealth often
focuses on whether households “over-borrow,” but gives short shrift to the returns
question: do borrowers minimize costs of debt, conditional on how much they
borrow?2 Borrowing costs merit scrutiny because, for many households, liabilities
are a more important determinant of wealth accumulation than financial assets.3
    Despite the potential importance of links between household decisions,
borrowing costs and household savings rates, research on the topic is
underdeveloped and piecemeal.4 We address several important gaps in the context
of the $800 billion U.S. credit card market. Rich transaction-level administrative
data, credit bureau data, and survey data grant us a uniquely comprehensive view


1
  See, e.g., Barber and Odean (2011) and Campbell (2006) for reviews.
2
  For discussions of over-borrowing see, e.g., Campbell (2006) and Benton, Meier and
Sprenger (2007).
3
  Aggregate U.S. household debt holdings are almost as large as aggregate financial asset
holdings, and that was true even before the 2000s boom (Dynan 2009). Also, by most
measures, more households participate in debt markets than in financial asset markets.
4
  Several papers suggest that search and switching costs prevent people from shopping
perfectly for loans but do not link such contract choices to the cross-section of borrowing
costs. See, e.g., Agarwal et al (2006); Berlin and Mester (2004); Bucks et al (2009, A12),
Calem et al (2006); Charles et al (2008); FINRA (2009); Kerr and Dunn (2008); Stango
(2002); Woodward and Hall (2012). Other papers suggest that debt misallocation –
holding higher-cost debt when lower-cost debt or liquid assets are available—may be
important, but that work also does not link misallocation to the cross section of “returns”
on the liability side. See, e.g., Agarwal, Skiba, and Tobacman (2009); Amar et al (2011);
Ponce et al (2012); Stango and Zinman (2009a). There is related work on fee avoidance
in credit cards and bank accounts, suggesting that many of those borrowing costs are
incurred due to limited information, memory, and/or attention (Sumit Agarwal et al.
2011; Stango and Zinman 2013). There is also work on (mis)allocation across (liquid)
assets and liabilities, although heterogeneity in the non-price characteristics of the
different products complicates that analysis; see, e.g., Gross and Souleles (2002b);
Telyukova (2011); Zinman (2007).




                                                                                              1
of consumers' credit card choice sets, card portfolio holdings, card attributes, and
borrowing/allocation decisions. The data allow us to address questions including:
is individual-level heterogeneity in borrowing costs substantial? If so, does that
heterogeneity simply reflect risk-based pricing and product differentiation by
lenders? Or is heterogeneity in consumer decision-making, conditional on choice
sets, an important driver of borrowing costs? And if consumer decisions matter,
which ones are most important in explaining the cross-section of borrowing costs?
      On the first question, we find striking cross-sectional variation in borrowing
costs across U.S. credit cardholders. Even after discarding introductory “teaser
rates” and “transactors” who never borrow, the balance-weighted interquartile
range of APRs paid by credit card borrowers is about 800 basis points. Moving a
typical consumer from the 75th to 25th percentile of borrowing costs, holding all
else constant, would increase that consumer’s annual household savings rate by
more than 1%. (For comparison, the national annual household saving rate during
our sample period was about 3.5%.) In short, the cross-section of borrowing costs
could explain substantial cross-sectional dispersion in savings rates. This stands in
stark contrast to the lack of APR dispersion in the 1980s and 1990s5 that
motivated much of the prior literature on credit card pricing and competition.6
      Second, observable borrower default risk (commonly priced by issuers) and
product differentiation together explain less than half of cross-sectional borrowing
cost dispersion. Default risk – measured by credit scores, and in-sample risk
metrics such as late payments, borrowing, credit limits, utilization and so on –
explains roughly 40 percent of cross-sectional variation in borrowing costs.
Product differentiation (card features such as rewards, fees, fixed/variable rate
pricing, and so on) and demographics (age, income and education) add only

5
    See Appendix Figure 1 for an illustration from 1983 and a comparison to 2007.
6
    See, e.g., Ausubel (1991), Stango (2000; 2002), Knittel and Stango (2003).




                                                                                        2
slightly to the fit. We find little evidence of a substantial tradeoff between APRs
and rewards or fees. The bottom line is that similarly risky borrowers, holding
cards with similar characteristics and debt levels, pay substantially different rates.
This finding holds both across issuers and within issuers.
   Third, we examine cross-issuer differences and find important heterogeneity
in the pricing of commonly observed individual-level risk metrics. This translates
to consumers facing substantial APR dispersion in their choice sets, both “outside
the wallet” and “inside the wallet.” Outside the wallet, data from direct mail
solicitations show that APRs offered by different issuers to the same individual
during the same month often differ by several hundred basis points. We also build
pricing models that allow for issuer-specific differences in pricing credit risk,
other consumer characteristics, and product characteristics. These models confirm
that different issuers systematically price the same factors – even credit scores –
differently enough to yield dispersion of several hundred basis points in the APRs
faced by a given individual. Inside the wallet, we show that many individuals
simultaneously hold multiple credit cards with APRs that vary widely.
   Finally, we decompose demand-side sources of borrowing cost dispersion by
examining the importance of consumer choices in and out of the wallet.
   Inside the wallet, we find little misallocation or heterogeneity: most people
allocate debt to the cheapest card(s) they hold, subject to credit limits. The median
cardholder leaves close to zero dollars on the table annually via misallocation,
and fewer than 10% of our credit card users leave more than $100 on the table
annually. “True” misallocation is probably lower when one considers pecuniary
and non-pecuniary costs of moving balances from one card to another.
   In contrast, heterogeneity outside the wallet – in shopping for credit cards –
can explain substantial cross-sectional differences in APRs, even for similarly
risky individuals. For a subset of our sample, we observe a self-reported measure
of whether a borrower “keeps an eye out for better credit card offers,” allowing us




                                                                                         3
to estimate the relationship between APRs and search intensity, conditional on all
other observable borrower and card characteristics. In estimating that relationship
we use several instruments for search intensity, exploiting the fact that Fair
Lending law prohibits card issuers from considering marital status or gender when
setting APRs (there is a long marketing literature documenting strong
relationships between gender or marital status and shopping behavior). Our
empirical results are robust to the instrument set, and suggest that “super-
shoppers” pay borrowing costs several hundred basis points lower than do non-
shoppers – a difference comparable to that between individuals in the best vs.
worst decile of credit score. Many consumers behave as though they face large
search costs in the credit card market, a finding in accord with related work on
mortgages (Campbell 2006; Woodward and Hall 2012).7
    Our results inform several strands of research, starting with the literatures on
credit card pricing, debt shopping and debt (mis)allocation discussed above.
Beyond that, our findings represent a liability-side analogue to prior work on the
asset side of the balance sheet, where several papers find that search/shopping
costs are substantial, and heterogeneous, enough to generate large differences in
net asset returns (Choi, Laibson, and Madrian 2010; Hortascu and Syverson 2004;
Sirri and Tufano 1998). Similarly, our results on debt misallocation dovetail with
those of Campbell, Calvet and Sodini (2007), who find that asset allocation
mistakes have substantive costs for only a few investors. Our findings also paint a
more complex picture of interactions between consumers and card issuers than
one might expect (similar to the idea in Taylor (2003)). That issuers can view the
same customer so differently – and price accordingly – is somewhat surprising.



7
 See        also      http://www.fanniemae.com/portal/research-and-analysis/housing-
quarterly.html.




                                                                                       4
    Our results also highlight borrowing cost dispersion as a potential driver of
cross-sectional dispersion in savings rates and wealth accumulation. While wealth
accumulation depends on choices about both borrowing levels (the quantity
channel) and APRs (the price channel), research and modeling often focus on the
quantity channel, under-emphasizing the price channel as a first-order source of
heterogeneity. Our work adds the price channel as a potential explanation for
borrowing costs that seem puzzlingly high even by the standards of behavioral
models.8 We cannot infer whether people are “over-paying” for credit card debt in
a behavioral sense, or simply making optimal tradeoffs between shopping costs
and benefits, but we hope that our paper will provoke inquiry along these lines.
    On a practical level, our results highlight the potential value of innovations—
e.g., in technology, standards, and/or disclosure—that lower the cost of loan
shopping. We speculate on implications for policy and practice in the Conclusion.


II. Data

A. Data Contents and Sample Characteristics

Our data come from Lightspeed Research (formerly Forrester Research).
Individuals in our sample are members of the “Ultimate Consumer Panel,” which
is one of many such panels maintained by Forrester/Lightspeed.9


8
   E.g., even with quasi-hyperbolic discounting, the calibrated life-cycle model in
Angeletos et al (2001) substantially underpredicts credit card borrowing. Other work on
links between borrowing behavior and behavioral biases in preferences, expectations,
and/or price perceptions includes Ausubel (1991) ; Gabaix and Laibson (2006); Heidhues
and Koszegi (2010); Laibson (1997); Meier and Sprenger (2010); Shui and Ausubel
(2004); Soll et al (2011); Stango and Zinman (2009b; 2011).
9
  We also use the data in Stango and Zinman (2009a; 2013). Other Forrester/Lightspeed
panels track consumer behaviors such as the use and purchases of new technology. Those
panels are widely used by industry researchers and academics; see, e..g, Goolsbee (2000;
2001), Kolko (2010), Prince (2008).




                                                                                           5
   The credit card data collected by Lightspeed have four main components. The
first component is transaction-level and comes from monthly credit card account
statements. The set of transactions includes all credits (payments, refunds) and
debits (purchases, fees, interest charges, etc.) on the account. The second
component is account-month level and contains data on account terms: APR, cash
advance APR, bill date, due date, ending balance on bill date, summaries of
credits and debits during the month, and so on.

   In addition, we observe credit report data from one of the major bureaus,
“pulled” at around the time of the panelist’s registration. The credit report data
include data on “trades” (current and past loans of all kinds), delinquency, loan
balances, and a credit score on the standard 850-point scale.

   Finally, Lightspeed solicits and collects survey data from panelists. All
panelists complete a registration survey in which they report demographics and
financial characteristics. Lightspeed also periodically invites panelists to take
online surveys. The data we use later in the paper regarding credit card shopping
come from one of those periodic surveys.

   Table 1 summarizes the data. Our data span 2006-2008, and in this paper our
main sample consists of the 4,312 panelists who enroll at least one credit card
account and for whom we observe credit bureau data. We stratify panelists by
their quartile of average “revolving” (i.e., interest-accruing) debt to facilitate
analysis that conditions on debt levels, to understand how heavy and light
borrowers differ, and because our research questions are most salient for heavier
borrowers. Within-panelist revolving debt levels are quite persistent, with a
month-to-month serial correlation of 0.96.

   Seventy percent of panelists enroll one or two accounts, and the remaining
thirty percent enroll three or more. Roughly half of our sample enrolls a
“complete” set of credit cards, meaning that the number of accounts enrolled




                                                                                     6
matches the number of “active credit card lines” on the panelist’s credit report.
Appendix Table 1 shows that complete-set panelists look quite similar to the full
sample (compare to Table 1). This alleviates selection/measurement concerns, and
suggests panelists with “incomplete” sets register the cards that they use regularly.

     The 1st quartile of revolving debt contains many “transactors” who essentially
never revolve balances but use their cards for purchases. Consumers in the 3rd and
4th quartiles are heavier “revolvers” who consistently carry balances. For these
revolvers interest charges are 81% and 92% of total borrowing costs.10

     Interestingly, we see many similarities between individuals in the highest and
lowest quartiles of revolving debt. Purchase volume, credit scores, and education
are each U-shaped with respect to revolving balances. Income increases with
revolving debt. We also see the expected life-cycle pattern, with those in the
middle of the age distribution carrying more debt.

     Table 1 also shows that credit card interest paid can be substantial relative to
income. Interest costs for the median individual in the heaviest-borrowing quartile
are 2.4% of annual household income, and exceed 1% for one-quarter of our full
sample.11 As context, the national average annual household savings rate was
about 3.5% both during our sample period and over the 10 years prior. So any
money left on the table via higher borrowing costs could materially affect
household savings rates.




10
   The remainder of borrowing costs comes from annual, late, over-limit, cash advance,
balance transfer and other fees. See Stango and Zinman (2009a) for further detail on fees
in these data.
11
    Restricting the sample to “single, never married” panelists leaves the results
unchanged. Only 7% of respondents report registering a card belonging to someone else.




                                                                                            7
     Perhaps the most noteworthy overall pattern in Table 1 is the substantial
heterogeneity, both within and across revolving quartiles, in every variable. “Who
borrows?” is not easily explained by observable individual characteristics.

     The Data Appendix provides many additional details on panel construction,
variable definitions, and sample characteristics.



B. Representativeness and External Validity

     Our credit data benchmarks reasonably well against various other data sources
(the Data Appendix provides detailed comparisons). Our sample is similar to the
U.S. population in terms of cardholding, purchases, creditworthiness, APR
distribution, and interest costs relative to total borrowing costs. The one key
difference is that our cardholders have outstanding balances that are about half the
national average. Given that our analysis focuses on identifying borrowing cost
dispersion conditional on debt amounts, any “missing debt” will lead us
understate the potential impact of borrowing cost dispersion on saving rates.

     In terms of demographics, our panelists are younger, more educated, and
higher income (conditional on age) than national averages.

     The online nature of the panel might affect inferences about the broader
population of cardholders, if “being online” is correlated with shopping or
allocating debt efficiently. To the extent that our sample is more homogeneous
than the population by dint of being younger, “online” and willing to participate
in the panel, our results could easily understate the level of diversity in borrowing
costs, shopping behavior and debt allocation in the population.12


12
  Panel participants are also relatively willing to share financial information, raising
questions about whether they might be unrepresentative in other, unobservable but




                                                                                           8
    The time period under consideration here, 2006-2008, is also noteworthy. We
do not observe a decline in borrowing cost dispersion in the early stages of the
financial crisis. Nor do we know of any reason to expect that our results—which
are mostly about dispersion—would differ in calmer times, but this is clearly
something worth exploring in future research.



III. Cross-sectional Variation in Borrowing Costs

A. Measuring Credit Card Borrowing Costs, With and Without Float and Teasers

    We measure borrowing costs for each panelist as the average balance-
weighted annual percentage rate (APR) over our sample period. Balances accrue
interest charges if they are “revolving”: not fully repaid after the due date of the
bill. We focus on APRs because they constitute >80% of borrowing costs for
heavier borrowers (Table 1).

    The first rows of Table 2 show APR dispersion over revolving and non-
revolving (zero-APR) balances. Our primary focus is on revolving APRs, so the
next rows exclude the 627 panelists (15% of the sample) who never revolve
balances during our sample period. APR dispersion is substantial within every
borrowing quartile and similar across the top three, with interquartile ranges of
800-900 basis points (bp), and 10th/90th percentile ranges of 1600-1700bp.

    The next rows, and most of the analysis below, discard the account-months we
classify as paying “teaser” (introductory) rates (see the Data Appendix for
details). Dropping teaser rates from the data has little effect on dispersion.13


critical ways. But the same could be said about any data source—including household
surveys-- that relies on a clear opt-in from subjects.
13
   Teaser rates have a negligible effect on cross-individual dispersion for three reasons: 1)
teaser rates typically last only six months or so, and represent only a small proportion of




                                                                                                9
    The subsequent rows show that dispersion in the sub-sample of panelists who
enroll all of their cards is nearly identical to that in the full sample.

    The last rows motivate our focus on the cross-section rather than the time
series of APRs. We first present, as an illustration, data from a single month of
our data (January 2006). In this month – and every other month – dispersion is
virtually identical to dispersion averaged across all months. Second, the last row
shows that regressing panelist-month-level APRs on just a set of panelist fixed
effects yields a fit of nearly eighty percent. Most APR variation is in the cross-
section of panelists rather than within-panelist over time.



B. Scaling the Magnitude of APR Dispersion

    APR dispersion could matter a lot economically. Take a borrower at the
medians for income, interest costs, and revolving debt in our top revolving debt
quartile (keeping in mind that outstanding balances for such an individual in our
data are equal to the outstanding balances of the median cardholder in the U.S.).
That individual’s savings rate could rise by 1.2 percentage points if borrowing
costs fell from the 75th percentile of APRs to the 25th, or by 1.8pp if borrowing
costs fell from the 90th percentile to the 10th. Alternatively, the same individual
could hold total interest costs constant with $4,000 ($10,000) in additional debt or
consumption, moving from the 75th to the 25th (90th to the 10th) percentile. Our
APR dispersion seems representative, so these magnitudes should be relevant for
U.S. cardholders more broadly (see the Data Appendix Section E for details).

account-months; 2) people have multiple cards, and a mix of teaser and non-teaser rates,
at any point in time; i.e., even though one can sort account-months into teaser vs. non-
teaser, the extent to which this sorting aggregates to the individual level is muted; 3) we
do not actually find a significant tradeoff between introductory and post-teaser APRs.
Anecdotally, most teaser rate offers recoup their lower APRs via 2-5% balance transfer
fees rather than higher post-teaser APRs.




                                                                                              10
   The potential savings-rate implications for heavy borrowers here are slightly
smaller than losses incurred by individual investors due to excessive trading in
Barber et al. (2009); they are larger than the 75th percentile of losses from
investment mistakes among asset holders in Campbell, Calvet and Sodini (2007);
they are similar to losses from sub-optimal 401(k) account contributions in Choi
et al (2011); and they are larger than (amortized) losses from insufficient
mortgage shopping in Woodward and Hall (2012).


IV. Borrowing Cost Dispersion: Explanations and Empirical Strategies

A. Broad Explanations and Data Requirements
What might explain the substantial cross-sectional APR dispersion in Table 2?
   Consider two borrowers, Gretchen and Mary. Assume each has two credit
card accounts with a total credit limit of $10,000, and each revolves an average of
$6,000 across those two cards. If we find that Gretchen pays 22% APR on
average and Mary pays 14%, what might explain the difference?
   Broadly, there are two classes of explanation. One class holds that Gretchen
and Mary face different prices from the market because they are differently risky,
or use cards that are differentiated products; if so, their choice sets cannot be
compared apples-to-apples. The other broad class of explanation is that Gretchen
and Mary in fact face similar prices from the market (or similar distributions of
prices), but make different choices given the same choice set.
   Disentangling those explanations, and assessing their relative importance,
requires rich data. One must observe what issuers observe re: customer default
risk and card characteristics, and be able to infer how those things are related to
the APRs that customers face in the market (and hold in their wallets). The
analysis would be enriched with observations of consumer choices with respect to
shopping for and using cards.




                                                                                      11
     Our data are up to the task. Our ability to measure risk with credit bureau,
usage, and repayment data compares favorably to issuers’ abilities; for example,
issuers observe only partial usage and repayment data for their cardholders’ other
accounts, while we observe those data in detail and in closer to real-time. We also
observe characteristics associated with product differentiation: issuer identities,
and details on card attributes such as credit limits, rewards, fees, and “fixed” vs.
variable APRs. Collectively, these data allow us to control quite comprehensively
for default risk and product differentiation.
     We also observe detailed information about repayments (allocation), and
about some borrowers’ self-reported shopping for credit cards (contract choice).
Card repayment and usage data allow us to examine the importance of decisions
“within the wallet”: does Mary pay lower APRs because she allocates debt to her
low-rate cards better than does Gretchen? Shopping data allow us to assess the
importance of behavior “outside the wallet”: does Mary pay lower APRs because
she has a keener eye for better outside offers from issuers?14


B. Empirical Strategies
Our empirical approach to exploring the (relative) importance of these different
explanations proceeds as follows:
1.     First, we use our default risk and card characteristic data to estimate how
       much those factors contribute to cross-sectional APR variation (Section V).
       The key statistics are r-squareds revealing how much variation can be
       explained by observable borrower default risk, unobserved issuer-specific
       factors, and observable card characteristics;

14
   Most customers still apply for new cards in response to direct mail solicitations,
although the online channel is growing. Issuers mailed over five billion solicitations
during our sample period, and most of our panelists report having acquired their card(s)
in response to direct mail.




                                                                                           12
2.     Next, we assess a threshold question regarding whether borrower behavior
       might affect borrowing costs: does a given borrower face different APRs
       from different issuers, even at the same point in time (Section VI)? That
       must be true either for borrowers’ shopping to matter or, strictly speaking,
       for misallocation “in the wallet” to be possible. Otherwise, the Law of One
       Price would dictate that borrower behavior is irrelevant in determining
       APRs held (and paid);
3.     Last, we examine the extent to which misallocation in the wallet and
       shopping can explain the cross-section of APRs paid (Section VII). We also
       ask how holding more cards in the wallet affects both the APR cost from
       misallocation and the lowest rate in the wallet.


V. Borrowing Cost Dispersion Conditional on Risk, Product Heterogeneity
A. Specifications: Models Explaining the Cross-Section of Borrowing Costs
     The most natural explanations for cross-sectional variation in APRs are
default risk and card-level product differentiation.

     Our data include much, if not all, of the information used by issuers when
setting and adjusting APRs, as well as significant detail about card characteristics.
We observe credit score, supplementary credit bureau data (e.g., the number of
current and past “lines” of credit of varying kinds), purchase volume and
revolving balances, in-sample late/missed payments, credit limits and utilization,
demographics (age, income and education categories), fees (annual, balance
transfer, cash back, others), rewards and affinity links, and fixed/variable rate
pricing. The Data Appendix provides additional details on variable construction.

     To assess how well these covariates explain APRs we estimate a series of
panelist- and account-month-level models with APRs as the dependent variable,
using all of our available data regarding risk factors and product characteristics as




                                                                                        13
flexibly parameterized covariates. In panelist-level regressions we include
panelist-level aggregates, as well as characteristics of panelist’s primary card by
average revolving balances. The panelist-level models include balance-weighted
issuer fixed effects, accounting for average APR differences across issuers
stemming from omitted card characteristics, systematic differences in pricing
customer risk, and other unobservables. The account-month models include issuer
and month-year fixed effects. All models include indicators for panelists’ first and
last months in the data, accounting for variation in APRs generated by systematic
time-varying APRs and panelists’ different sample entry/exit dates.


B. Results and Robustness
   Table 3 reports the fit of the APR regressions. The broad takeaway is that
observable risk and card/issuer characteristics explain 30-40% of cross-sectional
variation in borrowing costs. Credit scores alone explain 5-20% of cross-sectional
variation in APRs. Including in-sample risk measures adds substantially to the
explanatory power of the model, in most cases allowing the model to explain 25-
40% of cross-sectional variation. This compares favorably to analogous work
predicting credit card delinquency (Gross and Souleles 2002a; Allen, DeLong,
and Saunders 2004). Card characteristics and demographics add very little to the
explanatory power of the model. Reading across columns, the models do a better
job fitting APRs for heavier borrowers than for “transactors.” And the panelist-
level models generally have better fit than the account-month models.
   Appendix Table 2 shows regression coefficients from our best-fitting panelist-
level specification (the fourth r-squared row in the last column of Table 3).
Because our focus is on improving fit rather than parsimony, we include many
sets of covariates that are highly collinear. For example, the model
includes revolving balances and credit lines – which together are very highly
correlated with utilization – and also includes utilization as well. So the results on




                                                                                         14
many individual variables do not have clear interpretations. Nevertheless, it bears
noting that we do see the expected strong results on credit score and late fees.
   Returning to Table 3, the bottom rows compare model fit early in the sample
vs. late, highlighting the tradeoffs between informativeness of our credit bureau
data (observed at the beginning of the sample period) and informativeness of our
in-sample risk metrics (which grow more comprehensively backward-looking by
the end of the sample period). Credit scores explain APRs no better overall when
timely than when “stale.” This probably reflects the stylized fact that credit scores
are very stable within-person, over time. The in-sample risk measures are more
informative by the end of the sample, though not dramatically so. Overall, the
adjusted fit increases from 0.28 to 0.33 between the first six months of the sample
and the last six, again suggesting that panelist-level behavior, and hence risk, is
strongly auto-correlated (also recall the within-panelist serial correlation in
revolving balances of 0.96). Yet another symptom of this is that the time-invariant
panelist-level in-sample risk variables explain nearly as much variation in APRs
in the “first six months” model (adj. r-squared=0.25) as do the same variables in
the “last six months” model (adj. r-squared=0.31), even though the former are
almost purely derived from as-yet-unobserved future panelist behavior, while the
latter are based completely on 3 years of directly observed recent past behavior.
   Even our richest model leaves more than half of APR dispersion unexplained.
Figure 1 illustrates this, showing both the raw (de-meaned) variation in borrowing
costs and the residual variation. The inter-quartile range in residual variation is
500 basis points, and the 10th/90th range is 1000bp.
   A natural concern is that some of the residual dispersion is driven by omitted
variables that are commonly priced by all issuers (any variable that is differently
priced across issuers makes consumer decision making about contract choice and
allocation important, as we explore in the next sections). We consider this
possibility somewhat remote because we do observe the market-wide standard




                                                                                        15
measure of risk (the credit score), which at panel entry provides a summary
measure of all pre-panel signals about risk. We also observe detailed in-sample
data on granular behaviors (late/missed payments, utilization and over-limit
instances) that are the other primary pricing factors. In all we may observe more
account-level information than do issuers; e.g., a given card issuer may only
observe details on its own accounts, while we observe details for all accounts held
by a particular panelist. We also observe data at higher frequency than issuers do,
because of reporting lags between issuers and the bureau. Conversations with
bankers and industry experts offer reassurance that our model captures nearly all
of the key risk metrics and product characteristics that affect pricing.15
     Another concern is that our functional form might not capture the true
relationship between these variables and APRs. But our model is extremely
flexible – we parameterize nearly every right-hand side variable into deciles or
similarly flexible categories. We have also estimated even more flexible
specifications, with interactions, to the point of over-fitting, in that these models
reduce the adjusted r-squared substantially.16
     Another contributor to unexplained variation in APRs could be randomization
by issuers (see, e.g., Day 2003; Shui and Ausubel 2004). We cannot empirically
distinguish between randomized pricing and the omitted credit risk story, but

15
   We observe account ages (years since opening) for a subset of panelists, and in that
sub-sample do not find account age to be significant correlated with APR. This is
unsurprising given that: 1) many panelists have a mix of older and newer accounts; 2) we
do observe panelist age, which is correlated with account age at the panelist level; 3)
issuers can reprice accounts over time (implying that we wouldn’t expect to see APRs
that were initially low due to macro conditions “stick” over time); 4) consumers can close
any sticky-high APR accounts over time, or move balances out of them (implying that the
effects of any sticky-high accounts would be muted).
16
   Another possible issue might be cards shared across individuals, but restricting the
sample to “single, never married” panelists leaves the results unchanged. Only 7% of
respondents report registering a card belonging to someone else.




                                                                                             16
intuition argues against randomized prices as a primary driver of borrowing cost
dispersion, given the considerable resources that issuers expend in developing
proprietary internal risk models.
     It is also possible that “relationship banking” – benefits granted to cardholders
because they also hold, e.g., a deposit account or mortgage with the same bank –
could affect APRs (Sumit Agarwal et al. 2009). But in survey responses only 3%
of our panelists report paying a lower credit card APR due to relationship
banking.
     Overall, our finding of substantial cross-sectional dispersion in borrowing
costs seems robust to various ways of controlling for credit risk and product
differentiation. Nevertheless, we grant that our models fitting the cross-section of
borrowing costs might be imperfectly specified. We therefore pursue a
complementary approach, one focusing directly on the possibility that different
issuers price the same risk characteristics differently, leading similarly risky
borrowers to face different prices in the market and hold cards at different APRs,
and making borrower behavior in and out of the wallet – allocating debt across
cards, and card shopping – an important determinant of dispersion in borrowing
costs.


VI. Choice Sets: APR Dispersion in the Market and in the Wallet
A. Offer APR Dispersion
     Our first evidence of within-individual offer dispersion comes from a separate
dataset on the terms of credit card mailers from Mintel Comperemedia.17 The
Mintel data allow us to measure dispersion in offers received for a particular


17
  We are extremely grateful to Mintel, and to Geng Li at the Federal Reserve Board of
Governors, for allowing us to share summary statistics from these data. A paper by Li
and coauthors (Han, Keys, and Li 2011) contains more detail about these data.




                                                                                         17
individual in a specific month; that is a lower bound on dispersion measured over
a longer time period. Looking at within-month offer APR dispersion eliminates
any confounding effect of time-varying credit risk at the individual level. We
focus on January 2007 in particular: January because it is a peak month for mail
solicitations by credit card issuers, and 2007 because it sits in the middle of our
Lightspeed sample period. We condition on having received more than one credit
card offer during January 2007, dropping roughly 25% of individuals and leaving
us with 1,211 people who received a mean (median) of 4 (3) credit card offers.
     To illustrate within-individual dispersion in offers, Table 4a shows the
distribution of within-individual differences between the highest and lowest APR
offers, calculated two ways.18 The first APR is the contract or “goto” APR – the
APR after any teaser period expires (column 3). The second APR is an estimated
“net-of-teaser” APR, which is the 24-month weighted average of the teaser and
goto APRs (column 6).19 The median within-individual and within-month high-
low goto (net-of-teaser) rate spread is 434 (750) basis points, and the seventieth
percentiles are 725 (986) basis points. These measures of dispersion must,
mechanically, be at least weakly larger over longer time periods – longer time
periods that are still short enough such that within-person variation in
creditworthiness is trivial for nearly all consumers. In short, it is common for an
individual to receive credit card offers at very different APRs.




18
   The distribution of APRs shown here lies below that in our data, because these are
initial offers and do not reflect the upward shift in APRs that occurs in the group of
cardholders who are repriced or incur a penalty rate after accepting the initial offer.
19
   If, for example, the teaser APR is zero for six months and the goto rate is 2000 basis
points, the net-of-teaser APR equals (6/24)*(0)+(18/24)*2000=1500bp.




                                                                                            18
B. Cross-Issuer Heterogeneity in Risk-Based Pricing
     Our second analysis of within-individual dispersion in choice sets uses the
Lightspeed data to estimate cross-issuer heterogeneity in risk-based pricing.
Relatively little is known about such heterogeneity, and whether it leads to
significantly different APR offers for a particular individual, in part because
issuers invest considerable resources in their internal modeling and view their
models as valuable trade secrets. In some sense, of course, the fact that issuers
expend significant resources is prima facie evidence that different internal models
yield different “optimal” APRs for a given individual; otherwise, why invest in
the models? Nonetheless, we know of no academic work documenting or
estimating the magnitude of this heterogeneity.
     Appendix Figure 2 illustrates cross-issuer heterogeneity by plotting
distributions of the credit score/APR relationship for each of five large
(anonymized) issuers in our data, and also for a sixth “all other issuers” group.20
The plots illustrate three sorts of heterogeneity across issuers, all of which are
substantial. The first is that, even within a credit score decile, different issuers can
have APR levels that differ by several hundred basis points (e.g., compare the
horizontal lines denoting the median rate across issuers for the same credit score
decile). Another type of cross-issuer heterogeneity is in the credit score-APR
gradient: the decline in APRs from the worst to best decile. The third type of
cross-issuer heterogeneity is in the extent of APR variance within credit score
deciles. At the least, these types of differences indicate differential emphasis on
credit scores vs. other information (such as late payments) in pricing risk.
     More formally, in order to quantify the potential impact of these differences
on cross-panelist borrowing cost dispersion, we take the simplest or richest

20
   Credit scores are defined based on the entire distribution of APRs, so “decile 1” for
different issuers captures exactly the same range of scores.




                                                                                           19
account-month model in Table 3 and allow for issuer-specific coefficients on risk
factors for each of the largest six issuers in our sample (which collectively make
up 85% of cards in our sample and 75% nationally).
    We use the coefficients from these issuer-level pricing models to predict
implied APRs for every panelist, in each month, from each of the six issuers. The
hypothetical is “what would the set of APRs from these six issuers be, given
panelist X’s characteristics and the month-year of the data?” We then calculate
the gap between the highest and lowest of these implied APRs, for every panelist
in every month. The thought experiment is to ask how much within-individual
variation in APRs can be generated simply via systematic cross-issuer differences
in risk-based pricing. Note that because our models include month-year effects
and estimate within-month high-low differences, time series variation in issuers’
pricing does not contribute to our estimate of within-individual price dispersion.
    A useful feature of this approach is that it is quite conservative. It treats all
smaller issuers as pricing identically, and we actually exclude the “all other
issuers” category from our dispersion calculations below. It treats each larger
issuer as applying a single pricing model, when in fact many large issuers employ
different models, even internally, for a variety of reasons, one being legacy effects
from acquisitions of other issuers with different models. Finally, it is possible that
our specification is less flexible than that actually employed by a given issuer,
which makes our fitted APRs less dispersed than the ones an issuer would
actually set.
    Table 4b shows the key results of this exercise: the implied high and low
APRs, and the high-low spread. We show data from January 2007 to facilitate
comparison with the Mintel data in Table 4a. Dispersion from our predictions
(Table 4b) is even greater than that in the Mintel data (Table 4a), perhaps because
heterogeneity in ex-post repricing compounds heterogeneity in ex-ante pricing. In
any case, the central takeaway is that both prediction model specifications in




                                                                                         20
Table 4b – “all covariates” and “credit score decile only” – imply substantial price
dispersion based simply on differential treatment of identical customer
characteristics by the largest six credit card issuers. Even the 10th percentile of the
high-low difference is an estimated 500 or 600 basis points. The 90th percentile is
estimated at about 1300 basis points in both specifications.


C. Within-Wallet Dispersion
   Table 4c shows actual within-wallet APR dispersion for our panelists,
measured as the difference between the highest and lowest APRs held for each
panelist in January 2007. The first three columns describe dispersion for the entire
set of panelists. This is useful as a reference point, but necessarily includes many
zeros – dispersion must be zero for any panelist with only one card. Columns 4-6
show in-wallet dispersion for the subset of panelists with more than one card.
   These data show substantial within-wallet dispersion for many panelists.
Among those with >1 card, the median is 400 basis points. Twenty-five percent of
panelists with >1 card hold cards differing by more than 766 basis points.
   In all, the evidence in Tables 4a-4c strongly suggests that any given individual
receives offers at very different APRs from different issuers, and that many
individuals actually hold cards with very different APRs. We reiterate that these
estimates are probably conservative.
   Price dispersion in choice sets creates the possibility that consumer behavior
contributes to conditional dispersion in marginal borrowing costs. If borrowers
shop differentially for cards, then better shoppers will obtain lower rates from the
distribution of possible APRs. Similarly, if a given borrower holds cards in the
wallet with different APRs, effectively allocating debt to lower-APR cards will
reduce borrowing costs. We now examine these issues.




                                                                                          21
VII. Borrower Behavior and Borrowing Costs: Allocation and Shopping
A. Potential Savings from Re-allocating Revolving Debt
    Table 5 examines the within-panelist allocation of total revolving balances
across different cards. We first calculate the panelist-level “best weighted APR”
that would apply if all debt were always allocated to the lowest-rate card in the
wallet, up to the credit limit of each card, including teaser rates and fixing the
levels of revolving and non-revolving debt. For example, if someone is floating
$1,000 on one card, revolving $2,000 on another card, and has a zero balance on a
third card, we calculate the cheapest APR the panelist could pay to revolve that
$2,000, across the APRs on all 3 cards on that day, subject to the credit limit on
each card. Subtracting the “best weighted APR” from the “actual weighted APR”
yields “APR misallocation,” which we scale 3 different ways: as an APR, as
annualized dollars, and as a share of annual interest costs.
    Nearly all panelists allocate debt quite efficiently (Table 5). Among all
panelists including those with only one card, the 50th percentile of misallocation is
zero. The 75th percentile of APR (dollar) misallocation is 48bp ($8/year), and the
90th is 245bp ($84/year). Heavier borrowers have greater misallocation in APR
and dollar terms, while the share of total interest costs incurred via misallocation
is higher among the lightest borrowers.
    Limiting the analysis to “complete cards” panelists, for whom we observe all
possible misallocation, reveals somewhat more but still modest misallocation. The
median is 2bp and the 75th percentile is 114bp ($20/year). Even in the top
borrowing quartile the median is only $35/year. Economically meaningful
misallocation exists at the highest percentiles of the heaviest borrowing quartile,
but is pretty rare overall.
    Even these estimates of “misallocation” costs, modest as they are, are
probably upper bounds on money left on the table even in a fairly strictly
pecuniary sense. Our measured misallocation ignores credit card rewards (miles,




                                                                                        22
points, cash) that might render a card more expensive in APR terms but less
expensive net of rewards (a pattern supported in some unreported analysis).
Further, re-allocation can incur balance transfer fees, in which case some
measured “misallocation” could be optimal conditional on balance transfer fees.
     We also, in unreported results, have examined allocations of “excess
repayments”: payments greater than the monthly minimum (Ponce et al 2012).
This is a somewhat cleaner test, because although rewards might affect purchase
choice, once rewards have been obtained a borrower should always allocate
excess repayments to the highest-APR card. Again, we see that nearly all
repayments are allocated efficiently: sample-wide, all excess repayments go to
highest-rate cards in 80% of panelist-months, and efficiency increases with
payment size.


B.      Shopping/Search Behavior and Borrowing Costs: Descriptive Data

     We now examine the link between card shopping and borrowing costs. For a
subset of panelists (n=603), we observe agreement (on a 10-point scale) with the
statement “I always keep an eye out for better credit card offers.” Panelists
supplied responses via one of the periodic and voluntary surveys emailed to
panelists by Lightspeed; the survey was administered in the first quarter of 2007.

     Table 6 summarizes shopping responses grouped into four categories. The
bottom row shows that 34% of panelists report 1-3 on the 10-point scale (“non-
shoppers”), 30% report 4-6 (“medium shoppers”), 26% report 7-9 (“high
shoppers”), and 10% report 10, the strongest agreement (“super-shoppers”).

     The top rows of Table 6 show that self-reported shopping intensity correlates
sensibly with other variables that might reflect shopping: current cards held,
previous (now closed) accounts, and recent credit card applications. For example,
only 15% of non-shoppers hold 5 or more cards, while 33% of super-shoppers




                                                                                     23
hold 5+ cards; 16% of non-shoppers have 15+ past cards, while 40% of super-
shoppers have 15+ past cards; and 5% of non-shoppers report having applied for
2+ cards recently, while 26% of super-shoppers report the same thing.

     The next sets of rows provide descriptive evidence previewing our
instrumental variables results below: shoppers pay lower APRs, conditional on
credit characteristics.

     The last columns compare survey respondents to non-respondents. Non-
respondents have fewer current/past cards and recent applications, are less
creditworthy, borrow more and pay higher APRs. These differences caution
against extrapolating our results below from respondents to non-respondents.



C. Shopping Behavior and Borrowing Costs: Regressions

     Can individual-level differences in shopping behavior explain meaningful
differences in borrowing costs? We examine this question by adding the 10-point
shopping intensity variable, in linear form, to our main panelist-level specification
from Table 3 and Appendix Table 2.21

     The key identification issue is that shopping may be endogenous; a high APR
“shock” (in the form of APRs in the wallet that a panelist views as higher than
his/her risk warrants) might increase shopping effort, and thereby upward-bias the
estimate of the relationship between shopping and borrowing costs.

     To deal with endogeneity we instrument for the shopping variable with up to
three panelist characteristics: marital status, gender and survey-taking behavior
(panelists get invited by Lightspeed to take short surveys, about once per quarter).

21
  We have experimented with other functional forms (e.g., fewer ordinal categories,
dummies for “shopper” vs. “non-shopper” at different thresholds) with similar results.




                                                                                         24
We choose marital status and gender as instruments because they satisfy the
exclusion restriction by law: the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) prohibits
lenders from (price) discriminating based on marital status or gender, regardless
of intent. E.g., Fair Lending examiners monitor compliance by testing lenders for
“disparate impact”: conditional correlations between protected characteristics and
credit outcomes. Lenders have strong incentives to pass these tests; i.e., to ensure
they satisfy our exclusion restrictions.22 We choose survey-taking because it too
plausibly enters the model only via its indication of search behavior – lenders do
not observe survey-taking, and we cannot think of any omitted risk factor for
which it might proxy. Exogeneity also requires that APR shocks do not change
the IVs themselves. This almost certainly holds for gender and marital status.

     Appendix Table 3 sheds light on the first stage for each of the three
instruments, in the raw data: single panelists and male panelists search
substantially more, and the number of periodic Lighstpeed surveys taken is
correlated with shopping intensity (negatively). There are many possible
explanations for these correlations; we simply note that gender and marital
differences in shopping have long been observed in marketing research,23 and that
one can imagine that online survey-taking could be correlated with online search.
Below we treat the first stage more formally and carefully, by systematically
varying the instrument set and reporting coefficients and confidence intervals
robust to the weak instrument problem.

     Table 7 presents our estimates of the effect of shopping on borrowing costs.
The first column reports OLS results, while columns 2-6 present IV results for
permutations of the instrument set. For each IV specification we report the

22
    See http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/supmanual/cch/fair_lend_over.pdf for
Fair Lending guidance pertinent to our sample period (and today).
23
   See, e.g., Laroche et al (2000) and references therein.




                                                                                       25
standard IV point estimate and standard error, the p-value of the CLR/AR test for
whether the test of the null is robust to weak instruments, and the associated
corrected-confidence interval for the coefficient on the endogenous regressor.24
The three over-identified models pass Sargan exogeneity tests (see bottom row).

     The OLS results reveal no strong relationship between shopping and APRs,
but the IV specifications suggest a large, negative effect of search intensity on
APRs that is robust to the instrument set and to weak instruments. The point
estimates suggest a roughly 100bp reduction in borrowing costs per “point” of
shopping intensity. The IQR of shopping intensity in the sub-sample is 5 points –
from 2 to 7 – implying a reduction in borrowing costs of 500bp by moving from
the 25th to 75th percentiles of shopping intensity. This effect is comparable to that
generated by cross-sectional variation in observable and commonly priced default
risk; e.g., moving from the 25th to 75th percentile of credit score is also correlated
with a 500-600bp reduction in borrowing costs. Note also that the cross-sectional
variation implied by differences in shopping dwarfs that deriving from
misallocation. The interquartile range of misallocation is 48 basis points in our
data: roughly one-tenth the amount implied by differences in self-reported
shopping behavior.

     So why doesn’t everyone shop more? Framed differently, why do many
people behave as if they have very large search costs? Answering this question
convincingly will require much additional research, but our results suggest a
partial and reduced-form explanation: borrowers may face tradeoffs between
shopping efficiently and allocating efficiently. Appendix Table 4 explores this by
focusing on the number of cards held, since active shoppers hold more cards
(Table 6). Holding more credit cards is associated with better APRs in the wallet
24
  See Finlay and Magnusson (2009) for a discussion of the weak instrument problem and
the Stata routine we use to deal with the issue.




                                                                                         26
(middle panel of Appendix Table 4), but also with greater misallocation in the
wallet. On net, these correlations almost offset: the conditional correlations
between cards held and panelist-level borrowing costs are small and weak
statistically (Appendix Table 2).



VIII. Conclusion

   We document and decompose cross-consumer dispersion in credit card
borrowing costs that is large enough to materially affect household saving rates,
even after controlling for debt levels, credit risk, and product characteristics. Our
results suggest that dispersion is generated by the intersection of heterogeneity in
issuer pricing and heterogeneity in consumer contract choice: different issuers
offer different APRs to the same individual, and differences in consumer
shopping behavior lead otherwise identical consumers to choose contracts at
widely differing rates. Little of the cross-sectional dispersion is due to
heterogeneity in how consumers allocate debt across their portfolio of cards, even
though there is in fact substantial “within-wallet” APR variation.
   Our estimates of borrowing cost levels and dispersion, and hence of the
potential impact of borrowing cost heterogeneity on the distribution of household
savings rates, probably err on the conservative side. Our sample seems to revolve
substantially less credit card debt than the broader population, and it may be more
efficient in its financial decision making by dint of being online, more-educated,
and higher-income. Our sample may also be relatively homogeneous, by dint of
everyone being online, and consenting to participate in the panel that generates
our data. Moreover, we observe only credit card borrowing costs, and not costs in
other, even larger debt markets: mortgages, auto loans, and student loans.
   Our results inform interventions designed to help improve credit market
outcomes. If credit shopping is more malleable than creditworthiness (credit




                                                                                        27
scores are quite sticky), then helping people shop for cards may be a relatively
effective focus for interventions.25 This is not to say that our results support any
particular policy, programmatic, or business tack: they are silent, for example, on
how or how cost-effectively one could affect search behavior, and on what the
general equilibrium effects of any such innovation would be.
     We close with five closely related directions for further research. One is on
“borrowing higher” vs. “over-borrowing”; e.g., on the relative importance of, and
relationships between, the price and quantity channels in explaining the cross-
section of savings rates and wealth accumulation. Second is unpacking what
drives search behavior: heterogeneity in standard preferences for leisure, in one or
more behavioral factors, in skills/endowments, etc.? Optimal policy and practice
may depend on those primitives, and one important task going forward is
reconciling the substantial heterogeneity and inefficiency we find on the contract
choice margin with the substantial homogeneity and efficiency we find on the
allocation margin. Third is identifying how issuers respond to search behavior,
and how issuers and consumers interact in equilibrium. Fourth is examining how
consumers allocate attention, including shopping effort, across multiple domains
in household finance: is attention to different areas positively correlated in the
cross-section, or do people substitute attention in one area for attention in
another? Our results here suggest tradeoffs between allocation margins and
contract choice margins. Fifth is building sharper links between consumer credit
market outcomes and wealth accumulation. Much work remains to characterize
the nature and sources of financial product price dispersion, and its implications
for incidence and efficiency.

25
  This harks back to early work on consumer protection in debt markets, which typically
focused on improving comparison shopping (National Commission on Consumer Finance
1972). The importance of consumer-specific pricing in the credit card market suggests
that “Smart Disclosure” could be useful (e.g., Kamenica, Mullainathan, and Thaler 2011).




                                                                                           28
                                  REFERENCES

Agarwal, S., S. Chomsisengphet, C. Liu, and N. Souleles. 2006. “Do Consumers
        Choose the Right Credit Contracts?”
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet,, Chunlin Liu,, and Nicholas
        Souleles,. 2009. “Benefits of Relationship Banking: Evidence from
        Consumer Credit Markets”. Working paper.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Driscoll, Xavier Gabaix, and David Laibson. 2011.
        “Learning in the Credit Card Market.”
Agarwal, Sumit, Paige Skiba, and Jeremy Tobacman. 2009. “Payday Loans and
        Credit Cards: New Liquidity and Credit Scoring Puzzles?” American
        Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 99 (2): 412–17.
Allen, Linda, Gayle DeLong, and Anthony Saunders. 2004. “Issues of Credit Risk
        Modeling in Retail Markets.” Journal of Banking and Finance 28: 727–
        752.
Amar, Moty, Dan Ariely, Shahar Ayal, Cynthia Cryder, and Scott Rick. 2011.
        “Winning the Battle but Losing the War: The Psychology of Debt
        Management.” Journal of Marketing Research 48 (Special Issue on
        Consumer Financial Decision Making): S38–S50.
Angeletos, George-Marios, David Laibson, Jeremy Tobacman, Andrea Repetto,
        and Stephen Weinberg. 2001. “The Hyperbolic Consumption Model:
        Calibration, Simulation, and Empirical Evaluation.” Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 15 (3): 47–68.
Ausubel, Lawrence M. 1991. “The Failure of Competition in the Credit Card
        Market.” American Economic Review 81 (1): 50–81.
Barber, Brad M., Yi-Tsung Lee, Yu-Jane Liu, and Terrance Odean. 2009. “Just
        How Much Do Individual Investors Lose by Trading?” Review of
        Financial Studies 22 (2) (February 1): 609–632.
Barber, Brad, and Terrence Odean. 2011. “The Behavior of Individual Investors.”
Benton, Marques, Stephan Meier, and Charles Sprenger. 2007. “Overborrowing
        and Undersaving: Lessons and Policy Implications from Research in
        Behavioral Economics.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Community
        Affairs Discussion Paper 07 (4).
Berlin, Mitchell, and Loretta Mester. 2004. “Credit Card Rates and Consumer
        Search.” Review of Financial Economics 13 (1-2): 179–198.
Bucks, Brian, Arthur Kennickell, Traci Mach, and Kevin Moore. 2009. “Changes
        in U.S. Family Finances from 2004 to 2007: Evidence from the Survey of
        Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin February: A1–A56.
Calem, Paul, Michael Gordy, and Loretta Mester. 2006. “Switching Costs and
        Adverse Selection in the Market for Credit Cards: New Evidence.”
        Journal of Banking and Finance 30 (6): 1653–1685.




                                                                                  29
Calvet, Laurent, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2007. “Down or Out:
        Assessing the Welfare Costs of Household Investment Mistakes.” Journal
        of Political Economy 115 (5): 707–747.
Campbell, John Y. 2006. “Household Finance.” Journal of Finance LXI (4):
        1553–1604.
Charles, Kerwin, Erik Hurst, and Melvin Stephens. 2008. “Rates for Vehicle
        Loans: Race and Loan Source.” American Economic Review Papers and
        Proceedings 98 (2): 315–320.
Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigette Madrian. 2011. “$100 Bills on the
        Sidewalk: Suboptimal Saving in 401(k) Plans.” Review of Economics and
        Statistics 93 (3): 748–763.
Choi, James, David Laibson, and Brigitte Madrian. 2010. “Why Does the Law of
        One Price Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual Funds.” Review of
        Financial Studies 23 (4): 1405–1432.
Day, G.S. 2003. “Creating a Superior Customer-Relating Capability.” MIT Sloan
        Management Review 44 (3): 77–82.
Dynan, Karen. 2009. “Changing Household Financial Opportunities and
        Economic Security.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 23 (4): 49–68.
Finlay, Keith, and Leandro Magnusson. 2009. “Implementing Weak-instrument
        Robust Tests for a General Class of Instrumental-variables Models.” The
        Stata Journal 9 (3): 1–24.
FINRA Investor Education Foundation. 2009. “Financial Capability in the United
        States: National Survey – Executive Summary.”
Gabaix, Xavier, and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer
        Myopia, and Information Suppression in Competitive Markets.” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 121 (2): 505–540.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “In a World Without Borders: The Impact of Taxes on
        Internet Commerce.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2) (May):
        561=576.
———. 2001. “Competition in the Computer Industry: Online Versus Retail.”
        Journal of Industrial Economics 49 (4 (Symposium on E-Commerce))
        (December): 487–499.
Gross, David, and Nicholas Souleles. 2002a. “An Empirical Analysis of Personal
        Bankruptcy and Delinquency.” The Review of Financial Studies 15 (1):
        319–347.
———. 2002b. “Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates Matter for
        Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data.” Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 117 (1) (February): 149–85.
Han, Song, Benjamin Keys, and Geng Li. 2011. “Credit Supply to Bankrupt
        Consumers: Evidence from Credit Card Mailings.”




                                                                                  30
Heidhues, Paul, and Botond Koszegi. 2010. “Exploiting Naïvete About Self-
        Control in the Credit Market.” American Economic Review 100 (5): 2279–
        2303.
Hortascu, Ali, and Chad Syverson. 2004. “Product Differentiation, Search Costs,
        and the Welfare Effects of Entry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds.”
        Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 403–456.
Kamenica, Emir, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Richard Thaler. 2011. “Helping
        Consumers Know Themselves.” American Economic Review 101 (3)
        (May): 417–422. doi:10.1257/aer.101.3.417.
Kerr, Sougata, and Lucia Dunn. 2008. “Consumer Search Behavior in the
        Changing Credit Card Market.” Journal of Business and Economic
        Statistics 26 (3): 345–353.
Knittel, C., and V. Stango. 2003. “Price Ceilings, Focal Points, and Tacit
        Collusion: Evidence from Credit Cards.” American Economic Review 93
        (5) (December): 1703–1729.
Kolko, Jed. 2010. “A New Measure of US Residential Broadband Availability.”
        Telecommunications Policy 34 (3) (April): 132–143.
Laibson, David. 1997. “Golden Eggs and Hyperbolic Discounting.” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 112 (2): 443–477.
Laroche, Michel, Gad Saad, Mark Cleveland, and Elizabeth Browne. 2000.
        “Gender Differences in Information Search Strategies for a Christmas
        Gift.” Journal of Consumer Marketing 17 (6): 500–522.
Meier, Stephan, and Charles Sprenger. 2010. “Present-biased Preferences and
        Credit Card Borrowing.” American Economic Journal: Applied
        Economics 2 (1): 193–210.
National Commission on Consumer Finance. 1972. Consumer Credit in the
        United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Ponce, Alejandro, Enrique Seira, and Guillermo Zamarripa. 2012. “Do
        Consumers Borrow on Their Cheapest Credit Card? Evidence from
        Mexico.”
Prince, Jeffrey. 2008. “Repeat Purchase Amid Rapid Quality Improvement:
        Structural Estimation of Demand for Personal Computers.” Journal of
        Economics and Management Strategy 17 (1): 1–33.
Shui, Haiyan, and Lawrence Ausubel. 2004. “Time Inconsistency in the Credit
        Card Market.”
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano. 1998. “Costly Search and Mutual Fund Flows.”
        Journal of Finance 53 (5): 1589–1622.
Soll, Jack B., Ralph L. Keeney, and Richard P. Larrick. 2011. “Consumer
        Misunderstanding of Credit Card Use, Payments, and Debt: Causes and
        Solutions.”




                                                                                  31
Stango, Victor. 2000. “Competition and Pricing in the Credit Card Market.”
       Review of Economics and Statistics 82 (3): 499–508.
———. 2002. “Pricing with Consumer Switching Costs: Evidence from the
       Credit Card Market.” Journal of Industrial Economics 50 (4): 475–492.
Stango, Victor, and Jonathan Zinman. 2009a. “What Do Consumers Really Pay
       on Their Checking and Credit Card Accounts? Explicit, Implicit, and
       Avoidable Costs.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
       99 (2): 424–29.
———. 2009b. “Exponential Growth Bias and Household Finance.” Journal of
       Finance 64 (6): 2807–2849.
———. 2011. “Fuzzy Math, Disclosure Regulation, and Credit Market
       Outcomes: Evidence from Truth-in-Lending Reform.” Review of
       Financial Studies 24 (2): 506–534.
———. 2013. “Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from Shocks
       to the Salience of Bank Overdraft Fees.”
Taylor, Curtis. 2003. “Supplier Surfing: Competition and Consumer Behavior in
       Subscription Markets.” The RAND Journal of Economics 34 (2): 223–246.
Telyukova, Irina. 2011. “Household Need for Liquidity and the Credit Card Debt
       Puzzle.”
Woodward, Susan E., and Robert E Hall. 2012. “Diagnosing Consumer
       Confusion and Sub-Optimal Shopping Effort: Theory and Mortgage-
       Market Evidence.” American Economic Review 102 (7): 3249–3276.
Zinman, Jonathan. 2007. “Household Borrowing High and Lending Low Under
       No-arbitrage.”




                                                                                 32
                                                         Residual APR Variation


                 .15
                 .1
       Density




                             APR IQR=[-4.22%, 4.00%]
                             Resid IQR=[-2.63%, 2.41%]
                 .05
                 0




                       -20                  -10                  0                10     20

                                                                 Demeaned APR
                                                                 Residuals



                                Figure 1. Raw and residual variation in weighted APRs.

Notes: “Demeaned APR” shows the distribution (kernel density) of panelist-level average
weighted APRs on all revolving balances during the sample period, demeaned so that they are
centered on zero. “Residuals” shows the distribution (kernel density) of residuals from the fullest
specification of the panelist-level “above plus demographics” regressions described in Table 3.
Fitted values and residuals are calculated using the quartile-specific coefficients in the first four
columns of Table 3 (fifth row down).




                                                                                                        33
Table 1. Panelist-Level Summary Statistics
                                                                             Revolving Balance Quartile
                                                                   1            2             3           4                    All
                           Quartiles [revolving balances, $]   [0, 499]    [499, 1534] [1534, 4586] [4586, 62515]          [0, 62515]
Cards held (share of panelists, N= 4312)
                                                           1     0.50          0.51           0.39             0.30           0.42
                                                           2     0.26          0.29           0.31             0.27           0.28
                                                           3     0.12          0.10           0.15             0.16           0.13
                                                           4     0.06          0.05           0.07             0.09           0.07
                                                         5+      0.06          0.05           0.08             0.17           0.09
Average purchases per month ($, N =4312)
                                                       25th      36            12              27               71             28
                                                       50th     291            57              148             305             173
                                                       75th     1025          314              491             911             688
                                                       90th     2090          1362            1497             1934           1722
Average revolving balances ($, N = 4312)
                                                       25th       0            363            1447             5773           187
                                                       50th       0            528            2029             8471          1061
                                                       75th       42           769            2866            13544          3965
                                                       90th      125           934            3536            20981          10102
Annualized interest costs ($, N =4312)
                                                       25th      0              63            264              970             30
                                                       50th      0             102            363              1487            197
                                                       75th      7             152            515              2332            695
                                                       90th      21            203            716              3778           1741

Interest costs/total borrowing costs, average (N =4312)          0.48          0.66           0.81             0.92           0.75

Annualized interest costs/annual income (N= 4312)
                                                       25th     0.000         0.001          0.004            0.014           0.001
                                                       50th     0.000         0.002          0.007            0.024           0.004
                                                       75th     0.000         0.003          0.011            0.042           0.012
                                                       90th     0.000         0.005          0.018            0.068           0.030
Credit score [N= 4312]
                                                       25th      696           562            602              651             616
                                                       50th      767           631            669              699             694
                                                       75th      803           728            741              749             768
                                                       90th      819           796            792              789             805
Income [N=4106]
                                             under $25,000       0.20          0.18           0.15             0.09           0.16
                                                $25k-$45k        0.22          0.22           0.18             0.17           0.20
                                               $45k-$87.5        0.42          0.46           0.45             0.51           0.46
                                              $87.5-$125k        0.09          0.08           0.12             0.12           0.10
                                                   $125k+        0.07          0.06           0.10             0.11           0.08
Education [N=4312]
                                                HS or less       0.08          0.12           0.10             0.08           0.10
                                             Some college        0.23          0.34           0.31             0.28           0.29
                                          College degree +       0.69          0.53           0.59             0.64           0.61
Age [N=4312]
                                                   Under 30        0.27          0.27             0.26            0.21            0.25
                                                      30-39        0.25          0.29             0.28            0.31            0.28
                                                      40-49        0.21          0.20             0.22            0.23            0.21
                                                      50-59        0.18          0.16             0.15            0.18            0.16
                                                         60+       0.09          0.08             0.09            0.08            0.08
                                                   Panelists      1,078         1,078            1,078           1,078           4,312
                                                   Accounts       2,079         1,987            2,247           2,994           9,307
                                            Panelist-months      18,561        19,761           21,030          21,960          81,312
                                           Account-months        29,438        29,681           35,117          47,851         142,087
Notes: All variables measured at panelist level. Panelist-level averages are across all panelist-days in the sample. Income statistics
have smaller sample sizes due to item-nonresponse on registration survey. "Cards held" is the maximum number of distinct cards
(accounts) observed on any one day in the Lightspeed data, at the panelist level. Interest costs are calculated using daily balances
and APRs for all card/days in the sample, and annualized. "Total borrowing costs" include interest costs, annual fees, late and over-
limit fees, cash advance fees and balance transfer fees. Credit score is from one of the three major bureaus, observed upon entry into
the panel. Income, education and age are self-reported upon entry into the panel. Revolving balance quartiles are calculated using
panelist-level average daily revolving balances.




                                                                                                                                         34
Table 2. Borrowing Costs in the Cross-Section of Panelists
                                                                   Revolving Balance Quartile
                                                           1           2            3            4          Total
              Quartile cutoffs (revolving balances) [0, 499]      [499, 1534] [1534, 4586] [4586, 62515] [0, 62515]
Panelist-level weighted APR, all balances, all panelists (N=4312)
                                               10th          0.00         3.04         6.38          8.80       0.00
                                               25th          0.00         8.21        11.21         11.91       3.45
                                               50th          0.00        15.96        16.18         16.13      13.17
                                               75th          1.08        21.11        21.68         20.77      19.53
                                               90th          7.57        25.14        25.90         25.42      24.38

Panelist-level weighted APR, revolving balances (N=3685)
                                             10th       11.99             11.99           10.56             10.07         10.99
                                             25th       14.90             15.26           14.90             13.40         14.79
                                             50th       17.59             19.34           18.47             17.28         18.21
                                             75th       20.92             23.94           23.47             21.92         23.05
                                             90th       26.26             28.24           28.04             26.53         27.63

Panelist-level weighted APR, revolving balances, no teaser rates (N=3629)
                                             10th         12.24        12.90              11.90             11.51         11.96
                                             25th         14.99        15.74              15.24             14.01         14.99
                                             50th         17.80        19.46              18.90             17.78         18.36
                                             75th         21.07        24.03              23.78             22.31         23.21
                                             90th         26.32        28.29              28.15             26.83         27.84

Panelist-level weighted APR, revolving balances, no teaser rate, complete cards sub-sample (N=1742)
                                             10th         11.70         12.74          11.34                11.24         11.58
                                             25th         14.90         15.43          14.99                13.34         14.73
                                             50th         17.36         19.46          17.95                17.00         17.99
                                             75th         21.22         23.99          22.43                21.61         22.78
                                             90th         25.84         28.24          27.66                25.99         27.20

Panelist-level weighted APR, revolving balances, no teaser rates, January 2006 (N=2495)
                                             10th         12.23          12.07        12.23                 11.16         11.77
                                             25th         14.90          14.90        15.14                 14.05         14.90
                                             50th         17.40          17.68        17.93                 17.23         17.45
                                             75th         20.07          21.32        22.91                 22.07         22.08
                                             90th         28.15          28.05        28.24                 27.24         28.08

   R-sq.: monthly borrowing costs on panelist FEs            0.78          0.76            0.78              0.76          0.77
Notes: Weighted APR is at panelist level across all card/days (or card/days without teaser APRs) in sample, weighted by
total balances or only revolving balances. Balances that are non-revolving have an APR of zero. "Teaser rates" are defined by
the authors as any APR below 7.99%. Complete cards sub-sample is defined as in Table A1. January 2006 sub-sample
summarizes panelist-month-level weighted APRs for the month of January 2006. R-squared is from a regression of panelist-
month-level weighted APRs on revolving balances on a set of panelist fixed effects; the r-squared therefore identifies the
share of variation in panelist-month-level APRs that is identified by time-invariant differences in APRs across panelists (i.e.,
the cross-section).




                                                                                                                              35
Table 3. Explaining Borrowing Cost Cross-Sections Using Observable Risk, Card Characteristics/Effects, Demographics, and Issuer/Time Fixed Effects
                                                                                        Revolving Balance Quartile
                                                                         1                  2                  3                  4               Total
Panelist-level models:                                                                        R-squared (unadjusted R-squared)
                                               Credit score decile  0.06 (0.07)       0.14 (0.15)         0.21 (0.20)        0.13 (0.12)       0.15 (0.15)
                                       Above plus in-sample risk    0.09 (0.25)       0.24 (0.30)         0.34 (0.39)        0.30 (0.35)       0.27 (0.29)
                                      Above plus "issuer effects"   0.13 (0.38)       0.39 (0.46)         0.38 (0.47)        0.35 (0.45)       0.34 (0.37)
                              Above plus card fees/characteristics  0.17 (0.42)       0.39 (0.47)         0.39 (0.48)        0.36 (0.46)      0.35 (0.38)*
                                       Above plus demographics      0.16 (0.46)       0.38 (0.48)         0.39 (0.50)        0.37 (0.49)       0.35 (0.39)
                                                                N       448               1062               1061              10588              3629
Account-month-level models:                                                                             R-squared (unadjusted R-squared)
                                                 Credit score decile         0.07 (0.07)          0.16 (0.16)      0.17 (0.17)     0.06 (0.06)                 0.12 (0.12)
                            Time-invariant panelist-level variables          0.27 (0.27)          0.38 (0.38)      0.32 (0.32)     0.26 (0.26)                 0.27 (0.27)
               Time-varying usage and risk, issuer and time effects          0.24 (0.24)          0.36 (0.36)      0.29 (0.29)     0.21 (0.21)                 0.25 (0.25)
    Time-varying usage and risk, issuer and time effects, card chars.        0.24 (0.25)          0.36 (0.37)      0.30 (0.30)     0.21 (0.22)                 0.26 (0.26)
                                               All covariates above          0.32 (0.33)          0.41 (0.42)      0.34 (0.35)     0.49 (0.38)                 0.30 (0.30)
                                                                   N           28375                28708            33480            44804                      135367
Account-month-level models, first six months of sample:                                                 R-squared (unadjusted R-squared)
                                                Credit score decile          0.10 (0.10)          0.15 (0.15)      0.16 (0.16)     0.07 (0.07)                 0.13 (0.13)
                           Time-invariant panelist-level variables           0.27 (0.28)          0.35 (0.36)      0.31 (0.32)     0.23 (0.24)                 0.25 (0.25)
   Time-varying usage and risk, issuer and time effects, card chars.         0.21 (0.22)          0.33 (0.34)      0.27 (0.27)     0.20 (0.20)                 0.24 (0.24)
                                              All covariates above           0.30 (0.31)          0.38 (0.39)      0.32 (0.33)     0.27 (0.28)                 0.28 (0.28)
                                                                  N             7591                 8070             9224            11786                      36671
Account-month-level models, last six months of sample :                                            R-squared (unadjusted R-squared)
                                                   Credit score decile   0.03 (0.03)         0.20 (0.20)        0.23 (0.23)         0.06 (0.06)         0.13 (0.13)
                               Time-invariant panelist-level variables   0.23 (0.26)         0.50 (0.53)        0.42 (0.45)         0.35 (0.38)         0.31 (0.32)
    Time-varying usage and risk, issuer and time effects, card chars.    0.27 (0.30)         0.46 (0.49)        0.41 (0.44)         0.28 (0.30)         0.30 (0.31)
                                                  All covariates above   0.33 (0.37)         0.52 (0.55)        0.44 (0.48)         0.35 (0.38)         0.33 (0.34)
                                                                    N       2123                1783               1961                 3122               8989
Notes: Each cell reports the r-squared (unadjusted r-squared) from a regression of APRs on the set of listed covariates. Panelist-level models use as the dependent
variable the panelist-level APR paid on all revolving balances, excluding teaser rates, weighted by balances across all accounts and days in sample period. Account-
month-level models use the account-month-level APR as the dependent variable. Covariates are listed below and described in fuller detail in the Data Appendix.
Full results from asterisked specification * are shown in Appendix Table 3.

"Credit score decile" is a full set of indicator variables for the panelist-level credit score. Base model also includes indicators for sample entry/exit timing.
"In-sample risk" (or "time-invariant panelist-level variables") include the number of cards held (indicators up to 5+), panelist-level average daily total credit
line across all cards (decile indicators), panelist-level indicators for quintile of total late fees in-sample and quartile of total over-limit fees in-sample, panelist-level
credit utilization decile indicators, average monthly purchase volume quartile indicators, and average monthly revolving balance quartile indicators.

"Issuer effects" in panelist-level regressions are a vector measuring for each panelist the average shares of revolving balances allocated to each distinct issuer in
the data.
"Card fees/characteristics" include average fees paid per year (annual, balance transfer and cash advance) across all cards, and indicators for whether the
panelist's primary card (the one with the highest level of revolving balances, on average) has an annual fee, has a variable rate, and is a rewards card.

"Demographics" include indicators for age category, income category and education category (see Table 1).
"Time-varying usage and risk" include panelist-month level indicators for utilization decile, credit line decile, total late fees to date in sample and total over-
limit fees to date in sample.
"Issuer and time effects" in account-month models include issuer fixed effects and month-year fixed effects.
"Card characteristics" in account-month models include card-level indicators for whether the card has an annual fee, is a rewards card or has a variable rate, and
interactions between the variable rate indicator and month-year fixed effects.




                                                                                                                                                                                 36
Table 4. APR Dispersion in Choice Sets, in the Market and in the Wallet

Table 4a. Out-of-sample offer rate dispersion, within-individual, within-month, January 2007.
                                   Goto APR                                Net-of-teaser APR
                         High         Low       Difference           High         Low      Difference
      Percentile          (1)          (2)          (3)               (4)          (5)         (6)
         10th            10.99        8.99         0.00              9.90         3.75        0.46
         30th            13.99        9.90         2.25              12.24        4.95        4.25
         50th            16.15        9.99         4.34              14.24        6.45        7.50
         70th            18.24        10.99        7.25              18.24        9.31        9.86
         90th            19.50        14.90        9.25              18.99       13.39        13.95
Notes: Data from Mintel Comperemedia Inc. (http://www.comperemedia.com/). Sample covers all
reported credit card direct mail offers for 1211 individuals in the Comperemedia sample, from
January 2007. "Goto" APR is the rate at which balances incur interest charges after expiration of
the introductory "teaser" period (if any). "Net-of-teaser" APR is the average of the teaser and goto
APRs over the first 24 months of the offer.

Table 4b. Estimated within-panelist (within-month) high APR "offer," low APR "offer" and high-
low APR "offer" spread, January 2007.
                                 All covariates                           Credit score decile only
                          High        Low       Difference             High         Low      Difference
      Percentile           (1)         (2)           (3)                (4)          (5)         (6)
10th                      16.71       9.25          5.05              17.73         9.26        5.89
25th                      18.52      10.91          6.42              18.74        10.67        7.11
50th                      21.38      12.72          8.19              21.73        12.42        8.73
75th                      24.12      14.75         10.43              24.10        14.55        10.84
90th                      26.67      16.79         13.20              26.62        16.08        13.50
Notes: Estimated APR "offers" are calculated using our Lightspeed data. We first estimate OLS
APR regressions for each of the largest six issuers, letting the relationship between panelist
characteristics and APR differ by issuer. Each model includes a full set of panelist-month-level and
card-month-level covariates described in Section V and the Data Appendix, (Columns 1-3 above),
or just credit score decile and month-year fixed effects (Columns 4-6 above). We use the
coefficients from each model to predict six fitted APRs for each panelist in each month - a
hypothetical set of "offers" from the largest six issuers. This allows us to estimate a high APR, low
APR, and high-low spread for each panelist.


Table 4c. Actual within-panelist within-month APR differences "in the wallet," January 2007.
                                 All panelists                          Panelists with >1 card
                         High         Low      Difference           High         Low      Difference
      Percentile          (1)          (2)         (3)               (4)          (5)         (6)
                 10th 14.99           8.99          0               16.99        8.90          0
                 25th 18.24          10.99          0               18.55        9.97        0.75
                 50th 21.65          14.79          0               23.24       12.99        4.00
                 75th 29.24          17.49        3.00              29.99       15.90        7.66
                 90th 30.49          21.65        8.01              32.24       18.24       12.00
Notes: Table shows actual APRs on cards held by panelists in our data during January 2007 (we
choose this month-year to facilitate comparison with 4a and 4b above). "High" column shows the
distribution of APRs across panelists using only each panelist's highest APR "in the wallet." "Low"
column shows the distribution of APRs across panelists using only each panelist's lowest APR in
the wallet. "Difference" shows the distribution of the max-min spread in the wallet, again during
only January 2007. First column shows distributions for all panelists in that month (N=2808), and
second column shows distributions for the subset of panelists with more than one card in that
month (N=1197).



                                                                                                          37
Table 5. Is Borrowing Cost Heterogeneity Driven By "Misallocation", Very Strictly Defined?
                                                                     Revolving Balance Quartile
                                                                     1           2           3           4                 Total
                                                                       All panelists with revolving balances
Average within-wallet APR max-min difference
                                                     25th            0           0           0           0                     0
                                                     50th            0           0        0.01       1.66                    0.0
                                                     75th        2.11         2.00        4.51       6.38                   4.08
                                                     90th        5.09         5.66        8.34      10.63                   8.30
Average APR misallocation
                                                           25th            0           0            0           0              0
                                                           50th            0           0            0        0.05              0
                                                           75th         0.09        0.09         0.46        0.93           0.48
                                                           90th         4.00        1.73         2.05        2.62           2.45
Annualized dollars lost from misallocation
                                                           25th            0           0           0           0               0
                                                           50th            0           0           0        4.96               0
                                                           75th         0.02        0.55        9.20      100.23            8.22
                                                           90th         2.81        9.08       45.14      321.19           84.13
Misallocation costs as percentage of annual interest costs
                                                          25th             0           0           0           0               0
                                                          50th             0           0           0           0               0
                                                          75th          0.01           0        0.02        0.06            0.03
                                                          90th          0.23        0.11        0.13        0.17            0.16
                                                          95th          0.45        0.25        0.30        0.26            0.28
                                                            N            451       1078         1078        1078           3685
                                                                               Panelists with revolving balances,
                                                                                  complete cards sub-sample
Average within-wallet APR max-min difference
                                                           25th            0           0            0           0              0
                                                           50th         0.46           0         1.56        3.72           1.21
                                                           75th         3.65        3.48         5.91        7.89           5.23
                                                           90th         5.86        7.06         8.66       11.95           9.14
Average APR misallocation
                                                           25th            0           0            0           0              0
                                                           50th            0           0         0.06        0.39           0.02
                                                           75th         1.15        0.50         0.85        1.71           1.14
                                                           90th         4.76        3.28         3.49        3.88           3.78
Annualized dollars lost from misallocation
                                                           25th            0           0           0           0              0
                                                           50th            0           0        0.99       35.21           0.27
                                                           75th         0.45        2.86       21.13      180.01          19.80
                                                           90th         3.24       15.53       75.15      435.23         133.24
Misallocation costs as percentage of annual interest costs
                                                            25th           0           0            0            0              0
                                                            50th           0           0            0        0.02               0
                                                            75th        0.07        0.03         0.06        0.11            0.07
                                                            90th        0.30        0.20         0.22        0.24            0.24
                                                               n         252        522           511         484           1769
Notes: "Average APR misallocation" is the average balance-weighted daily reduction in APR that would be obtained by
costlessly transferrring all balances to lowest-rate cards, conditional on current credit limits. "Dollars lost" is the average
annualized dollar savings the panelist would enjoy by reallocating perfectly throughout the sample period. "Misallocation
costs as percentage..." compares the annualized dollar savings from reallocation to the annualized dollar interest costs
from Table 1, at the panelist level. Complete cards sub-sample includes panelists for whom the number of card accounts in
our data matches "active bankcard lines" from the credit report.




                                                                                                                                    38
Table 6. Self-Reported Search Intensity, Other Shopping-Related Variables, and Credit Characteristics
                                                    10-point scale (10 highest), "I always keep an eye out for better credit card offers"
                                                                                                                                            Non-respondents
                                        Variable      [1, 3]             [4, 6]            [7, 9]              10           All respondents

Current (in-sample) credit card accounts:
                                                 1       0.27               0.22              0.21               0.28              0.24               0.45
                                                 2       0.25               0.25              0.21               0.20              0.24               0.29
                                                 3       0.22               0.19              0.18               0.12              0.19               0.12
                                                 4       0.11               0.13              0.10               0.07              0.11               0.07
                                                5+       0.15               0.21              0.29               0.33              0.22               0.07

Previous (closed) credit card accounts
                                              0-2        0.23               0.22              0.22               0.15              0.22               0.25
                                              3-5        0.23               0.15              0.15               0.10              0.17               0.22
                                              6-9        0.21               0.24              0.20               0.23              0.22               0.23
                                            10-14        0.17               0.17              0.19               0.12              0.17               0.15
                                              15+        0.16               0.21              0.24               0.40              0.22               0.14

Self-reported recent credit card applications
                                                 0       0.70               0.57              0.41               0.35              0.55               0.57
                                                 1       0.25               0.32              0.42               0.39              0.33               0.36
                                                 2       0.05               0.10              0.14               0.20              0.10               0.06
                                                 3       0.00               0.01              0.04               0.06              0.02               0.01

                           Credit score (median)          753               728                705               703                723               690

       Average weighted APR, no misallocation
                                    (median)             16.33             15.43              16.12             14.90              15.88             17.94

     Revolving credit card balances ($, median):       553.91             1088.83          1313.87              839.65             890.00            1080.00
                                      N (panelists)      205                181               157                 60                603               3710
Notes: Search intensity is self-reported agreement with the statement "I always keep an eye out for better credit card offers," on a 10 point scale with 1 being
"Does not describe me at all" and 10 being "Describes me perfectly." Survey question was part of a larger email survey sent to all panelists in the first quarter
of 2007. Survey content was not announced prior to the decision to take the survey. In-sample credit card accounts is defined as in Table 1. Previous
accounts is the number of previously held but closed credit card accounts from the panelist's credit bureau file. "Applications" are the sum of affirmative
responses to survey questions asking "Have you applied for any new credit cards in the last 12 months?" Surveys were emailed to panelists in 2004Q4,
2005Q1 and 2006Q1. Only those panelists taking each survey (751 for the first, 972 for the second, and 1354 for the last) could have provided an affirmative
response. Non-respondent column shows data for panelists who did not take the survey containing the search question.




                                                                                                                                                                    39
Table 7. Search Behavior and Borrowing Costs
                                                                          Dependent variable: weighted best APR (mean=16.35)
                                                             (1)             (2)           (3)            (4)         (5)                  (6)
        Self-reported search intensity (10-point scale)    -0.083         -1.119*       -1.065*         -0.950     -1.101**            -1.116***
                                                           (0.078)        (0.577)       (0.583)        (0.620)      (0.430)              (0.360)

                                                        N    497             497             476             497             476           476
                                                r-squared    0.59            0.41           0.45            0.55            0.44           0.50
                            full set of control variables?   yes             yes             yes             yes             yes            yes
                                             Instruments: None (OLS)
                                            Marital status                   yes                                             yes            yes
                                                   Gender                                    yes                             yes            yes
                               Lightspeed surveys taken                                                      yes                            yes
    CLR/AR test robust to weak instruments (p-value)          n/a            0.03           0.03            0.08            0.00           0.00
                   95% CI, robust to weak instruments         n/a       [-3.38, -0.14] [-3.26, -0.12] [-3.38, 0.06] [-2.51, -0.37] [-2.12, -0.37]
                                     Sargan test (p-value)    n/a            0.83            n/a             n/a            0.35           0.98
Notes: All models are estimated at the panelist level. "Weighted best APR" is the lowest APR the panelist could pay in that month, averaged
across days, if balances were allocated to lowest-rate cards conditional on credit limits. Search intensity is self-reported agreement on a scale of
1-10 with the statement "I always keep an eye out for better credit card offers," with 1 meaning "Does not describe me at all" and 10 meaning
"Describes me perfectly." All models include the full set of regressors described in Tables 3 and A3. Marital status is a set of four indicator
variables for "single, never married," "married," "divorced/widowed/separated" and "other." Lightspeed surveys taken is a panelist-level total of
periodic surveys taken by panelists; see Stango and Zinman (2013) for details. CLR/AR test is for significance of the endogenous regressor
(search intensity), given that the instruments may be weak, and 95% CI is calculated using standard errors robust to the presence of weak
instruments. Sargan test is for exogeneity of instruments (where rejection of the null indicates endogeneity), and is only applicable when the
model is over-identified as in columns (2), (5) and (6). See http://econ.tulane.edu/kfinlay/pdf/FinlayMagnusson2009.pdf for a discussion of the
weak instrument problem and the Stata routine we use to deal with the issue.




                                                                                                                                                40
Data Appendix

A. Panel Construction and Maintenance

   Panelists enter the Ultimate sample by providing Lightspeed with access to at least two
online accounts (checking, credit card, savings, loan or time deposit) held within the household.
Panelists have typically participated in other Forrester/Lightspeed panels; the incremental
payment for enrolling in the Ultimate panel averages $20. After initial enrollment, panelists need
take no action to maintain membership in the panel, and a panelist may request to leave the panel
at any time.

   Enrollment of new panelists occurs consistently throughout our sample period, as Lightspeed
attempts to keep panel size constant by balancing enrollment against attrition. Our sample size
falls over time, however, because later panelists tend not to have matched credit report data.
Appendix Table 5 shows some data on how the number of panelists and their characteristics
evolve over time. Because we focus on cross-panelist differences and generally employ panelist-
level time-invariant variables in the analysis, those dynamics are not a focus of the analysis.
Where appropriate, we do account for panelists’ sample entry/exit dates in the empirics. We also
check that our results are robust to using only individual months, or the first six months, of data.



B. Measuring Credit Risk

Our data include much, if not all, of the information used by issuers when setting and adjusting
APRs:

1. Credit scores: A credit score from one of the major three bureaus is probably the single best
   summary source of information about credit history and risk. We observe one credit score for
   each panelist at entry into the sample, which is generally in January 2006, but occasionally
   later. The score, on the standard 850-point scale, summarizes risk by incorporating
   information about total debt, debt utilization, default history ranging several years into the
   past, and the number of “pulls” or applications for new credit.

2. Supplementary credit bureau data: We also observe other information from the report
   including total debt, the number of active credit cards, total credit available, the number of




                                                                                                   41
    active auto and mortgage “lines” (loans), the total number of past (closed) credit card
    accounts, and a few other variables.1

3. The number of credit cards held: For each panelist on each day, we observe the number of
    registered credit card accounts. We define for each panelist the number of cards held as the
    maximum number of cards held on any one day. We have defined the variable other ways
    without any difference, because the number of cards held is very stable for a panelist over
    time.

4. Purchase volume and revolving balances: For each panelist we calculate average monthly
    purchase volume and average monthly revolving balances (these can be very different
    depending on whether the panelist revolves). We then bin each panelist into one of four
    quartiles based on each variable.

5. In-sample late/missed payments: A late or missed payment can trigger a “default” APR on
    the account in question, and is also in many cases reported to the credit bureau, leading other
    issuers to incorporate the late/missed payment history into APRs on new offers or existing
    cards. The credit score mentioned above should capture information about late/missed
    payments leading up to the panelist’s enrollment in Lightspeed, and once the panelist enters
    our data we directly observe late/missed payments. We measure running late payment counts
    for each account, a running count of late payments at the panelist level across all accounts,
    and several panelist-level and time-invariant measures of “total late fees,” “average late fees
    per month” and “any late fee in-sample.”

6. Limits and utilization: Issuers generally consider utilization (the ratio of balances to available
    credit) as a signal about risk. Cardholders may face higher APRs or offers either by having
    what an issuer considers “high” utilization, or by exceeding their credit line (going “over-
    limit”) on one or more cards. Again, the credit score we observe at panel enrollment
    incorporates all available information about utilization as of enrollment; after enrollment we

1
  Beyond the credit score itself, issuers may also incorporate this disaggregated information from the
credit report into risk modeling for new account offers. In practice, adding such information non-
parametrically to our models has little effect on the fit. This is partly because we use rich, disaggregated
data on within-sample account performance, as described below. Customers may also self-report income,
education, and other demographics on their applications, but an issuer generally does not directly observe
those things. We include such demographics in our models and find that they do not improve the fit.




                                                                                                         42
   observe utilization levels (including both credit limits and card balances) and “over-limit”
   instances directly, at the card and panelist level. As with late/missed payments we here we
   calculate running utilization levels and over-limit instance counts, and also construct
   panelist-level time-invariant “Over-limit fees per month” and “Any over-limit fee in-sample”
   measures.

7. Demographics: We observe from the registration survey categorical variables measuring age,
   income and education. These may not be directly observed by issuers, but may proxy for
   variables (such as time since opening first credit card) that issuers incorporate into pricing.

   Collectively, these variables are quite comprehensive. They likely compare favorably to the
data observed by issuers on their own cards, although individual issuers may of course employ
those data differently. They may dominate data observed by issuers on other cards (i.e., on
accounts issued by other issuers).


C. Measuring Non-APR Account Attributes
We also observe a variety of card- and issuer-level characteristics:
1. Annual fees: For each card in the data, we observe annual fees incurred. We measure annual
   fees both as a cardinal number – the average annual fees paid per year, either at the card or
   panelist level – and using an indicator for “any annual fee incurred during the sample
   period,” again either at the panelist or account level.
2. Other fees (balance transfer, cash advance, etc.): We observe balance transfer fees, cash
   advance fees, late fees, and over-limit fees as they are incurred, and include them as annual
   dollar costs per account or panelist. This is imperfect because we only observe fees that are
   incurred, rather than the contingent price that might be incurred. We have experimented with
   a variety of alternative approaches to this issue – inferring fees even when they are never
   incurred from data on actual fees paid by other panelists with the same card, for example –
   with little effect on the results.
3. Rewards: We observe for every card in the data its “card name” as a text string, which is the
   issuer’s name for the card. An example would be “MBNA CREDIT CARD.” The card name
   often reveals information about rewards or “affinity” links (e.g., “AMERICA WEST
   FLIGHTFUND CREDIT CARD,” “GREEN BAY PACKERS VISA”). We also observe its
   “account name,” which is an issuer- or panelist-defined name for the account and also


                                                                                                     43
    contains information about affinity/reward links (e.g., “NATIONAL WILDLIFE
    FEDERATION          PLATINUM          PLUS       MASTERCARD,”            “PLATINUM          DELTA
    SKYMILES”). We do not directly observe rewards, but in practice the dollar value of
    rewards does not vary by much across cards. We have experimented with separate variables
    for rewards and affinity status, or a single combined indicator for the presence of either.
4. Fixed/variable rate pricing: A credit card APR may be “fixed,” meaning not pegged to
    another market rate, or “variable,” meaning that the APR moves monthly or quarterly with
    some market interest rate.2 We construct an indicator measuring whether the rate is fixed or
    variable.
5. Unobserved issuer-specific and state-specific effects: We also observe the issuer (e.g., Bank
    of America, Capital One, Citi, etc.) for each credit card in the data. This allows us to
    construct a set of “issuer effects” measuring average APR differences across issuers, which
    might come from omitted card characteristics, or from systematic differences in pricing
    customer risk.3 Because a given panelist may have balances allocated across multiple cards
    from different issuers, our panelist-level regressions measure the average share of revolving
    balances held on cards of each issuer. In card-level regressions we simply include a fixed
    effect for the card issuer. (We’ve also estimated specifications with fixed effects for the card
    name, since, e.g., MBNA cards may be remain branded as “MBNA”, even after MBNA gets
    acquired by Bank of America. This alternative definition of issuer does not affect the results.)
    We also observe the panelist’s state of residence and in unreported specifications include
    fixed effects for state of residence; those effects might capture any number of omitted
    influences on state-level supply or demand for credit.
6. Sample entry/exit dates: Because panelists may be in the data for less than the entire sample
    period, we include a set of indicators for the panelist’s first and last months in the data. This
    corrects for variation in APRs generated by systematic time-varying APRs, combined with
    differential entry/exit dates by panelists.




2
   See Stango (2000) for a detailed discussion of fixed and variable rate pricing in credit cards.
3
  Issuer effects are de-identified when we report the results, per confidentiality provisions of our data
licensing agreement with Lightspeed.



                                                                                                      44
D. Classifying “Teaser” Rates

    Our data do not identify teaser rates as such, but they are fairly easy to classify empirically
because they are significantly lower than even the lowest contract rate offered to the best credit
risks during our sample period. We classify any APR below 7.99% as a teaser rate (source:
tabulations from the Mintel data discussed in Section VI-A). This discards 5% of account-
months, and 1% of panelists who always pay teasers in-sample.


E. Representativeness
    Starting at the top of Table 1, our cardholding distribution matches up well with data from
the 2007 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), particularly when one uses our “complete cards”
sub-sample (Appendix Table 2) as the benchmark.4 Purchases also match up well with the SCF,
in which the comparable 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the weighted data are $20, $250, and
$1000.5 Comparisons of revolving debt are more problematic, given substantial underreporting
in the SCF (Zinman 2009; Brown et al. 2011), and the lack of distinction between revolving and
transaction balances in credit bureau data (and in the data that issuers report to regulators). But if
we look simply at outstanding balances, we see about 50% less in our data than in the bureau
(Brown et al Appendix Table 1).6 This suggests that our data may understate the level of debt and
total interest costs in the broader population. For our panelists the share of total credit card costs
from interest (vs. fees) is 74%, as compared to an estimate of 80% from 2007 issuer-side data
(source: Cards&Payments).

    Data from other sources on APR distributions is limited, but comparing our data to the SCF
(which asks about a single APR, on the card used most often), we find similar dispersion; the
interquartile range in the SCF is 900 basis points, which is comparable to what we observe, even
if one restricts our data to the subsample of panelists’ “primary cards.” The dispersion we
observe also looks similar to that in more recent administrative data from the OCC.7 How the
central tendency in our data compares to other data is murkier. The APRs we observe are higher
on average than the self-reported APRs in the 2007 SCF, but are similar to those in the OCC
4
  Zinman (2009) shows that cardholding in the SCF matches up well with issuer-side data.
5
  Zinman (2009) shows that card purchases in the SCF match up well with issuer-side data.
6
  This may be explained in part by the life-cycle u-shaped pattern of credit card debt (Brown et al Figure
4), coupled with the fact that our sample is relatively young.
7
  Source: http://files.consumerfinance.gov/f/2011/03/OCC-Presentation.pdf .



                                                                                                       45
administrative data from 2009. In short, we see little reason to believe that the dispersion we
observe is uncharacteristic of the national population of U.S. credit cardholders.

   In terms of demographics, our panelists are younger, more educated, and higher income
(conditional on age) than national averages. The overall credit score distribution looks
representative, conditional on demographics (source: tabulations from the Payment Cards Center
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia).




                                                                                             46
    Appendix Figure 1. APR variation in the 1983 and 2007 Surveys of Consumer Finances.

Notes: Figures show distributions of answers to SCF open-ended questions regarding credit card
interest rates in the 1983 and 2007 Surveys of Consumer Finances. In 1983 interviewers asked for
“Respondent's best guess as to average interest rate he/she pays (annualized) if the full bill is not
paid on the bank or storecard he/she uses the most often.” In 2007 interviewers asked “What
interest rate do you pay on the card where you have the largest balance?”




                                                                                                        47
                     Issuer 1                                              Issuer 2




                     Issuer 3                                              Issuer 4




                     Issuer 5                                          All other issuers




      Appendix Figure 2. Credit scores and APRs for five large issuers and all other issuers.

Notes: Each pane shows the relationship between credit score decile and the within-decile
distribution of contract APRs, for five largest issuers in sample and the remaining smaller issuers
(the latter appearing in the bottom right pane). Each box-and-whisker plot shows the median APR
as a solid horizontal line within the box, the 25th/75th percentiles as the top and bottom of the box,
and the 5th/95th percentiles as the whiskers.




                                                                                                         48
Appendix Table 1. Panelist-Level Summary Statistics, Complete Cards Sub-sample (Compare to Table 1)
                                                                          Revolving Balance Quartile
                                                                    1        2              3          4                       All
                             Quartiles (revolving balances, $) [0, 499] [499, 1534] [1534, 4586] [4586, 62515]             [0, 62515]
Cards held (share of panelists, N= 2134)
                                                             1   0.35      0.38          0.25         0.15                    0.29
                                                             2   0.29      0.31          0.32         0.26                    0.29
                                                             3   0.17      0.15          0.19         0.19                    0.17
                                                             4   0.10      0.08          0.10         0.11                    0.10
                                                           5+    0.10      0.09          0.14         0.29                    0.15
Average purchases per month ($, N =2134)
                                                         25th      52        21            53         126                      45
                                                         50th     445        89           218         450                     264
                                                         75th    1197       565           682         1224                    986
                                                         90th    2220      1821          1837         2335                   2070
Average revolving balances ($, N = 2134)
                                                         25th       0       355          1423         5630                     98
                                                         50th       0       525          2005         8637                    877
                                                         75th      38       771          2894        13666                   3535
                                                         90th     125       916          3528        21692                   9529
Annualized interest costs ($, N =2134)
                                                         25th       0        62           240         942                      16
                                                         50th       0       100           353         1450                    157
                                                         75th       6       144           497         2239                    578
                                                         90th      20       200           667         3707                   1591

Interest costs/total borrowing costs, average (N =2134)          0.46          0.66           0.81             0.93           0.74

Annualized interest costs/annual income (N= 2134)
                                                          25th   0.000        0.001          0.004            0.013          0.000
                                                          50th   0.000        0.002          0.007            0.024          0.003
                                                          75th   0.000        0.003          0.011            0.041          0.011
                                                          90th   0.000        0.005          0.018            0.073          0.029
Credit score [N= 2134]
                                                          25th   695           553            600              649            619
                                                          50th   763           634            673             702.5           703
                                                          75th   798           743            749              755            773
                                                          90th   817           802            797              791            807
Income [N=2031]
                                              under $25,000      0.14          0.19           0.20             0.11           0.16
                                                 $25k-$45k       0.17          0.25           0.20             0.19           0.20
                                                $45k-$87.5       0.48          0.41           0.44             0.49           0.45
                                               $87.5-$125k       0.11          0.08           0.09             0.12           0.10
                                                    $125k+       0.11          0.06           0.07             0.10           0.09
Education [N=2134]
                                                  HS or less     0.09          0.14           0.10             0.10           0.11
                                               Some college      0.21          0.37           0.36             0.30           0.31
                                            College degree +     0.70          0.49           0.54             0.60           0.59
Age [N=2134]
                                                      Under 30        0.25           0.33            0.30             0.25    0.28
                                                          30-39       0.28           0.27            0.30             0.34    0.30
                                                          40-49       0.20           0.19            0.22             0.19    0.20
                                                          50-59       0.16           0.15            0.12             0.16    0.14
                                                            60+       0.11           0.07            0.07             0.07    0.08
                                                       Panelists      617            522             511              484    2,134
                                                      Accounts       1,441          1,195           1,280            1,734   5,650
                                                Panelist-months     11,379         10,216          10,601           10,718  42,914
                                               Account-months       20,424         17,724          19,937           27,945  86,030
Notes: All variables are as described in Table 1. "Complete cards" sub-sample includes panelists for whom the number of cards held in
the Lightspeed data is at least as great as the number of "active credit card lines" reported in the credit bureau data.




                                                                                                                                        49
Appendix Table 2. More Results from a Panelist-Level Model (asterisked specification in Table 3, row 4, last column).
                                 Dependent variable: panelist weighted average APR on revolving balances, no teaser rates: mean (LHS)=17.48
                                                     Variable Coefficient Standard error                                                  Variable Coefficient Standard error
                                        Credit score: decile 2     -0.439         0.295                              Total late fees >0: quintile 1 1.073***         -0.387
                                        Credit score: decile 3     -0.522         0.320                              Total late fees >0: quintile 2 1.900***          -0.42
                                        Credit score: decile 4 -1.263***          0.355                              Total late fees >0: quintile 3 2.586***         -0.413
                                        Credit score: decile 5 -1.705***          0.380                              Total late fees >0: quintile 4 4.018***         -0.431
                                        Credit score: decile 6 -1.797***          0.392                             Total late fees > 0: quintile 5 5.830***         -0.475
                                        Credit score: decile 7 -2.169***          0.417                        Total over-limit fees > 0: tertile 1    -0.13         -0.367
                                        Credit score: decile 8 -2.530***          0.449                         Total over-limit fees >0: tertile 2   -0.095         -0.412
                                        Credit score: decile 9 -2.393***          0.473                        Total over-limit fees > 0: tertile 3    0.109         -0.433
                                      Credit score: decile 10 -2.167***           0.484                              Average utilization: decile 2    -0.105          0.457
                                              Two cards held      -0.361*         0.204                              Average utilization: decile 3    -0.034          0.472
                                            Three cards held       -0.245         0.271                              Average utilization: decile 4     0.225          0.473
                                             Four cards held       -0.259         0.351                              Average utilization: decile 5    -0.287          0.501
                                                5+ cards held      -0.567         0.366                              Average utilization: decile 6    -0.479          0.519
                                   Total credit line: decile 2     -0.108         0.335                              Average utilization: decile 7    -0.046          0.537
                                   Total credit line: decile 3 -0.834**           0.411                              Average utilization: decile 8     0.702          0.563
                                   Total credit line: decile 4 -1.575***          0.474                              Average utilization: decile 9     0.805          0.579
                                   Total credit line: decile 5 -2.249***          0.510                            Average utilization: decile 10 1.382**             0.589
                                   Total credit line: decile 6 -1.769***          0.555            Average monthly purchase volume: quartile 2         -0.07          0.222
                                   Total credit line: decile 7 -2.056***          0.587            Average monthly purchase volume: quartile 3        -0.097          0.288
                                   Total credit line: decile 8 -1.902***          0.636            Average monthly purchase volume: quartile 4         0.438          0.368
                                   Total credit line: decile 9 -2.431***          0.686          Average monthly revolving balances: quartile 2 -0.890**              0.352
                                  Total credit line: decile 10 -2.422***          0.779          Average monthly revolving balances: quartile 3 -1.048**              0.449
                   Average annual fees paid/year, all cards      0.035**          0.017          Average monthly revolving balances: quartile 4 -1.148**              0.584
         Average balance transfer fees paid/year, all cards        -0.004         0.035                                                   Constant 21.475***          1.058
            Average cash advance fees paid/year, all cards         0.029          0.049
                      Panelist's primary card: variable rate?     -0.416*         0.251
                        Panelist's primary card: annual fee? 1.029***             0.184
                           Panelist's primary card: rewards? 0.677***             0.225
                     Panelist-level "issuer effects": p-value              0.000
               Indicators for last month in sample: p-value                0.000
                                                             N                                                      3629
                                      r-squared (unadjusted)                                                     0.35 (0.38)
Notes: Coefficients are from an OLS regression at the panelist level. Dependent variable is the panelist-level weighted average APR on revolving balances during the
sample period, excluding balances with "teaser rates." Sample begins with 4312 panelists from Table 1, dropping 627 who never revolve balances and 56 who borrow on
teaser rates for entire time in sample. "Cards held" is the maximum number of different accounts open on any one day during the sample period. "Total credit line"
quintile is measured using the average daily credit line on all cards. "Average utilization" is the average across all days in the sample of daily balances (revolving or not)
divided by total credit line, across all cards. "Primary card" is the card on which a majority of balances are held during the sample period, across all days. Panelist-level
"issuer effects" are a vector measuring for each panelist the average shares of revolving balances allocated to each distinct issuer in the data.




                                                                                                                                                                             50
Appendix Table 3. Self-reported search intensity and instruments for search intensity

                                                               10-point scale (10 highest), "I always keep an eye out for better credit card offers"
                                         Variable       [1, 3]            [4, 6]            [7, 9]            10         All respondents Non-respondents

                                  Marital status:
                           Single, never married         0.15             0.21             0.20             0.22              0.19               0.16
                                         Married         0.66             0.59             0.61             0.53              0.61               0.67
                 Divorced, separated or widowed          0.15             0.19             0.15             0.18              0.17               0.11
                                           Other         0.03             0.01             0.05             0.07              0.03               0.05

                                          Female         0.69             0.66             0.59             0.47              0.63               0.69

                Lightspeed surveys taken (mean)          5.43             5.30             4.97              4.70              5.20                0.70
                                   N (panelists)         205               181              157               60                603               3710
Notes: Search intensity is self-reported agreement with the statement "I always keep an eye out for better credit card offers," on a 10 point scale with 1
being "Does not describe me at all" and 10 being "Describes me perfectly." Survey question was part of a larger email survey sent to all panelists in the
first quarter of 2007. Survey content was not announced prior to the decision to take the survey.The final row shows the total number of Lightspeed
surveys voluntarily taken by panelists; the maximum possible is 18. Non-respondent column shows data for panelists who did not take the survey
containing the search question.




                                                                                                                                                        51
Appendix Table 4. Costs and Benefits of Holding Multiple Cards
                                                                          Revolving balance quartile
                                                          1             2             3              4             All
                                                         Dependent variable: average max-min difference "in the wallet"

                                   Two cards held     1.355***        1.907***       2.220***       2.404***        1.964***
                                                       (0.150)         (0.163)        (0.233)        (0.288)         (0.103)

                                  Three cards held    2.349***        3.065***       4.104***       3.754***        3.388***
                                                       (0.204)         (0.248)        (0.294)        (0.354)         (0.136)

                                   Four cards held    3.479***        4.275***       4.499***       4.929***        4.346***
                                                       (0.271)         (0.342)        (0.399)        (0.429)         (0.178)

                                     5+ cards held    4.630***        5.294***       6.194***       7.258***        6.240***
                                                       (0.308)         (0.400)        (0.429)        (0.409)         (0.184)

                                                                     Dependent variable: weighted best APR

                                   Two cards held     -2.197***         -0.526       -1.116***       -0.975**      -0.947***
                                                       (0.663)         (0.352)        (0.416)         (0.445)       (0.212)

                                  Three cards held     -1.983**      -1.653***       -2.099***        -0.720       -1.548***
                                                        (0.882)       (0.537)         (0.526)        (0.548)        (0.279)

                                   Four cards held      -1.497       -2.003***       -2.583***       -1.344**      -1.844***
                                                       (1.120)        (0.741)         (0.716)         (0.668)       (0.363)

                                     5+ cards held    -4.413***      -4.199***       -4.333***       -1.460**      -2.877***
                                                       (1.278)        (0.868)         (0.771)         (0.637)       (0.373)

                                                                  Dependent variable: APR cost of misallocation

                                   Two cards held     1.659***        0.383***       0.442***        0.280**        0.522***
                                                       (0.435)         (0.131)        (0.135)        (0.114)         (0.082)

                                  Three cards held    2.625***        0.937***       0.928***       0.637***        1.089***
                                                       (0.579)         (0.200)        (0.171)        (0.141)         (0.108)

                                   Four cards held     1.224*         1.523***       1.049***       1.049***        1.384***
                                                       (0.735)         (0.276)        (0.233)        (0.171)         (0.141)

                                     5+ cards held    2.751***        2.554***       2.264***       1.317***        2.038***
                                                       (0.838)         (0.323)        (0.251)        (0.163)         (0.145)

Notes: All models are OLS, estimated at the panelist level. "Average max-min difference" is the unweighted average across
all days of the difference between the highest and lowest APRs simultaneously held by the panelist (see Table 5). "Weighted
best APR" is balance-weighted APR the panelist would have paid over the sample period if all balances were always
allocated to lowest-rate cards (conditional on credit limits). "APR cost of misallocation" is the balance-weighted reduction in
APR that would have been obtained if all balances had been costlessly trasferred to lowest-rate cards conditional on credit
limits throughout the sample period. Models include all covariates from the fullest models described in Table 3. See
Appendix Table 2 for condtional correlations on net: between cards held and average borrowing costs.




                                                                                                                                  52
Appendix Table 5. Observations and panelist characteristics by month/year
                                                                      Panelist-level median
                   Panelists         Accounts        Revolving balances Weighted APR Credit Score
       Jan-06        3,656             6,448                 1154                18.23            694
      Feb-06         3,688             6,532                 1169                18.25            694
      Mar-06         3,673             6,572                 1168                18.24            696
      Apr-06         3,631             6,461                 1193                18.24            697
     May-06          3,589             6,285                 1201                18.24            697
      Jun-06         3,512             6,124                 1208                18.24            697
       Jul-06        3,462             5,979                 1226                18.21            697
      Aug-06         3,418             5,867                 1227                18.19            698
      Sep-06         3,302             5,642                 1242                18.14            699
      Oct-06         3,204             5,490                 1247                18.13            700
      Nov-06         3,118             5,253                 1248                18.12            700
      Dec-06         3,009             4,962                 1260                18.10            699
       Jan-07        2,889             4,591                 1258                18.11            699
      Feb-07         2,818             4,460                 1265                18.09            700
      Mar-07         2,829             4,654                 1260                18.05            700
      Apr-07         2,808             4,704                 1260                18.02            700
     May-07          2,719             4,571                 1248                18.01            700
      Jun-07         2,726             4,619                 1275                17.96            702
       Jul-07        2,755             4,727                 1268                17.93            703
      Aug-07         2,679             4,654                 1286                17.90            704
      Sep-07         2,233             4,020                 1337                17.73            709
      Oct-07         1,243             2,553                 1128                17.00            719
      Nov-07         1,211             2,502                 1132                16.99            720
      Dec-07         1,185             2,288                 1224                16.90            721
       Jan-08        1,169             2,209                 1239                16.86            722
      Feb-08         1,161             2,180                 1239                16.88            722
      Mar-08         1,142             2,142                 1245                16.87            722
      Apr-08         1,115             2,092                 1255                16.82            723
     May-08          1,096             2,033                 1233                16.76            724
      Jun-08         1,070             1,974                 1255                16.73            723
       Jul-08        1,031             1,919                 1249                16.69            724
      Aug-08         1,008             1,872                 1233                16.69            724
      Sep-08          981              1,834                 1255                16.68            724
      Oct-08          951              1,766                 1285                16.63            724
      Nov-08          884              1,609                 1286                16.42            728
      Dec-08          347               499                  1750                16.12            738
Notes: number of panelists/accounts reflects both entry of new panelists and attrition. For a given
panelist the set of cards is registered upon entry and not updated (i.e., we do not observe new accounts
for panelists who remain in the sample). The attrition beginning in September 2007 coincides with the
Forrester/Lightspeed spinoff (which required panelists to renew their consent for participation).




                                                                                                           53
