                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHY DO PEOPLE VOLUNTEER? AN EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS OF PREFERENCES
                       FOR TIME DONATIONS

                                      Alexander L. Brown
                                         Jonathan Meer
                                      J. Forrest Williams

                                      Working Paper 19066
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19066


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2013




We would like to thank the Texas A&M Humanities and Social Science Enhancement of Re-
search Capacity Program, Texas A&M College of Liberal Arts Seed Grant Program, and the
College of Liberal Arts at Texas A&M for providing generous financial support for our research.
We have benefited from comments by Catherine Eckel, Ericka Farret, Judd Kessler, Rodrigo
Velez and seminar participants at Chapman University, George Mason University, the University
of California, San Diego, Washington State University, and conference presentations at 2013
Biennial Social Dilemmas Conference, the 2013 Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics,
and the 2012 and 2013 North American Economic Science Association Meetings. We would also
like to thank Xiaoyuan Wang and Jeremy West for helping to conduct the sessions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Alexander L. Brown, Jonathan Meer, and J. Forrest Williams. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do People Volunteer? An Experimental Analysis of Preferences for Time Donations
Alexander L. Brown, Jonathan Meer, and J. Forrest Williams
NBER Working Paper No. 19066
May 2013, Revised March 2016
JEL No. D64,H41

                                           ABSTRACT

Why do individuals volunteer their time even when recipients receive far less value than the
donor's opportunity cost? Previous models of altruism that focus on the overall impact of a gift
cannot rationalize this behavior, despite its prevalence. We develop a model that relaxes this
assumption, al- lowing for differential warm glow depending on the form of the donation. In a
series of laboratory experiments that control for other aspects of volunteering, such as its
signaling value, subjects demonstrate behavior consistent with the theoretical assumption that
gifts of time produce greater utility than the same transfers in the form of money. Subjects
perform an effort task, accruing earnings at potentially different wage rates for themselves or a
charity of their choice, with the ability to transfer any of their personal earnings to charity at the
end of the experiment. Subjects exhibit strong preferences for donating time even when
differential wage rates make it costly to do so. The results provide new insights on the nature of
volunteering and gift-giving.

Alexander L. Brown                                 J. Forrest Williams
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
TAMU 4228                                          TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843                          College Station, TX 77843
abrown@econmail.tamu.edu                           jwilliams@econmail.tamu.edu

Jonathan Meer
Department of Economics
TAMU 4228
College Station, TX 77843
and NBER
jmeer@econmail.tamu.edu
1         Introduction

When a consultant whose hourly rate is $100 donates her time at a local soup kitchen,
it is unlikely that the kitchen is getting $100 per hour worth of increased service
provision. Yet this was the opportunity cost of the donation. The charity would
be better served if the consultant had worked an extra hour and donated her extra
salary to them. Further, her opportunity cost would have been identical. Indeed, in
most charitable giving models, an altruistic donor would maximize the benefit of her
donation to the organization subject to her personal costs.
        The experiments in this paper are inspired in part by the observation that many
high earners do, in fact, volunteer their time.1 Our hypothesis is that this phe-
nomenon is driven, at least in part, by higher levels of warm glow when volunteer-
ing than when donating money, and we develop a theoretical model that generates
testable implications on this point. This hypothesis does not preclude signaling or
networking impacts on volunteering from being substantial; rather, we argue that,
even in the absence of other-signaling opportunities, individuals still prefer to make
gifts of time to those of money. Our experimental design controls wage rates and
tasks, and keeps donative choices private to directly test whether individuals gain
different levels of utility from donating money to charity and working an equiv-
    1
    For example, data from the 2011 American Time Use Survey shows that, among full-time
workers over 25 years of age, volunteer rates are similar across quartiles of the earning distribution,
with the 4.9% of the bottom quartile volunteering an average of 2.15 hours on the day the time diary
was collected, conditional on volunteering, and the 5.2% of top quartile volunteering an average of
2.14 hours (United States Department of Labor, 2010). Additionally, the 2010 Study of High Net
Worth Philanthropy (Center on Philanthropy at Indiana University, 2010), surveying individuals
with household incomes over $200,000 and/or a non-residential net worth over one million dollars,
found that nearly 80% of these individuals with volunteered in a given year, with half that number
volunteering over 200 hours.


                                                  1
alent amount directly for charity. Subjects perform identical tasks for charity or
themselves, ruling out working for charity due to heterogeneous ability or convex
preferences over tasks.
   We investigate the choices that subjects make when they have the option to
donate both time and money; we call these treatments Time & Money (T&M). We
also vary the relative wages earned for self and charity. We find a strong desire to
give via time rather than from earnings; this outcome holds even when the wages
earned directly for the individual are 33% larger than those for the charity. We
interpret these findings to be a rejection of a prediction that agents only care about
the value of their donation, and not the manner in which it was given. Our findings
are consistent with a model of charitable giving in which volunteering produces more
warm glow than monetary donations. A structural model with a constant elasticity
of substitution framework rejects the null hypothesis of equal utility for equivalent
gifts of time and money. It can, however, rationalize our alternative functional form
where gifts of time have greater value.
   We also decompose Time & Money, restricting subjects to donate only their time
(Time Only) or earnings (Money Only). We use these treatments as counterfactuals
for conditions in which subjects can give both time and money. We find that subjects
are much more likely to donate (extensive margin) and give more (intensive margin)
when working directly for the charity than when working for themselves and then
later donating their earnings to charity, even though the end result of both activities
is identical. Our conclusions are unaffected by the corrections for multiple hypothesis
testing proposed in List et al. (2016).


                                          2
       The main implications of our findings are clear: this behavior is inconsistent with
any model that assumes equivalent utility for gifts of time and money. An alternative
model in which gifts of time produce greater utility than money fits all of our main
results.
       Of course, volunteering activities in the field have a number of attributes that
are different from work. When an individual volunteers for charity, she may see
the grateful faces of others, receive greater recognition for her contribution, make
valuable social contacts, or perform a task so different from her work that she may
view it as leisure. In particular, the ability to signal one’s generosity has been show to
exert a strong impact on giving behavior.2 We readily concede these issues. However,
the fact that we find an effect at all in this environment strongly supports the idea
that an individuals’ preference to volunteer results from more than just these factors.
One may argue — though it is not necessary to interpret our main results — that
these features increase the utility individuals receive from volunteering relative to
donating money in the field and our results are therefore a lower bound for the overall
preference for volunteering.3
       Our model and results have broader applications to the literature on efficiency in
general gift-giving (Waldfogel, 1993) and the relationship between financial rewards
and altruistic behavior (Lacetera and Macis, 2010). The context of giving and volun-
teering provides more evidence on how non-monetary donations differ from monetary
   2
     See, for example, Harbaugh (1998a,b), Li and Riyanto (2009), Samek and Sheremeta (2014),
and Kessler (2013) for evidence from observational data, lab experiments, and field experiments.
   3
     Alternatively, the ability for higher earners to deduct donations on their tax returns, which
are not present in our experimental environment either, might give individuals a preference for
monetary donations in the field through a lower price of giving.



                                                3
ones – not only from the perspective of the recipient, but for the donor as well. Dif-
ferential warm glow, in addition to social norms around cash gifts (Waldfogel, 2002)
and efforts to signal generosity (Ellingsen and Johannesson, 2009), can help reconcile
seemingly-inefficient giving behavior.
        Our results also have implications for non-profit organizations, which rely on
donations of both money and time. Moreover, though both types of donations are
common,4 the vast majority of the literature on charitable giving addresses aspects
of monetary donations exclusively. Volunteering is an important activity in its own
right, and deeper investigation of the motivations behind it are warranted.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present
the relevant literature. Section 3 presents the theoretical framework and Section 4
discusses our experimental design and our predictions. Section 5 presents our results,
with Section 6 presenting alternative explanations for our main results. Section 7
closes our paper with a brief discussion of our work and concluding remarks.



2         Literature

The charitable giving literature discusses warm glow, prestige, reciprocity, fairness,
social pressure, and impact philanthropy as potential explanations for the prevalence
of pro-social activity. A detailed discussion of the economics of philanthropy is
presented by Andreoni (2006). None of these theories invalidates another and each
    4
    In 2010, approximately 8.1 billion hours of volunteering were provided in the United States
(Corporation for National & Community Service, 2011) with an estimated market value of nearly
$173 billion. Total monetary gifts to charitable organizations were $291 billion (Giving USA Foun-
dation, 2011).



                                                4
likely underlies some important aspect of individual behavior. For the purpose of our
paper, we focus on warm glow as the primary reason for giving, since our experimental
design normalizes many of the other factors which could drive pro-social behavior,
while also investigating the role of solicitation.
       Andreoni (1989) lays out a model in which an agent gains utility from the act
of donating, dubbed “warm glow.” A number of experiments have documented the
extent to which warm glow drives giving. Crumpler and Grossman (2008) show that
agents will give some of their own money to charity even when their donation does
not alter the total amount donated to charity. That is, individuals are giving for
pure warm glow reasons, not to expand the amount available to the charity. Tonin
and Vlassopoulos (2010) finds similar influences of impure altruism. Null (2011)
suggests warm glow may be partially to blame for inefficient allocations of gifts to
charity.5 Taken together, these studies indicate that warm glow is a key factor in
both charitable activities.
       The literature on the relationship between volunteerism and monetary donations
consists of theoretical, empirical, and experimental approaches, but even with the
various techniques there is no consensus on whether volunteering is a substitute or a
complement to a monetary donation. Duncan (1999) develops a model showing that
agents should be indifferent between giving time or money to charity in equilibrium.
Brown and Lankford (1992) assume that giving is a normal consumption good and
use survey data and jointly estimate giving functions of time and money, finding that
gifts of time and money are complements. Likewise, Apinunmahakul et al. (2009)
   5
     The observed inefficient allocations in his study are driven by failures to adequately adjust to
different exogenous donor matching rates.


                                                 5
conduct similar analysis with a later and larger survey data and find similar results.
Conversely, Bauer et al. (2013) use repeated cross-sectional European survey data;
they do not find that donations of time and money are gross complements. Feldman
(2010) uses a well-specified utility function to build an econometric model and, using
national survey data, shows that the two types of gifts are substitutes.
    Lilley and Slonim (2014) conduct a laboratory experiment which offers insights
into impure and pure altruism. Subjects make choices about how time and money
they would like to donate to charity while facing different match rates, wages, tax
rates, and endowments; one of these choices is then implemented. They additionally
vary how the value of these donations is phrased in order to induce a focus on pure
or impure altruism. Their results, complementary to ours, find that subjects are
willing to sacrifice efficiency in their giving in order to increase their own utility.



3     Theoretical Model

We develop a model that generates testable implications on how agents view dona-
tions of time and money. Following Duncan (1999), we define an increasing, differ-
entiable, quasiconcave utility function for personal consumption and charitable gifts
of time and money,


                         U (x, d, w̃v) s.t. x + d + wv = wT                               (1)

where x ∈ R+ personal consumption, d ∈ R+ the amount of money donated, v ∈ R+
the time volunteered, w is the earned wage rate and T is the total endowment of


                                            6
time.6
       It is unclear whether an agent views her gift of time to charity at the level of
its impact (w0 ) or at her opportunity cost (w). We define θ ∈ {0, 1} and w̃ =
(1 − θ)w + θw0 to determine the wage rate at which the agent views her contribution
of non-leisure time, remaining agnostic of how the two wages impact the warm-glow
utility of volunteering.7 As pointed out in Andreoni et al. (1996), it is likely the case
that w0 ≤ w.
       Our central line of inquiry is the relationship between the types of gifts and their
respective warm glow impacts. The conventional assumption is that individuals are
indifferent between giving a certain amount of money or of time as long as their
desired amounts are given (Andreoni et al., 1996; Duncan, 1999). We consider a
strong form and a weak form of this general assumption.

Assumption 1A (Strong Form of Donative Equivalence). Donations of time and
money are always perfect substitutes. That is for every utility function U (x, d, w̃v),
there exists a function Ū , such that U (x, d, w̃v) = Ū (x, d + w̃v).

       A weaker assumption assumes that equivalent value given to charity, whether
through gifts of time or money, has equal impact, holding all else constant.

Assumption 1B (Weak Form of Donative Equivalence). Holding all else equal, the
   6
     Previous versions of our paper also included terms for leisure and solicitation. In the interest
of simplicity, we omitted those terms in this model. They did not appreciably change theoretical
results. See Brown et al. (2013) for the full model. We do discuss the role of solicitation in relation
to our specific experimental environment in Section 6.
   7
     Note that if we expand the model to allow θ ∈ (0, 1), predictions will be similar to the case
where θ = 1. Essentially, this is equivalent to increasing the curvature of the utility function as
agents are less responsive (but still somewhat responsive) to relative price changes.



                                                  7
utility from contributions of equivalent values of time and money are equal. That is,
for any, x, d, and v, and for some w̃, U (x, d, w̃v) = U (x, w̃v, d).

   Note that the conditions of the Weak Form of Donative Equivalence necessarily
include the Strong Form. However, Assumption 1B also allows the possibility that
warm glow is not constant across contribution levels. That is, an individual with
preferences for volunteering may still donate due to diminishing marginal returns of
the latter activity.
   Assumptions 1A and 1B do not, however, directly imply an agent is indifferent
between giving time or money to charity. Since it is likely that w > w0 , agents may
value their own volunteered time more highly than the charity does if w̃ is weighted
toward opportunity cost of time. We develop a proposition that addresses whether
the majority of gifts are from time or money.

Proposition 3.1. Suppose the Weak Form of Donative Equivalence holds. Provided
some form of donations occur (d + v w̃ > 0), the relation between wage rates (w and
w0 ) determines the optimal allocation of gifts. Specifically, agents’ giving favors the
method with the higher wage rate. That is,

  1. If θ = 1 and w > w0 , then the optimal allocation has d > vw0 .

  2. If θ = 1 and w < w0 , then the optimal allocation has d < vw0 .

  3. If θ = 1 and w = w0 , then an optimal allocation exists where d = vw0 . If U
      satisfies strict concavity, this allocation is unique.

  4. If θ = 0, then an optimal allocation exists where d = vw. If U satisfies strict
      concavity, this allocation is unique.

                                              8
Proof. See Appendix A

    Thus, if effective charitable wage is higher than the wage rate, a majority of gifts
should come from volunteering. If the opposite occurs, the majority of gifts should
be from monetary donations. If the wages are equal, an optimum allocation will exist
where donations will be equal. That optimum will be unique if strict concavity is
satisfied. Since the Strong Form necessarily violates strict concavity, we can expect
multiple optimal allocations when wage rates are equal under that assumption.
    It is interesting to note if we have multiple optimal allocations under the condi-
tions of parts 3 and 4, the Weak Form implies that all optimal allocations will be sym-
metric about d = v w̃. If (x∗ , d∗ , v ∗ w̃) where d∗ 6= v ∗ w̃ is optimal, then (x∗ , v ∗ w̃, d∗ ) is
optimal as well, because U (x∗ , d∗ , v ∗ w̃) = U (x∗ , v ∗ w̃, d∗ ) and both allocations are on
the budget constraint. One can therefore consider the “average” optimal allocation
d = v w̃ regardless of whether strict concavity holds. Since we observe the behavior
of many subjects and compare aggregate outcomes in our experiment, this result is
useful in making our theoretical predictions.
    Proposition 3.1 provides a corollary which is of interest when only one type of
donation (either time or money) is possible.

Corollary 3.1. Assume the Weak Form of Donative Equivalence holds. Suppose
that, in one state, monetary donations are restricted so d1 ≡ 0 and in another state,
volunteering is restricted so v2 ≡ 0. Further suppose w = w0 and all other parameters
are equal across states. If (x∗1 , 0, v1∗ ) is an optimal allocation in state 1, then (x∗1 , d∗2 , 0)
is an optimal allocation in state 2 where v1∗ w0 = d∗2 .

Proof. See Appendix A

                                                  9
      Corollary 3.1 tells us that an equivalent statement of Proposition 3.1, points 3
and 4, holds when comparing across theoretical environments.8 If wages are equal
across two environments—one where only volunteering is possible and one where
only monetary donations are possible—then donations should be equal.
      Another comparison can be made between states where only one form of donations
are permissible and states with both, provided the Strong Form holds. No equivalent
prediction can be made under the Weak Form.

Proposition 3.2. Assume the Strong Form of Donative Equivalence holds. When
w = w0 , giving in an environment with at least two methods of giving available,
total gifts are equal to giving in an environment where only one method of giving is
available, ceteris paribus.

Proof. See Appendix A

      The main contention of this paper is that assumption of donative equivalence
between money and time—whether in the strong or weak form—does not explain our
motivating example or empirical data on charitable giving particularly well. As an
alternative, we propose an alternative assumption that gifts of time produce greater
warm glow than money. We modify the Weak Form slightly to produce Assumption
1C.

Assumption 1C (Alternate Form). Holding all else equal, the utility from contri-
butions of time exceed that from money. That is, for any, x, d, and v, and for some
w̃, U (x, d, w̃v) R U (x, w̃v, d) if and only if w̃v R d.
  8
      Points 1 and 2 will also hold across such theoretical environments.


                                                  10
    Under the Alternate Form, some of the preceding results no longer hold. Ap-
pendix section A.4 provides modified forms of Propositions 3.1 and Corollary 3.1.
The conditions of Proposition 3.1, parts 3 and 4 now produce d < vw0 and d < vw,
respectively. Corollary 3.1 now implies v1∗ w0 > d∗2 . Proposition 3.1, part 2 remains
unchanged. The conditions of of Proposition 3.1, part 1 lead to no result under the
Alternate Form.
    This theoretical environment generates testable implications regarding the allo-
cations of both types of gifts and two- versus one-gift environments under all three
forms of our donative assumptions. In the next section, we explain our experimental
design and then discuss, in Section 4.5, the specific predictions that these implica-
tions produce in this experiment.



4     Experimental Design and Predictions

The experiment consisted of subjects selecting one of ten charities, performing an
effort task to earn money that ultimately would go to themselves or charity, and
then observing the experimenter allocate cash according to their decision. Subjects
encountered the same list of charities in randomized order. The content and length
of the effort task as well as the payment procedures were identical across subjects.
Importantly, subjects earned all the money they donated to charity rather than
receiving it as an endowment; this design allows for a clearer comparison to our
treatments where subjects can choose to work directly for charity and may also more




                                         11
accurately model outside behavior.9


4.1       Charity Selection

Subjects were informed they would have to select one charity from a menu of ten
charities and corresponding descriptions. Charities were randomly sorted on the
screen into one of two different menu styles, organized either by location (local or
national) or by type of charity (e.g. food security, special needs, etc.). The order
of the relevant categories was randomized, as was the order of charities within each
category. This was done to assuage concerns of anchoring effects from specific menus;
an example menu can be seen in Figure 1. Subjects were given four minutes to review
the options available to them and select their charity.10 Each subject knew that her
choice was finalized once selected and understood that selection of a charity did
not require compulsory contribution to it. After all subjects selected a charity, the
experiment would proceed.
       Some subjects were given information detailing if the charities were approved by
either the State Employee Charitable Campaign of Texas or were three or four star
rated by Charity Navigator during the charity selection process (Brown et al., forth-
coming). This information was provided independently of giving and volunteering
treatments and did not impact the results.11
   9
     Reinstein and Riener (2012) show there are large differences in donation behavior when subjects
are endowed with money rather than earning their endowment. They find that those subjects who
earned their compensation choose to donate less.
  10
     This process rarely took more than two minutes.
  11
     Indicators for the interaction of our baseline treatments with these information-provision treat-
ments were not jointly or individually statistically significant, whether entered separately for each
rating organization (p = 0.31) or together (p = 0.97).



                                                 12
                   Figure 1: Sample Charity Selection Menu by Location


4.2       Effort Task and Payment Schedule

After subjects selected their charity, they began an effort task. Subjects had 75
minutes to move as many “sliders” from one position on the screen to a specific
randomized target (see Figure 2) as they could.12 Subjects were paid a fixed amount
per slider completed in addition to a participation award of $5.00.13
      Subjects moved their slider markers along the line to a randomly generated target
number (an integer in the set [1, 99]), with the slider beginning at the far left at the
point corresponding to 0. In Figure 2, the target position is located at 73 and the
subject’s current position is at 63. Once the subjects aligned their markers, they (or
their charity, if applicable) were credited the appropriate wage and they were able
 12
      This task was developed by Gill and Prowse (2012).
 13
      Subjects were not permitted to give their participation award to charity during the experiment.


                                                  13
                             Figure 2: An Example Slider


to move to another slider.
   The subject saw thirty sliders (ten rows of three) on the screen and could com-
plete the sliders in any order; once all thirty sliders were finished, the page reset
with thirty more sliders and newly randomized target numbers for each slider. This
process repeated throughout the experiment until the time expired, providing no
upper bound on the amount of money subjects could earn. Subjects who did not
wish to participate in this task for the full length of time were allowed to browse the
internet. An earnings summary and the time remaining were displayed at the top of
the screen, and subjects were given a verbal notification when two minutes remained
and when thirty seconds remained.


4.3    Payment

Subjects were paid individually and discretely in cash at the conclusion of the experi-
ment to avoid any social stigma from their earnings and donation selection. Subjects
were presented two envelopes; one envelope was unlabeled and contained their per-
sonal earnings while the second was labeled with the charity’s name. If a subject
chose to donate money to charity, the second envelope would contain that amount
of money. Each subject was asked to confirm that these amounts were correct and
sign a form stating that they wished to contribute their charity total to the charity

                                          14
whose name was on the envelope. The experimenter then collected the charitable
envelope from the subject, taped it shut, and placed the envelope in a box labeled
donations. Subjects were informed that all donations would be made within 90 days
and were given contact information for the experimenter making the donation. Do-
nation totals for each charity were calculated, and a donation in that amount was
given to each charity at the conclusion of all the sessions.
       All experiments took place at the Economic Science Laboratory in the Depart-
ment of Economics at Texas A&M University. 414 undergraduates were recruited
from econdollars.tamu.edu, an ORSEE (Greiner, 2004) website database. Experi-
ments were conducted using z-tree (Fischbacher, 2007) and lasted no longer than
two hours, with average subject earnings of $33.29. On average, subjects allocated
$4.70 to charity.


4.4       Design and Treatments

The experimental design made use of three primary treatments to determine the
effects of donations of time versus money: Time & Money (T&M), Time Only (T),
and Money Only (M). T&M examined the situation when individuals can give money
or time to charity; wages were varied inside of this treatment to investigate the
strength of preferences for and substitution between the two types of gifts. T and
M decomposed this main treatment into its component parts, allowing subjects to
either donate their time (T) or their money (M), but not both.14
  14
    Two other treatments, Money (Continual) and Money (at End), were implemented to ascer-
tain whether actionable and/or non-actionable solicitation can explain the strong preferences for
donating time rather than money. These are discussed in Section 6, with fuller details regarding
these treatments found in Appendix B.


                                               15
                                    Table 1: Treatments

                    Rate Earned  Rate Earned Opportunity to                   Opportunity to
   Treatment       when Working when Working  Give Money                        Give Time
                      for Self   for Charity   Directly                          Directly
  T&M 3/3             3 cents      3 cents    End of Task                      During Task
  T&M 3/4             3 cents      4 cents    End of Task                      During Task
  T&M 4/3             4 cents      3 cents    End of Task                      During Task
     T                3 cents      3 cents       None                          During Task
    M                 3 cents         –       End of Task                         None
 T&M 3.5/3.5         3.5 cents    3.5 cents   End of Task                      During Task
    MC                3 cents         –       During Task                         None
    MR                3 cents         –       End of Task                         None


4.4.1    Time & Money (T&M)

In this treatment, the wage rates when working for self and charity were randomly
determined for the subject within a session, ensuring that session effects do not
drive our results. We denote the differences within the Time & Money treatments
with a x/y designation, where x is the wage for self and y is the wage earned for
charity, measured in cents per slider.15 Subjects worked for either the charity or for
themselves at fixed wages rates. Additionally, they could donate any of the money
they earned for themselves to the charity at the end. To minimize default effects,
subjects chose whether to start by working for charity or themselves; these buttons
were randomized on the screen before the effort task began. The subject would see
the button in Figure 3a with the additional message reminding her that she could
donate any personal earnings at the end of the effort task, as in Figure 3b.
  15
    Because the experimenter read the instructions aloud, mixing treatments within a session was
impractical. To combat session effects, the same experimenter conducted each session and the time
of day for each treatment was randomized.




                                               16
         (a) Time, Time and Money                        (b) Money Only

  Figure 3: Display of Earnings and Donation Opportunities During Effort Task


4.4.2   Time Only (T)

The Time Only (T) treatment simulated an agent’s choice between working for one-
self and volunteering for charity; subjects had the option to have their effort directly
accrue to themselves or to the charity. However, there was no option to donate any
personal earnings at the end of the effort task. Each subject in the treatment had
a button (see Figure 3a) under their earnings display which allowed them to change
how their earnings accrue; either the earnings went to the individual or the charity
she selected at the beginning of the experiment. As above, subjects chose whether
to start by working for the charity or themselves.


4.4.3   Money Only (M)

In this treatment, the subjects could only earn money for themselves, but were
reminded throughout they they have the option to donate any of their earnings to
the charity they initially selected. An example of this reminder can be found in
Figure 3b.




                                          17
4.5    Theoretical Predictions

Our theoretical model provides predictions for subjects’ behavior as the wage ratio
changes in the Time & Money treatment. Applying Proposition 3.1 to our experi-
mental environment yields Predictions 1 and 2.
   In cases of identical wage rates or perceived identical wage rates (θ = 0), the Weak
Form cannot assure a unique optimum allocation unless we assume strict concavity
(see Proposition 3.1). However, whatever range of optimal allocations exists, it will
be symmetric around d = v w̃. If we make the interpretation that each allocation
in this range is equally likely to be chosen by the subject, then the average total of
donated money and equivalent volunteering should be equal.

Prediction 1A. If impact of donations rather than opportunity cost matters (θ = 1),
we should see more giving by the method favored by relative wage rates. Under each
of form of Donative Equivalence,

                        d                              d
                                                            
  1. (Strong Form)    d+vw0          4   = 1,        d+vw0       3       = 0.
                                     3                           4


                       d                     1         d
                                                            
  2. (Weak Form)     d+vw0       4       >   2
                                                 >   d+vw0           3   .
                                 3                                   4


                              d                        d                        1         d
                                                                                              
  3. (Alternate Form)       d+vw0            4   >   d+vw0       3       and    2
                                                                                    >   d+vw0       3   .
                                             3                   4                                  4



Prediction 1B. If opportunity cost rather than impact of donations matters (θ = 0),
relative wage rates should not matter. Under each of form of Donative Equivalence,

  1. (Strong Form) An individual subject donation may be in any proportion of time
      or money. Aggregate donations (in terms of opportunity cost) should be equal
      in both treatments.

                                                         18
  2. (Weak Form) If U is strictly concave, each subject’s donation should be equal
                                                           d        1       d
                                                                              
     in time and money in terms of opportunity cost, d+vw      4 = 2 =    d+vw 3
                                                                                 .
                                                                  3                4

     Otherwise, the predictions of the Strong Form hold.

  3. (Alternate Form) Donations of time (in terms of opportunity cost) should be
                                        d
     greater in both treatments, 12 > d+vw         1     d
                                                          
                                             4 and 2 > d+vw 3
                                                              .
                                             3                4



   Predictions 1A and 1B provide valuable tests for determining whether impact or
opportunity cost of donations matter to subjects. If relative wages affect the form
of subject giving, we can conclude impact matters. If subject behavior is relatively
unresponsive to wage rate changes, opportunity cost matters more. The strength of
preferences for a method of giving can provide insight into which of our three forms
of donative equivalence hold. Further, the results from the equal wage treatment can
also help isolate the predictions of the model under each form of these assumptions.

Prediction 2. Provided the utility function is strictly concave, the model under the
Weak Form predicts equal donations for time and money for each subject. Greater
donations of time are predicted by a model satisfying the Alternate Form.

  1. (Strong Form) An individual subject donation may be in any proportion of time
     or money. Aggregate donations should be equal in both treatments.

  2. (Weak Form) If U (·) is strictly concave, d 3 = v 3 . Otherwise, the predictions
                                                 3     3

     of the Strong Form hold.

  3. (Alternate Form) d 3 < v 3 .
                         3      3




                                        19
   Requiring subjects to make their charitable donation exclusively with time or
money allows us to further test our model. Prediction 3 applies Proposition 3.2 to a
cross-treatment comparison of Money Only, Time Only and Time & Money.

Prediction 3. Under the Strong Form total donations in the Time & Money treat-
ment should be equal to donations in the Time Only and Money Only treatments.

  1. (Strong Form) gT &M = gT = gM .

  2. (Weak Form) No prediction.

  3. (Alternate Form) No prediction.

   Comparing the Time Only and Money Only directly provides a clean comparison
of our forms of donative equivalence. All preferences that satisfy the Weak Form
have the same prediction. In contrast, models under the Alternate Form predict
greater donations in the Time Only than Money Only treatment.

Prediction 4. Giving should be equal in the Time Only and Money Only treatments
except under the Alternate Form.

  1. (Strong Form) gM = gT .

  2. (Weak Form) gM = gT .

  3. (Alternate Form) gM < gT .

   In the next section, we examine how the results of our experiments compare with
these predictions.


                                        20
5        Results

5.1       Experimental Outcomes

We begin by examining the summary statistics across treatments, in Table 2. There
are some differences in effort, as measured by sliders completed, across treatments,
though the differences are jointly insignificant. Turning to donative behavior and
beginning with the three wage combinations in the Time & Money treatment, there
are few differences in amounts given. Probability of giving (p = 0.64), percent
donated (p = 0.80), and probability of giving more than one dollar (p = 0.86) or five
dollars (p = 0.98) do not differ across these three treatments.16
       We now focus on the relative allocations of charitable donations of time and
money across treatments as specified in our hypotheses. We first examine Predic-
tion 1, the relative allocation of donations of time and money when wage rates for
each activity are unequal. Given that we examine multiple outcomes across multiple
treatments in our predictions, we make use of recent work by List et al. (2016) on
multiple hypothesis testing, who note that “[w]ithout taking into account the statis-
tical inference problem arising from multiple testing, experimentalists would be quite
likely to undertake a substantially large false discovery risk and draw ungrounded
conclusions.” In no cases are statistically significant results discussed below negated
by the corrections discussed in List et al. (2016).

Result 1. In the Time & Money treatment, when the wage ratio favors earning
  16
     An additional T &M 3.5/3.5 treatment, included to test for income effects, uncovers no meaningful
differences in the percent donated or the ratio of time and money donations relative to T &M 3/3 .
These results are shown in Table 5.


                                                 21
                            Table 2: Summary Statistics
                               T&M          T&M          T&M         Time     Money
Total Giving                (0.03, 0.03) (0.04, 0.03) (0.03, 0.04)   Only       Only
N                                 43           45           41         81         48
Sliders Completed              822.53       852.29       900.49     905.11      962.5
                              (203.90)     (244.53)     (279.61)   (263.78)   (238.51)
Earnings from Effort            24.68        33.16         28.3      27.15      28.88
                                (6.12)       (8.57)       (8.89)     (7.91)     (7.16)
Percent Giving Any Amount       83.72        75.56        80.49      71.60      31.30
Percent Giving $1 or More       60.47        63.41        62.22      67.90      16.67
Percent Giving $5 or More       39.53        41.46        40.00      43.21       8.33
Amount Donated                   4.52         5.64         5.78       5.55       1.64
                                (5.59)       (7.94)       (6.77)     (6.00)     (5.23)
Percent Donated                 20.60        17.18        19.21      20.17       5.48
                               (25.95)      (23.19)      (20.05)    (20.64)    (16.81)
Conditional on Giving
N                                36           34            33        58         15
Earnings from Effort           23.72        33.75         28.43     27.30      27.47
                               (6.04)       (9.24)        (9.34)    (8.04)     (6.69)
Percent Giving $1 or More      72.22        82.35         78.79      94.8       53.3
Percent Giving $5 or More      47.22        52.94         51.52      60.3       26.7
Amount Donated                   5.4         7.47          7.18      7.76       5.26
                               (5.83)       (8.37)        (6.85)    (5.75)     (8.44)
Percent Donated                 24.6        22.74         23.87      28.2       17.5
                              (26.59)      (24.23)        (19.7)    (19.2)     (26.9)
25th Percentile of Giving       0.98         1.68          2.44      2.70       0.69
50th Percentile of Giving       4.81         5.61          5.25      6.65       1.02
75th Percentile of Giving       7.57        10.12         11.84     10.95       5.38




                                         22
directly for charity, nearly all donations are of time. When the wage ratio favors
monetary donations to charity, the donations are roughly evenly split between time
and money.

   Figure 4 shows the percent of giving from money and time under the different
wage rates in the Time & Money treatment. Consistent with a warm-glow model
where the impact of donations determine warm glow (θ = 1, see Prediction 1A),
a larger proportion of donations come from money than time under T &M 4/3 than
T &M 3/4 , when the relative wage rate for own earnings increases (p = 0.001). Specif-
ically, 10.5% of donations are in the form of money when the relative wage favors
donating time in T &M 3/4 , and 47.5% of the donations are of money when the rel-
ative wage favors donating money in T &M 4/3 . Under the Strong Form of Donative
Equivalence, these proportions should be 0 and 1, respectively, as seen in Prediction
1A. The Weak Form, on the other hand, predicts that a majority of donations should
be in the form favored by relative wage rates; this is only partially consistent with
the data. These data are, on the other hand entirely consistent with the prediction
of the Alternate Form.
   It difficult to reconcile the preceding results with a model of charitable giving
where agents value donations of time at their opportunity cost (θ = 0). In such a
model, even without strict concavity (which would predict all subjects to give equal
amounts), we would expect roughly equal numbers of subjects to make a greater pro-
portion of their donations by each method. We expect this result because if subjects
have preferences that make them indifferent among several optimal allocations, those
allocations must be symmetric about d = vw under the Weak Form. This prediction


                                         23
                        Figure 4: Giving by Source of Gift


is not consistent with our data. Valuing volunteering at its opportunity cost (vw),
we find 18 subjects give more time than money and 5 subjects give more money than
time in the T &M 3/4 treatment; 15 subjects give more time than money and 18 give
more money than time in the T &M 4/3 treatment. This difference is significant at
p < 0.01.

Result 2. When the relative wage ratio is equal in the T &M 3/3 treatment, a majority
of donations are in the form of time.

   Figure 4 also shows relative donations in T &M 3/3 . Here, the relative benefits to

                                         24
the charity from a time or money donation are equal. In such cases, Prediction 2
states that under both the Weak and Strong Forms of Donative Equivalence, aggre-
gate totals of giving will be equal across the two methods. Under strict concavity on
U , each subject’s donation should be equal across the two methods. But the split is
significantly different from equal in T &M 3/3 (p = 0.03), with roughly three-fourths of
donations made through volunteering. Further observing the decisions of individual
subjects, 25 gave more through time than money, 11 gave more through money than
time. A binomial test finds this difference significant (p = 0.03), providing further
evidence against the predictions of a model that satisfies the Strong or Weak Forms
of Donative Equivalence.
       The result is consistent with Prediction 2 under the Alternate Form. Here, higher
levels of volunteering are directly attributable to subject preference for donations of
time over money.

Result 3. There is no difference in giving between the Time & Money (with equal
wage ratio) treatment and the Time Only treatment. There is a difference in giv-
ing between the Time & Money (with equal wages) treatment and the Money Only
treatment.

       As seen in Figure 5, the probability of giving at all is slightly higher in T &M3/3
than in Time Only (p = 0.14), though there are no significant differences in giving
over one dollar (p = 0.57) or over five dollars (p = 0.70). A Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test finds no difference in the two distributions (p = 0.39).17 On the other hand,
  17
    Our suspicion is that the slightly higher rate of small gifts in T &M 3/3 is due to an aversion to
receiving coins in payment (see Fielding and Knowles (2015) for a recent experiment showing that



                                                 25
      Figure 5: Probability of Giving above Various Thresholds by Treatment


there is significantly more giving in T &M 3/3 than Money Only.
    The preceding results are partially consistent with the Strong Form model in Pre-
diction 3 as we cannot reject T &M 3/3 = T , but the combined hypotheses T &M 3/3 =
M, T are rejected at p < 0.01. Thus, we conclude that Result 3 is not consistent with
the predictions of a model where the Strong Form of Donative Equivalence holds.
    Finally, we examine donations in the Time Only and Money Only treatments.
Recall that Prediction 4 states that contributions should be equal across treatments
as long as a model satisfies the Weak Form of Donative Equivalence.

Result 4. Subjects in Time Only treatment donate more resources to charity than
subjects donate more to charity when their payment is in the form of loose change). This conjecture
is confirmed in the data: a number of donors in T &M 3/3 gave only enough to leave themselves
with an even amount. The distributions of giving behavior are quite similar otherwise.



                                                26
in Money Only.

   As discussed in Section 4, our stylized experiment eliminates many of the other
rewards to volunteering. The magnitude and significance of these results, with the
total percent accruing to charity significantly different at p = 0.0001, are further
evidence against Prediction 4 under the Strong and Weak Form of Donative Equiv-
alence. Giving effort directly, akin to volunteering, provides more warm glow than
donating money. Even when individuals are faced with environments which offer
identical wages, social pressure, and so on, donative behavior is starkly different
when all that changes is whether they can give time or money to the charity.
   Result 4 directly contradicts Prediction 4 under the Strong and Weak Forms and
is inconsistent with the result of Corollary 3.1. However, a model of warm glow under
the Alternate Form — where gifts of time produce greater warm glow than gifts of
money — is consistent with all the results: giving changes with relative wages; more
gifts of time occur when wages are equal; total giving is substantially higher when
both time and money are options for donations than when only money is an option;
and giving is higher when volunteering is the only option relative to when only gifts
of money are possible.


5.2    A Structural Model of Giving

As discussed above, our results are most consistent with the predictions of a warm
glow model under the assumptions of our Alternate Form of Donative Equivalence.
We now turn to structural estimation to examine whether we can rationalize these
results in a standard utility framework. Importantly, the structural model allows us

                                         27
to pinpoint specific parameter values that correspond to our model under the Strong,
Weak and Alternate Forms of Donative Equivalence.
   We follow Fisman et al.’s (2007) framework, which models subject decisions in a
three-person dictator game. We assume a separable utility function which may be
expressed in terms of a macro (overall) utility function, allocating between earnings
for self and donations, and a subutility function, in which donations are allocated
between time and money.

                            h                                      iρ/ρ0 1/ρ
                 ρ             0               0 ρ0        0     ρ0
      Us   = α(x) + (1 − α) × α (θwv + (1 − θ)w v) + (1 − α )(d)

   s.t. I = x + d + wv.                                                            (2)


   As in Section 3, the terms x, v, d ≥ 0 denote money kept by the subject, time
effort given to charity, and money given to charity, respectively. The term θ ∈ {0, 1}
represents whether the impact (θ = 1) or opportunity cost (θ = 0) of volunteering
affects utility levels. The terms α, α0 ∈ [0, 1] represent the relative weight on self
versus charity and relative weight of donations of time versus money, respectively.
Here α > 0.5 (α0 > 0.5) represents a preference for keeping earnings for oneself rather
than giving to charity (giving in the form of money rather than time); values below
0.5 would indicate the reverse.
   The terms ρ, ρ0 ∈ (∞, 1] define the curvature of the indifference curves between
earnings for self and gifts for charity and the curvature of the indifference curves
for gifts of time and money, respectively. If 0 < ρ ≤ 1, agents are concerned with
maximizing the total amount of money that goes to charity and themselves—that



                                          28
         Table 3: Parametric Specifications by Donative Equivalence Assumption

                      Model Assumption         Parameter Specification
                        Strong Form                α0 = 0.5, ρ0 = 1
                        Weak Form                  α0 = 0.5, ρ0 ≤ 1
                       Alternate Form              α0 < 0.5, ρ0 ≤ 1


is, total earnings before any division. Similarly, values of 0 < ρ0 ≤ 1 indicate that
agents look to maximize total contributions to charity, with the two types of giving
as substitutes. Alternatively, ρ < 0 implies that agents prefer to reduce inequality
between their personal earnings and the amount given to charity, to some extent,
even in the face of a reduction in overall earnings. Similarly ρ0 < 0 points to a desire
to maintain similar amounts of gifts of time and money, suggesting that the two
forms of giving are complements. As ρ, ρ0 → 0 the indifference curves more closely
resemble Cobb-Douglas functions.
       As summarized in Table 3, there are clear parameter values that correspond to
our assumptions about Donative Equivalence. The Strong Form requires α0 = 0.5
and ρ0 = 1; the Weak Form requires α0 = 0.5 and ρ0 ≤ 1; the Alternate Form requires
α0 < 0.5 and ρ0 < 1. The models do require α and ρ to have any specific values.
       Using the same econometric approach as Fisman et al. (2007), we estimate these
parameters for a single representative subject.18 Panels A and B of Table 4 provide
estimates based on decisions of all 168 subjects that participated in all variations of
our T&M treatments. Panels C and D restrict analysis to the 100 subjects in those
treatments who gave a positive amount to charity in either form. In each case, we
  18
    Note that Fisman et al. (2007) had multiple observations per subject at different price levels
and estimated parameters for each subject. With only one observation per subject, we estimate
our model for a representative subject based on the decisions of all subjects.



                                               29
                            Table 4: Structural Parameter Estimates

                                          All Subjects                               Givers Only
                                     (1)               (2)                     (3)                (4)
                                   θ=0               θ=1                     θ=0                θ=1
             α                     0.586              0.948                   0.652              0.976
                              [0.573, 0.658]     [0.576, 1.000]          [0.524, 0.747]     [0.600, 1.000]
             ρ                     0.643             -0.445                  0.182              -1.870
                              [0.516, 0.719] [-2.69x1013 , 0.636]       [-0.090, 0.746] [-1.71x1014 , 0.323]
                 0
             α                     0.176              0.442                   0.176              0.442
                               [0.000,0.374]     [0.370, 0.498]          [0.000, 0.368]     [0.384, 0.491]
                 0
             ρ                     0.000              0.849                   0.000              0.849
                             [-0.032, 0.004]     [0.684, 0.987]         [-0.039, 0.006]     [0.700, 0.981]
 Log likelihood: macro              -59.9             -59.9                    -9.4               -8.9
  Log likelihood: sub              -105.1            -102.1                  -105.1             -102.1
 Log likelihood: total             -165.0            -162.0                  -114.5             -111.1

   Each column reports parameter estimates from estimation of the utility function in Equation (2). Bootstrapped
   95% confidence intervals are in brackets. Columns (1) and (2), using all subjects, have N = 168. Columns (3) and
   (4), using only those who made a gift, have N = 100.



estimate a specification restricting the utility to be driven by the opportunity cost
of volunteering (θ = 0, Columns 1 and 3) or impact of volunteering (θ = 1, Columns
2 and 4).19 We provide estimates and bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals of α,
α0 , ρ, and ρ0 .
       We briefly discuss the parameters of the macro utility function, α and ρ; as noted
above, these values do not have a direct bearing on our question. The estimates of
α, the parameter measuring the value of personal earnings versus gifts to charity,
are significantly greater than zero in all specifications. This is unsurprising, as we
expect that subjects value their own earnings more than money given to charity.
  19
    Values of θ on the interval (0,1) have no theoretical meaning and are not particularly different
in practice than θ = 1. Essentially, an agent either responds to changes in the relative impact of
her donation (θ > 0); or she does not (θ = 0). While values of θ on the interval (0,1) could reflect
a weaker response to changes in the impact of one’s donation, those changes are already captured
in the ρ term, so accounting for this term is unneccesary.




                                                      30
The estimates of ρ vary depending on the specification. To understand these esti-
mates, recall that both negative ρ (a desire to reduce inequality between personal
earnings and charitable gifts) and a low α (a greater preference for charitable gifts)
can rationalize high amounts given to charity. When θ = 1, a low α predicts that
subjects will give large amounts to charity when relative prices favor it; a negative
ρ does not require such conditions. But since subjects donating large amounts are
seen across all treatments and are no more prevalent in T &M4/3 , the behavior of
these large givers is rationalized through ρ. Thus, we observe a very wide confidence
interval for ρ when θ = 1, as not all subjects give to charity, but a few give a large
amount.20 When θ = 0, relative prices are constant, so a lower α can be used to
rationalize that some subjects choose to give high amounts to charity. We therefore
see lower α and higher ρ across the two values of θ.
       The parameters in the subutility function (i.e., α0 , ρ0 ) are of more interest to
our central research question, as they represent subject preferences over gifts of time
and money. In all four specifications, α0 is significantly less than 0.5, indicating a
preference for gifts of time over those of money. The values of α0 are closer to zero
when θ = 0, when utility is derived from opportunity cost rather than impact. The
parameter ρ0 varies dramatically between the θ = 0 and θ = 1 specifications, with
the values indicating Cobb-Douglas preferences when θ = 0. This suggests that
subjects are trying to give specific, targeted amounts of time and money which do
not depend on the amount given in the other form. The implications of this finding
may be minor, since the relative price of time and money donations is always one in
  20
    This finding is consistent with Fisman et al. (2007) who note that “preferences for giving are
very heterogeneous, ranging from perfect substitutes to Leontief.”


                                               31
the case when utility is derived from opportunity cost. If θ = 1, and relative prices
can vary, the values of ρ0 are quite high and significantly above 0, indicating that
subjects view gifts of time and money as substitutes. This result is consistent with
what we observe in Figure 4.
       Taken together, the results of the structural estimation are in line with those
from the simple analysis of the experimental data. The confidence intervals on the
parameter estimates of α0 and ρ0 reject the model under the Strong and Weak Forms
of Donative Equivalence. A model under the Alternate Form still fits the data. A
model where subjects appear to value donations of time on its impact to the charity
rather than the opportunity cost to themselves is more predictive of subject results.
       The models presented here are directly fit from data in all four of the T&M
treatments, and the estimates largely confirm in-sample results. They also provide
clear predictions for the out-of-sample treatments: because α0 is significantly less
than 0.5 in the model, we expect higher amounts given to charity in the time only
treatment than the money only treatment. This is, of course, exactly what we find
in Section 5, providing additional evidence for this type of model.21



6        Alternative explanations

There are several alternative explanations for our results that subvert our hypothesis
of differential warm glow. These explanations arise specifically from our experimental
environment, rather than generally applying to situations involving charitable giving;
  21
    The model also predicts that subjects will keep more money for themselves because α is signif-
icantly greater than 0.5. This is a far less exciting prediction, albeit a correct one.



                                               32
that is, they suggest the subjects’ preferences for donating time may be a confound
of our design. We address each possibility in turn.


6.1       Solicitation

One may argue that subjects in Time Only face different levels of solicitation and
opportunities to give than those in Money Only, and that the differences we find in
subjects’ giving behavior in these two treatments are driven by the structure of the
T treatment.22 To investigate this question, we consider an additional money-only
treatment, Money (Continual), in which the subject can give at any point during the
effort task by entering the dollar amount she wishes to give into a box on the screen.
That is, a subject is allowed to give as many times as she wishes in the experiment
up until the final second.
       This environment mirrors the opportunity and pressure to give in Time Only. If
subjects derive more utility from giving several times than just once at the end of
the experiment, or that habit formation drives multiple donations is what drove our
earlier results, we should see the behavioral differences between monetary and time
gifts disappear; in both T and MC, it is possible for a subject to give a little due to
social pressure and then develop a giving pattern based on her prior gift(s) (Meer,
  22
     Solicitation has been shown to have an important impact on donor behavior, making potential
donors more likely to donate (Andreoni et al., Forthcoming; DellaVigna et al., 2012; Meer and
Rosen, 2011). While most papers on this subject have focused on the charity’s choice of fundraising
strategy and its reaction to grants (e.g., Andreoni and Payne, 2011), Landry et al. (2006) investigate
different solicitation approaches and their impact on giving, and find that individuals are much less
likely to given in response to direct mail than to a door-to-door solicitation, but conditional on
giving, make larger gifts. Breman (2011) finds that allowing donors to defer an increase in the size
of their donation to the future increases giving; in future work, we will investigate the effects of
commitment mechanisms by giving subjects the opportunity to set their giving schedule prior to
the beginning of the effort task.


                                                 33
2013; Xiao and Houser, 2014).
       The results, found in Appendix B, show that donative behavior is stronger in
MC than in M, though the effects are driven by small gifts. The data indicate that
allowing for giving during the task elicits a higher likelihood of giving, but conditional
on giving, the differences in donations are not large. This finding is consistent with
those in Meer (2011), in which “the mere act of making a gift alleviates the social
pressure [from solicitation], but making a larger gift has no effect.” We therefore view
actionable solicitation as having some effect on donative behavior, but it does not
fully explain the difference in giving patterns between the Time Only and Money
Only treatments.23
       More importantly for our primary result, the differences between MC and T
remain large. We can easily reject the hypothesis that these two distributions of
gifts are the same with a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (p = 0.001); indeed, on every
metric, T dominates MC. These are the same results when comparing T and M;
indeed, with the exception of a small number of very generous individuals who gave
all or nearly all of their earnings, the distribution of giving for T is always higher
than the other treatments.
       One may argue that a comparison of T and MC is flawed because the cost to give
in Money (Continual) is greater than that in Time Only. In the latter treatment,
subjects only push a button to begin donating and again when stopping; conversely,
in MC subjects must choose an amount to donate, enter the amount, and push
  23
     We also examine the role of “non-actionable” solicitation, in contrast to the “actionable” solic-
itation in MC, by removing the reminder about the opportunity to give to the chosen charity from
M. The results, in Appendix B, do not differ greatly from those in Money Only, suggesting that
these sorts of passive reminders do not have a strong effect.


                                                 34
a button. As field literature has shown (Knowles and Servatka, 2014; Meer and
Rigbi, 2013; Rasul and Huck, 2010), even a minor cost may greatly reduce charitable
donations. If our experiment is a similar environment to the field, these minor
costs might explain the difference between the two treatments. The data do provide
evidence that subjects do not endure a greater cost per donative action in MC than
in T.24 We therefore believe that the difference in behavior between MC and T does
not arise from differences in the cost of making a donation.


6.2     Momentum

Another explanation for the increased donations through time rather than money is
that our volunteering framework takes advantage of momentum. With a touch of
a button, donations become the status quo and subjects must exert effort to stop
donating. Status quo bias is widely regarded as an important driver of behavior
(Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988). In order to avoid a default setting, subjects in
treatments that included time donations had to choose whether they would begin
donating to themselves or charity before the experiment began; 30.2% of subjects
started the experiment donating to charity in the Time & Money treatments and
32.1% began in Time Only. With well over half of subjects beginning by working
for themselves, this mechanism could also explain lower giving levels in Time Only
  24
    The average productivity of subjects in MC declines by about 23% in minutes in which they
make a donation, while subjects in T see a productivity decline of 16% in minutes in which they
switch the target of their earnings. Moreover, conditional on switching at all, the median subject in
T switches three times, while the median subject in MC only donates once, usually in the last few
minutes of the experiment. The total expected loss from switching among those in T is 8.1 sliders,
while the expected loss from giving is 7.4 sliders for givers in MC; this difference is approximately
two cents.



                                                 35
or lower relative giving of time in Time & Money treatments. A subject could
get caught up in working for herself and not donate anything to charity. That is,
momentum does not favor working for charity over oneself or vice versa. Further,
the data do not appear to support the momentum explanation; as mentioned above,
among those who work for charity at all, the median subject switched three times.


6.3    Miscalculation

Another possible explanation is that subjects somehow miscalculate and overshoot
their desired gift to charity be giving too much effort in the Time & Money or Time
Only treatment, but do not make a similar mistake in any of the other treatments.
If this explanation is true, we would expect to see subjects accumulating the bulk of
their donations to charity in the early part of the experiment. That is, over the course
of the 75 minute experiment, they would regret this initial donation and compensate
by switching to earning for themselves towards the end. The data do not support
this contention at all, as seen in Figure 6 in Appendix B; effort toward charity in
both the Time & Money and Time Only treatments are distributed almost uniformly
over time. We therefore do not find this explanation credible.
   The Time & Money treatment itself provides an even clearer test of this miscal-
culation hypothesis. With equal wage rates, subjects worried about miscalculation
could work entirely for themselves through the 75 minute slider task and then do-
nate their exact desired amount of their earnings to charity. This outcome is not
the case; Figure 4 shows that roughly three-fourths of all donations occur through
gifts of time in that treatment. Further, the total amounts given are not different


                                          36
between T &M 3 and T, indicating that subjects are not miscalculating their optimal
                 3

gift amount by over-giving effort.


6.4    Loss Aversion

Loss aversion—in which the utility change from a loss is greater in magnitude than
that from an equivalent-sized gain—is a fundamental part of behavioral economics
literature (Kahneman and Tversky (1979); see Camerer (2005) for a survey). In this
context, time donations could be seen foregone gains, while the earnings accrued for
oneself and then given to charity represent losses. Since individuals are loss averse,
the utility loss would be greater for a subject giving their earnings to charity than
from forgoing an identical amount in potential earnings. Then individuals would
be more likely give donations in time rather than money; this is true both in our
experimental setting and in actual decisions regarding volunteering and monetary
contributions.
   In general, it is very difficult to differentiate an explanation of loss aversion from
differential warm glow. Under the warm glow mechanism, working for charity pro-
duces a greater benefit; with loss aversion, donating money incurs a greater cost. For
most applications of a basic model, these two features are mathematically equivalent.
   An simple way to test these competing explanations in an experiment would be
to have pre-committment where subjects decided whether to donate time or money
to charity before they earned anything. In an experiment similar to ours, Lilley
and Slonim (2014) use pre-committment, but still find a significant preference for
donations of time. Further, the extent of loss aversion and how it is framed in the


                                          37
laboratory experiments is a topic of some controversy (see Plott and Zeiler, 2005).
For these reasons, we do not believe that loss aversion is solely responsible for our
results.
    That being said, loss aversion can have profound affects on donative behavior in
the field. Breman (2011) conducts a field experiment designed to reduce loss aversion
and induce donors to increase their charitable contributions of money. Donors who
are asked to increase their monthly contributions in the future are more likely to do
so than donors asked to give immediately. Given this result, it plausible that a gift
of a time rather than money might inhibit loss aversion in general and make decision
to give time more attractive.



7     Conclusions

This paper tests models of altruism in a series of laboratory experiments investi-
gating whether individuals behave more generously when working for directly for
charity (volunteering) rather than working for themselves and donating part of their
earnings. We have a consistent finding — subjects display a stronger desire to donate
time and effort than to donate money, even when the wage structure leads to large
efficiency losses when donating time instead of earned money. We further investigate
these results by restricting subjects to give only time or money and find the same
preferences for gifts of time.
    We argue the explanation of differential warm glow for donations of time and
money is the best explanation for our main result. All of our experimental results



                                         38
are consistent with a standard model that allows for this, which we confirm through
structural estimation. Further, explanations of our results that are driven by con-
founds of our design simply do not match the empirical regularities in our data.
   More broadly, differential warm glow may be thought of alternative viewpoint
to the frequently discussed economic anomaly of gift-gifting (e.g. Camerer, 1988;
Waldfogel, 1993; Prendergast and Stole, 2001; Ellingsen and Johannesson, 2011). In
almost all cases, non-monetary gifts are a less efficient use of resources than a direct
monetary gift (much like our volunteering example), but they are given far more
frequently than monetary gifts. Aside from potential social norms against giving
cash, a prevailing explanation is that non-monetary gifts, while inefficient, are more
conspicuous and thus have superior signaling properties (Ellingsen and Johannesson,
2011). As our donations to charity are anonymous, and donations of time and
money are treated identically by experimenters (i.e., they end up being money in
the same envelope), our experiments eliminate these signaling motivations, yet the
preference for a non-monetary gift to charity remains. This may indicate individuals
use non-monetary gifts rather than monetary gifts in social situations simply because
they derive greater pleasure from giving non-monetary gifts, regardless of signaling
motivations. Previous experiments were unable to isolate and test these explanations
separately. Ellingsen and Johannesson (2009) note that subjects are more willing to
sacrifice time rather than money in an ultimatum game, but the structure of that
game makes it impossible to disentangle whether social factors or preferences over
giving are responsible for that result. An extension of our design could measure the
willingness of donations to remain anonymous or become public, helping to clarify


                                          39
aspects of signaling in charitable giving.
       Given these experimental results, a natural question to ask would be how they
might translate to other settings. We suspect that factors like social recognition,
enjoyment of the volunteer activity itself, and the salience of one’s donation all may
increase the utility from donating time to charity rather than money.
       Nonetheless, charities must balance the higher willingness of their donors to vol-
unteer with the greater impact of their monetary donations. Unlike in our experi-
ment, where wages for volunteering never fell below 75% of one’s personal wage, it is
realistic to think one’s actual opportunity cost of time may be substantially greater
than the value to the charity of the volunteering activity (as it was in our motivating
example of the consultant in the soup kitchen). In such cases, charities still may
prefer to solicit monetary donations even if individuals are willing to give (based on
their personal costs) considerably less. Another implication of differential warm glow
is that individuals will accept a lower wage working in the non-profit sector than a
higher wage in the for-profit sector, even though they could donate the difference
in income to the charity.25 Regardless of its relative impact in these settings, our
results strongly suggest economic models must consider the warm glow associated
with gifts of time and money as different entities.




  25
    There is disagreement as to whether those working for non-profits are paid less, all else equal.
For example, Ruhm and Borkoski (2003) find no evidence of wage differentials. On the other hand,
Preston (1989) finds that those in the non-profit sector earn less, and a recent field experiment by
Frank (2012) found that half of workers in an online labor market were willing to accept a lower
wage rate to work for an organization with greater “social value.”


                                                40
References
Andreoni, James, “Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and
 Ricardian Equivalence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97 (6), 1447–1458.

  , Handbook on the Economics of Giving, Reciprocity, and Altruism, Elsevier,

   and Abigail Payne, “Is crowding out due entirely to fundraising? Evidence
  from a panel of charities,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (5-6), 334–343.

  , Justin M. Rao, and Hannah Trachtman, “Avoiding the Ask: A Field
  Experiment on Altruism, Empathy, and Charitable Giving,” Journal of Political
  Economy, Forthcoming.

  , William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, “Charitable Contributions of Time
  and Money,” 1996, July.

Apinunmahakul, Amornrat, Vicky Barham, and Rose Anne Devlin, “Char-
 itable Giving, Volunteering, and the Paid Labor Market,” Nonprofit and Voluntary
 Sector Quarterly, 2009, 38 (1), 77–94.

Bauer, Thomas K., Julia Bredtmann, and Christop M. Schmidt, “Time vs.
 Money: The Supply of Voluntary Labor and Charitable Donations across Europe,”
 European Journal of Political Economy, 2013, 32, 80–94.

Breman, Anna, “Give more tomorrow: Two field experiments on altruism and
 intertemporal choice,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95, 1349–1357.

Brown, Alexander L., Jonathan Meer, and J. Forrest Williams, “Why do
 people volunteer? An experimental analysis of preferences for time donations,”
 Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2013.

  , , and , “Social Distance and Quality Rating in Charity Choice,” Journal of
  Behavioral and Experimental Economics, forthcoming.

Brown, Eleanor and Hamilton Lankford, “Gifts of money and gifts of time: es-
 timating the effects of tax prices and available time,” Journal of Public Economics,
 1992, 47, 321–341.

Camerer, Colin F., “Gifts as Economic Signals and Social Symbols,” American
 Journal of Sociology, 1988, Suppl., 180–S214.


                                         41
  , “Three Cheers - Psychological, Theoretical, Empirical - for Loss Aversion,” Jour-
  nal of Marketing Research, 2005, 42 (2), 129–133.

Center on Philanthropy at Indiana University, “The 2010 Study of High Net
 Worth Philanthorpy: Issues Driving Charitable Activities amog Affluent House-
 holds,” 2010, November.

Corporation for National & Community Service, “Volunteering in America,”
 www.VolunteeringInAmerica.gov, 2011.

Crumpler, Heidi and Philip J. Grossman, “An experimental test of warm glow
 giving,” Journal of Public Economics, 2008, 92, 1011–1021.

DellaVigna, Stefano, John A. List, and Ulrike Malmendier, “Testing for
 Altruism and Social Pressure in Charitable Giving,” The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 2012, 127 (1), 1–56.

Duncan, Brian, “Modeling charitable contributions of time and money,” Journal
 of Public Economics, 1999, 72, 213–242.

Ellingsen, Tore and Magnus Johannesson, “Time is not money,” Journal of
  Economic Behavior & Organization, 2009, 72, 96–102.

   and , “Conspicuous Generosity,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (9-10),
  1131–1143.

Feldman, Naomi E., “Time Is Money: Choosing between Charitable Activities,”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (1), 103–30.

Fielding, David and Stephen Knowles, “Can You Spare Some Change For
  Charity? Experimental Evidence on Verbal Cues and Loose Change Effects in a
  Dictator Game,” Experimental Economics, 2015, 18 (4), 718–730.

Fischbacher, U., “z-Tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments,”
  Experimental Economics, 2007, 10, 171–178.

Fisman, Raymond, Shachar Kariv, and Daniel Markovits, “Individual
  Prefernces for Giving,” The American Economic Review, 2007, 97 (5), 1858–1876.

Frank, Douglas H., “Will employees pay to work for a good cause? Evidence from
  an online labor market,” Working Paper, 2012.



                                         42
Gill, David and Victoria Prowse, “A Structual Analysis of Disappointment Aver-
 sion in Real Effort Competition,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102(1), 469–
 503.
Giving USA Foundation, “Giving USA 2011 Executive Summary,” 2011.
Greiner, Ben, “The Online Recruitment System ORSEE 2.0 - A Guide for the
 Organziation of Experiments in Economics,” University of Colgne, Working Paper
 Series in Economics 10, 2004.
Harbaugh, William T., “The Prestige Motive for Making Charitable Transfers,”
 The American Economics Review, 1998, 88 (2), 277–282.
  , “What do donations buy? A model of philanthropy based on prestige and warm
  glow,” Journal of Public Economics, 1998, 67, 269–284.
Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky, “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
 Decision Under Risk,” Econometrica, 1979, 47 (2), 263–292.
Kessler, Judd B., “Announcements of Support and Public Good Provision,” Work-
 ing Paper, 2013, June.
Knowles, Stephen and Maros Servatka, “Transaction Costs, the Oppotunity
 Cost of Time and Inertia in Charitable Giving,” Working Paper, 2014, January.
Lacetera, Nicola and Mario Macis, “Do all material incentirves for pro-social
  activities backfire? The response to cash and non-cash incentives for blood dona-
  tions,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 2010, 31, 738–348.
Landry, Craig E, Andreas Lange, John A. List, Michael K. Price, and
  Nicholas G. Rupp, “Toward an understanding of the economics of charity: Ev-
  idence from a field experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 121
  (2), 747–782.
Li, Jingping and Yohanes E. Riyanto, “Category Reporting in Charitable Giv-
  ing: An Experimental Analysis,” Working Paper, 2009, January.
Lilley, Andrew and Robert Slonim, “Microfoundations and experimental evi-
  dence on the price of warm glow,” Journal of Public Economics, 2014, 114, 58–74.
List, John A., Azeem M. Shaikh, and Yang Xu, “Multiple Hypothesis Test-
  ing in Experimental Economics,” NBER Working Paper Series, January 2016,
  (21875).

                                        43
Meer, Jonathan, “Brother, Can You Spare a Dime: Peer Presure in Charitable
 Solicitation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2011, 95 (7-8), 929–941.

  , “The Habit of Giving,” Economic Inquiry, 2013, 51 (4), 2002–2017.

  and Harvey S. Rosen, “The ABCs of charitable solicitation,” Journal of Public
  Economics, 2011, 95, 363–371.

   and Oren Rigbi, “The Effects of Transactions Costs and Social Distance: Ev-
  idence from a Field Experiment,” B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy,
  2013, 13 (1), 271–296.

Null, C., “Warm glow, information, and inefficient charitable giving,” Journal of
 Public Economics, 2011, 95, 455–465.

Plott, Charles R. and Kathryn Zeiler, “The Willingness to Pay-Willingness to
  Accept Gap, the “Endowment Effect,” Subject Misconceptions, and Experimental
  Procedures for Eliciting Valuations,” The American Economic Review, 2005, 95
  (3), 530–545.

Prendergast, Canice and Lars Stole, “The non-monetary nature of gifts,” Eu-
 ropean Economic Review, 2001, 45 (10), 1793–1810.

Preston, Anne E., “The nonprofit worker in a for-profit world,” Journal of Labor
 Economics, 1989, 7 (4), 438–463.

Rasul, Imran and Steffen Huck, “Transactions Costs in Charitable Giving: Ev-
 idence from Two Field Experiments,” The B.E. Journal of Economic Analyisis &
 Policy, 2010, 10 (1), 1935–1682.

Reinstein, David and Gerhard Riener, “Decomposing desert and tangibility
 effects in a charitable giving experiment,” Experimental Economics, 2012, 15, 229–
 240.

Ruhm, Cristopher J. and Carey Borkoski, “Compensation in the Nonprofit
 Sector,” Journal of Human Resources, 2003, 38 (4), 992–1021.

Samek, Anya Savikhin and Roman M. Sheremeta, “Recognizing contributors:
  an experiment on public goods,” Experimental Economics, 2014, 17 (4), 673–690.

Samuelson, Williams and Richard Zeckhauser, “Status Quo Bias in Decision
  Making,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 1988, 1 (1), 7–59.

                                        44
Tonin, Mirco and Michael Vlassopoulos, “Disentangling the sources of pro-
  socially motivated effort: A field experiment,” Journal of Public Economics, 2010,
  94, 1086–1092.

United States Department of Labor, “United States Bureau of Labor Statis-
 tics,” American Time Use Survey (ATUS), 2010.

Waldfogel, Joel, “The Deadweight Loss of Christmas,” The American Economic
 Review, 1993, 83 (5), 1328–1336.

  , “Gifts, Cash, and Stigma,” Economic Inquiry, 2002, 40 (3), 415–427.

Xiao, Erte and Daniel Houser, “Sign Me Up! A Model and Field Experiment
 on Volunteering,” Working Paper, 2014, January.




                                        45
          Appendices: Not for Publication
A       Mathematical Appendix
A.1      Proof of Proposition 3.1
Proposition 3.1. Suppose the Weak Form of Donative Equivalence holds. Provided
some form of donations occur (d + v w̃ > 0), the relation between wage rates (w and
w0 ) determines the optimal allocation of gifts. Specifically, agents’ donations (either
in time or money) favor the method with the higher wage rate. That is,

   1. If θ = 1 and w > w0 , then the optimal allocation has d > vw0 .

   2. If θ = 1 and w < w0 , then the optimal allocation has d < vw0 .

   3. If θ = 1 and w = w0 , then an optimal allocation exists where d = vw0 . If U
      satisfies strict concavity, this allocation is unique.

   4. If θ = 0, then an optimal allocation exists where d = vw. If U satisfies strict
      concavity, this allocation is unique.

Proof. Consider the cases where θ = 1 and w 6= w0 which implies w 6= w̃. Suppose
w > w0 , but the optimal consumption bundle (x∗ , d∗ , v ∗ ) has d∗ ≤ v ∗ w0 . By the
Weak Form, there exists a bundle (x∗ , d0 , v 0 ) with d0 = v ∗ w0 and v 0 w0 = d∗ s.t.,
U (x∗ , d∗ , v ∗ w0 ) = U (x∗ , d0 , v 0 w0 ). Since d0 ≥ v ∗ w0 and w > w0 , the cost x∗ + d0 + v 0 w <
x∗ + d∗ + v ∗ w <= wT. Therefore there exists an  > 0 s.t. U (x∗ + , d0 , v 0 w0 ) >
U (x∗ , d∗ , vw0 ), U (x∗ , d0 , v 0 w0 ) and (x∗ + ) + d0 + v 0 w < wT which violates (x∗ , d∗ , v ∗ )
being the optimal consumption bundle. The identical reasoning shows when w < w0 ,
we must have d < vw0 .
    Now consider items 3 and 4. Using the Weak Form and the definition of a
derivative, one can show ∂U           ∂d
                                         (x, d, vw) = ∂U∂v
                                                           (x, vw, d). Since wage rates are identical
in the maximization problem, first order conditions dictate a maximum occurs where
d = vw. Under strict concavity, no other maxima could exist because a convex
combination of those two maxima would be in the budget set and produce greater
utility than either maxima, contradicting the idea that they are maxima.




                                                  46
A.2      Proof of Corollary 3.1
Corollary 3.1. Assume the Weak Form of Donative Equivalence holds. Suppose
that, in one state, monetary donations are restricted so d1 ≡ 0 and in another state,
volunteering is restricted so v2 ≡ 0. Further suppose w = w0 and all other parameters
are equal across states. If (x∗1 , 0, v1∗ ) is an optimal allocation in state 1, then (x∗1 , d∗2 , 0)
is an optimal allocation in state 2 where v1∗ w0 = d∗2 .

Proof. Suppose not, that the optimal consumption bundle in state 1 is (x∗1 , 0, v1∗ ) and
the optimal consumption bundle in state 2 is (x∗2 , d∗2 , 0), with v1∗ w0 6= d∗2 . Since the
cost of both allocations is equal to total income in their respective states, it follows
that U (x∗2 , d∗2 , 0) > U (x∗1 , v1∗ w0 , 0) since the latter allocation would be attainable in
state 2. By the Weak Form, U (x∗2 , 0, d∗2 ) > U (x∗1 , 0, v1∗ w0 ). But then (x∗1 , 0, v1∗ ) cannot
be a maximum in state 1, violating our given.

A.3      Proof of Proposition 3.2
Proposition 3.2. Assume the Strong Form of Donative Equivalence holds. When
w = w0 , giving in an environment with at least two methods of giving available,
total gifts are equal to giving in an environment where only one method of giving is
available, ceteris paribus.

Proof. Consider the case where only donating money is allowed and (c∗ , d∗ , 0) is
the optimal bundle. Then U (c∗ , d∗ , 0) ≥ U (c0 , d0 , 0) for all (c0 , d0 , 0) in the budget
set. Consider any d00 and v 00 in the two good case. Since total income is constant
across cases, there exists a d0 in the single good case such that d0 = d0 + vw0 . Then
all (c∗ , d∗∗ , wv ∗∗ ) where d∗∗ + wv ∗∗ = d∗ are optimal in the two good case since
U (c∗ , d∗∗ , wv ∗∗ ) = U (c∗ , d∗ , 0) ≥ U (c0 , d0 , 0) = U (c, d00 , 0).

A.4      Modified Propositions under Alternate Form
Proposition 3.10 . Suppose the Alternate Form holds. Provided some form of dona-
tions occur (d + v w̃ > 0), the relation between wage rates (w and w0 ) and preference
for volunteering determine the optimal allocation of gifts. Specifically, under certain
relative wage conditions agents’ donations (either in time or money) favor volunteer-
ing. That is,

   1. If θ = 1 and w > w0 , then d > vw0 , d < vw0 , or d = vw0 .

   2. If θ = 1 and w < w0 , then d < vw0 .

                                                 47
   3. If θ = 1 and w = w0 , then an optimal allocation is where d < vw0 . If U satisfies
      strict concavity, this allocation is unique.

   4. If θ = 0, then an optimal allocation is where d < vw. If U satisfies strict
      concavity, this allocation is unique.

Corollary 3.10 . Assume the Alternate Form holds. Suppose that, in one state,
monetary donations are restricted so d1 ≡ 0 and in another state, volunteering is
restricted so v2 ≡ 0. Further suppose w = w0 and all other parameters are equal
across states. If (x∗1 , 0, v1∗ ) is an optimal allocation in state 1, then (x∗1 , d∗2 , 0) is an
optimal allocation in state 2 where v1∗ w0 > d∗2 .




                                               48
B    Appendix of Additional Figures and Tables

           Table 5: Summary Statistics for Additional Treatments

                               Money        Money, no    T+CR
                              Continual     Reminder (0.035, 0.035)
    N                              70            47          39
    Sliders Completed           911.99        886.28      856.78
                               (250.33)      (224.64)    (268.41)
    Earnings from Effort         27.36         26.59       29.99
                                 7.52)        (6.74)       (9.40)
    Percent Giving Any Amount    57.10         31.90       74.36
    Percent Giving $1 or More    42.86         17.02       58.97
    Percent Giving $5 or More    22.43         10.64       23.08
    Amount Donated                2.85          1.02        4.75
                                 (5.49)       (2.26)       (9.45)
    Percent Donated              11.79         3.89        15.35
                                (22.85)       (9.08)      (25.23)
    Conditional on Giving
    N                              40            15              29
    Earnings from Effort         24.81         27.11           29.56
                                 (6.54)        (6.74)          (8.73)
    Percent Giving $1 or More     77.5         53.30           75.86
    Percent Giving $5 or More     40.0         33.30           31.03
    Amount Donated                4.97          3.20            6.39
                                 (6.52)        (3.06)         (10.51)
    Percent Donated               21.2          12.2           20.64
                                 (26.9)        (12.8)         (27.41)
    25th Percentile of Giving     1.00          0.70            1.30
    50th Percentile of Giving     2.30          3.00            3.21
    75th Percentile of Giving     5.00          5.00            6.30




                                    49
Figure 6: CDF of dollars donated by minute in T, MC, and T &M3/3




                              50
