                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS OF HOME COMPUTERS ON
             ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT AMONG SCHOOLCHILDREN

                                            Robert W. Fairlie
                                           Jonathan Robinson

                                         Working Paper 19060
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19060


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




We thank Computers for Classrooms, Inc., the ZeroDivide Foundation, and the NET Institute (www.NETinst.org)
for generous funding for the project. We thank David Card, Tarjei Havnes, Oded Gurantz, and participants
at seminars and workshops at UC Berkeley, SOLE, the MacArthur Foundation and the CESifo ICT
Conference for comments and suggestions. We also thank Bruce Besnard, Jennifer Bevers, John Bohannon,
Linda Coleman, Brian Gault, Reg Govan, Rebecka Hagerty, Kathleen Hannah-Chambas, David Jansen,
Cynthia Kampf, Gina Lanphier, Linda Leonard, Kurt Madden, Lee McPeak, Stephen Morris, Joanne
Parsley, Richard Pascual, Jeanette Sanchez, Zenae Scott, Tom Sharp, and many others for administering
the program in schools. We thank Shilpa Aggarwal, Julian Caballero, David Castaneda, James Chiu,
Samantha Grunberg, Keith Henwood, Cody Kennedy, Nicole Mendoza, Nick Parker, Miranda Schirmer,
Glen Wolf and Heidi Wu for research assistance. Finally, special thanks go to Pat Furr for donating
many computers for the study and distributing computers to schools. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robert W. Fairlie and Jonathan Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Experimental Evidence on the Effects of Home Computers on Academic Achievement among
Schoolchildren
Robert W. Fairlie and Jonathan Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 19060
May 2013
JEL No. I24

                                            ABSTRACT

Computers are an important part of modern education, yet many schoolchildren lack access to a computer
at home. We test whether this impedes educational achievement by conducting the largest-ever field
experiment that randomly provides free home computers to students. Although computer ownership
and use increased substantially, we find no effects on any educational outcomes, including grades,
test scores, credits earned, attendance and disciplinary actions. Our estimates are precise enough to
rule out even modestly-sized positive or negative impacts. The estimated null effect is consistent with
survey evidence showing no change in homework time or other "intermediate" inputs in education.


Robert W. Fairlie
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
rfairlie@ucsc.edu

Jonathan Robinson
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
457 Engineering 2
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jmrtwo@ucsc.edu
        Computers are an important part of modern education. In the United States, schools
spend more than $5 billion per year on computers and information technology (MDR 2004),
while the federal government spends another $2 billion per year on the E-rate program, which
provides discounts to low-income schools and libraries (Universal Services Administration
Company 2010). A large share of these expenditures goes towards in-school computing, and
consequently access to computers in school is ubiquitous.1 In contrast, many children do not
have access to a computer at home: nearly 9 million children ages 10-17 in the United States (27
percent) do not have computers with Internet connections at home (NTIA 2011). Partly to
address these disparities and to further reduce computer-to-student ratios in the classroom, a
growing number of schools are implementing costly one-to-one laptop programs (Silvernail et al.
2011; Texas Center for Educational Research 2009; Lowther 2007). 2 These programs are
extremely expensive -- for example, equipping each of the 55.5 million public school students in
the United States with a laptop would cost tens of billions of dollars even if these laptops were
replaced only every three years.
        How important is this disparity in access to home computing to the educational
achievement of schoolchildren, especially given the pervasiveness of computers in the U.S.
classroom? The potential impact depends on why households do not have computers in the first
place. If households are rational and face no other frictions, those households without computers
have decided not to buy a computer because the returns are relatively low. Although home
computers are useful for completing school assignments through word processing, research,
spreadsheets and other educational uses, they also provide a distraction caused by game, social
networking and other entertainment use.3 However, it is also possible that various constraints
prevent households from investing in home computers, even if the returns are high. For example,

1
  There are an estimated 15.5 million instructional computers in U.S. public schools, representing one
instructional computer for every three schoolchildren. Nearly every instructional classroom in these
schools has a computer, averaging 189 computers per school (U.S. Department of Education 2011).
2
  Extensive efforts to provide laptops to schoolchildren also exist in many developing countries. For
example, the One Laptop per Child program has provided more than 2 million computers to schools in
Uruguay, Peru, Argentina, Mexico and Rwanda, and new projects in Gaza, Afghanistan, Haiti, Ethiopia
and Mongolia. See http://one.laptop.org/about/countries.
3
  Surveys of home computer use among schoolchildren indicate high levels of use for both schoolwork
and entertainment (see U.S. Department of Commerce 2004; Lenhart et al. 2008; Lenhart 2009; Pew
Internet Project 2008a, 2008b; U.S. Department of Education 2011; Kaiser Family Foundation 2010 for
example). Theoretically, there is also no clear prediction of whether the net effects are positive or
negative (see Beltran, Das and Fairlie 2010 for example).


                                                   2
parents may simply be unaware of the returns to computer use, or they may face credit
constraints. There is reason to suspect that these constraints might be important, given that
households without computers tend to be substantially poorer and less educated than other
households (U.S. Department of Commerce 2011). Thus, the effect of computers for such
families is an open and important question.
        Only a few studies have examined this question, and there is no consensus in this
literature on even whether the effects of home computers are positive or negative. A few studies
find large positive effects of home computers on various educational outcomes such as grades,
test scores and cognitive skills (Attewell and Battle 1999; Fiorini 2010; Schmitt and Wadsworth
2006; Fairlie 2005; Beltran, Das and Fairlie 2010; Malamud and Pop-Eleches 2011), and an
almost equal number of studies find evidence of modestly-sized to large negative effects of home
computers on educational outcomes (Fuchs and Woessmann 2004; Vigdor and Ladd 2010;
Malamud and Pop-Eleches 2011). Thus, it remains an open question as to whether home
computers are academically beneficial or harmful to schoolchildren.4
        Empirically, the key challenge in the literature is isolating the causal effect of home
computers from other unobserved differences across students and their families. Previous studies
address concerns about possible omitted variable bias (mainly due to selection) by controlling for
detailed student and family background characteristics, instrumenting for computer ownership,
performing falsification tests, and/or estimating fixed effect models (for example, see Attewell
and Battle 1999; Fiorini 2010; Schmitt and Wadsworth 2006; Fuchs and Woessmann 2004;
Fairlie 2005; Vigdor and Ladd 2010; Beltran, Das and Fairlie 2010). More recently to address
selection bias, Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011) estimate a regression discontinuity design using
a computer voucher program for low-income families in Romania. Their estimates indicate
negative effects of having a home computer on grades, but positive effects on cognitive and


4
 A larger and more established literature examines the impacts of computers and computer-assisted
software in schools (where use is regulated by teachers) and finds somewhat mixed results ranging from
null to large positive impacts. See Kirkpatrick and Cuban (1998) and Noll, et al. (2000) for earlier reviews
of the literature, and see Barrera-Osorio and Linden (2009) and Cristia, et al. (2012) for more recent
evidence on computer impacts in schools, Goolsbee and Guryan (2006) and Machin, McNally and Silva
(2007) for evidence on the effects of ICT expenditures and subsidies to schools, and Angrist and Lavy
(2002), Banerjee, et al. (2007), Barrow, Markman and Rouse (2009) and Carrillo, Onofa and Ponce
(2010) for evidence on computer-assisted software in schools. These results contrast with stronger
evidence of positive effects for other school inputs such as teacher quality (e.g. Rivkin, Hanushek, and
Kain 2005).


                                                     3
computer skills. The only randomized experiment examining the impacts of home computers of
which we are aware was conducted by one of the authors with a sample of 286 low-income
community college students (Fairlie and London 2012).5 That study found evidence of small
positive effects on educational outcomes for college students, but did not estimate impacts on
schoolchildren, which may differ greatly.6
        We provide evidence on the educational impacts of home computers by conducting a
randomized control experiment with 1,123 students in grades 6-10 attending 15 schools across
California. It represents the first field experiment involving the provision of free computers to
schoolchildren for home use ever conducted, and the largest experiment involving the provision
of free home computers to students at any level. All of the students participating in the study did
not have computers at baseline. Half were randomly selected to receive free computers, while the
other half served as the control group. Since the goal of the study was to evaluate the effects of
home computers alone instead of a broader technology policy intervention, no training or other
assistance was provided. At the end of the school year, we obtained administrative data from
schools to test the effects of the computers on numerous educational outcomes. The reliance on
school-provided administrative data available for almost all students for the main education
outcomes essentially eliminates concerns over attrition bias and measurement error. We
supplement this information with a detailed follow-up survey, which includes information on
computer use and homework effort, in addition to other outcomes.
        We find that even though the experiment had a large effect on computer ownership and
total hours of computer use, there is no evidence of an effect on a host of educational outcomes,

5
  A few randomized control experiments have recently been conducted to examine the effectiveness of
computer-assisted instruction in schools (e.g. Barrow, Markman and Rouse 2009, Mathematica 2009,
Banerjee, et al. 2007, Barrera-Osorio and Linden 2009) and laptop use in schools (Cristia et al. 2012).
Although the One Laptop per Child program in Peru (Cristia et al. 2012) and the Texas laptop program
(evaluated with a quasi-experiment in Texas Center for Educational Research 2009) were initially
intended to allow students to take computers home when needed in addition to using them in school, this
did not happen in most cases. In Peru, some principals, and even parents, did not allow the computers to
come home because of concerns that the laptops would not be replaced through the program if they were
damaged or stolen. The result is that only 40 percent of students took the laptops home, and home use was
substantially lower than in-school use. In Texas, there were similar concerns resulting in many schools
not allowing computers to be taken home or restricting their home use. The main effect from these laptop
programs is therefore to provide one computer for every student in the classroom, rather than to increase
home access.
6
  From an analysis of matched CPS data, the study finds estimates of impacts of home computers on
community college students that are nearly an order of magnitude larger than the experimental estimates
raising concerns about potential biases in non-experimental estimates (Fairlie and London 2012).


                                                   4
including grades, standardized test scores, credits earned, attendance, and disciplinary actions.
We do not find effects at the mean, important cutoffs in the distribution (e.g. passing and
proficiency), or quantiles in the distribution. Our estimates are precise enough to rule out even
moderately-sized positive or negative effects. Evidence from our detailed follow-up survey
supports these findings. We find no evidence that treatment students spent more or less time on
homework, and we find that the computers had no effect on turning homework in on time,
software use, computer knowledge, and other intermediate inputs in education. The pattern of
time usage is also consistent with a negligible effect of the computers – while treatment students
did report spending more time on computers for schoolwork, they also spent more time on
games, social networking and other entertainment. Children also report relatively low hours
spent doing homework overall which may have limited the potential for the computers to
increase the productivity of their homework even if effective. Finally, we find no evidence of
heterogeneous treatment effects by pre-treatment academic achievement, parental supervision,
propensity for non-game use, or major demographic group. Overall, these results suggest that
increasing access to home computers among students who do not already have access is unlikely
to greatly improve educational outcomes, but is also unlikely to negatively affect outcomes.7
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the
computer experiment in detail and present a check of baseline balance between the treatment and
control groups. Section 3 presents our main experimental results. Section 4 presents results for
heterogeneous treatment effects. Section 5 concludes.


I. Experimental Design
A. Sample
        The sample for this study includes students enrolled in grades 6-10 in 15 different middle
and high schools in 5 school districts in the United States. Middle school students comprise the
vast majority of the sample.8 We focus on this age group because younger students (i.e.
elementary school students) would likely have less of a need to use computers for schoolwork


7
  The negative effects of home computers have gained a fair amount of attention recently in the press.
See, for example, "Computers at Home: Educational Hope vs. Teenage Reality," NY Times, July 10,
2010 and "Wasting Time Is New Divide in Digital Era," NY Times, May 29, 2012.
8
  The distribution of grade levels is as follows: 9.5% grade 6, 47.8% grade 7, 39.9% grade 8, and 2.8%
grades 9 and 10.


                                                    5
and because middle school captures a critical time in the educational process for schoolchildren
prior to, but influencing later, decisions about taking college prep courses and dropping out of
school. The project took place over two years: two schools participated in 2008-9, twelve schools
participated in 2009-10, and one school participated in both years. The 15 schools in the study
span the Central Valley of California geographically. Overall, these schools are similar in size
(749 students compared to 781 students), student to teacher ratio (20.4 to 22.6), and female to
male student ratio (1.02 to 1.05) as California schools as a whole (U.S. Department of Education
2011). Our schools, however, are poorer (81% free or reduced price lunch compared with 57%)
and have a higher percentage of minority students (82% to 73%) than the California average.
They also have lower average test scores than the California average (3.2 compared with 3.6 in
English-Language Arts and 3.1 compared with 3.3 in Math), but the differences are not large
(California Department of Education 2010). Although these differences may impact our ability to
generalize the results, low-income, ethnically diverse schools such as these are the ones most
likely to enroll schoolchildren without home computers and be targeted by policies to address
inequalities in access to technology (e.g. E-rate program and IDAs).
        To identify children who did not have home computers, we conducted an in-class survey
at the beginning of the school year with all of the students in the 15 participating schools. The
survey, which took only a few minutes to complete, asked basic questions about home computer
ownership and usage. To encourage honest responses, it was not announced to students that the
survey would be used to determine eligibility for a free home computer (even most teachers did
not know the purpose of the survey). Responses to the in-class survey are tabulated in Appendix
Table A1. In total, 7,337 students completed in-class surveys, with 24 percent reporting not
having a computer at home. This rate of home computer ownership is roughly comparable to the
national average: – estimates from the 2010 CPS indicate that 27% of children aged 10-17 do not
have a computer with Internet access at home (U.S. Department of Education 2011).
        Any student who reported not having a home computer was eligible for the study.9 In
discussing the logistics of the study with school officials, school principals expressed concern


9
  Because eligibility for the study is based on not having a computer at home, our estimates capture the
impact of computers on the educational outcomes of schoolchildren whose parents do not buy them on
their own and do not necessarily capture the impact of computers for existing computer owners.
Schoolchildren without home computers, however, are the population of interest in considering policies to
expand access.


                                                   6
about the fairness of giving computers to a subset of eligible children. For this reason, we
decided to give out computers to all eligible students: treatment students received computers
immediately, while control students had to wait until the end of the school year. Our main
outcomes are all measured at the end of the school year, before the control students received
their computers.
        All eligible students were given an informational packet, baseline survey, and consent
form to complete at home. To participate, children had to have their parents sign the consent
form (which, in addition to participating in the study, released future grade, test score and
administrative data) and return the completed survey to the school. Of the 1,636 students eligible
for the study, we received 1,123 responses with valid consent forms and completed
questionnaires (68.6%).10


B. Treatment
        We randomized treatment at the individual level, stratified by school. In total, of the
1,123 participants, 559 were randomly assigned to the treatment group. The computers were
purchased from or donated by Computers for Classrooms, Inc., a Microsoft-certified computer
refurbisher located in Chico, California. The computers were refurbished Pentium machines with
17" monitors, modems, ethernet cards, CD drives, flash drives, Microsoft Windows, and
Microsoft Office (Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Outlook). The computer came with a 1 year
warranty on hardware and software during which Computers for Classrooms offered to replace
any computer not functioning properly. In total, the retail value of the machines was
approximately $400-500 a unit. Since the focus of the project was to estimate the impacts of
home computers on educational outcomes and not to evaluate a more intensive technology policy
intervention, no training or assistance was provided with the computers.11


10
   This percentage is lowered by two schools in which 35% or less of the children returned a survey
(because of administrative problems at the school). However, there may certainly be cases in which
students did not participate because they lost or did not bring home the flier advertising the study, their
parents did not provide consent to be in the study, or they did not want a computer. Thus, participating
students are probably likely to be more interested in receiving computers than non-participating students
(which would also be the case in a real-world voucher or giveaway program). To deal with this, we focus
on Intent-to-Treat effects in our main specifications. Note also that the results we present below are not
sensitive to excluding the two schools with low participation rates.
11
   When the computers were handed out to students they were offered a partially subsidized rate for dial-
up Internet service from ChicoNet ($30 for 6 months). They were also given some information about


                                                     7
        The computers were handed out by the schools to eligible students in the late fall of the
school year (they could not be handed out earlier because it took some time to conduct the in-
school surveys, obtain consent, and arrange the distribution). Because the computers were
handed out in the second quarter of the school year we use first quarter grades as a measure of
pre-treatment performance and third and fourth quarter grades as measures of post-treatment
performance. Almost all of the students sampled for computers received them: we received
reports of only 11 children who did not pick up their computers, and 7 of these had dropped out
of their school by that time. After the distribution, neither the research team nor Computers for
Classrooms had any contact with students during the school year. In addition, many of the
outcomes were collected at least 6 months after the computers were given out (for example, end-
of-year standardized test scores and fourth quarter grades). Thus, it is very unlikely that student
behavior would have changed for any reason other than the computers themselves (for instance,
via Hawthorne effects).


C. Data
        We use five main sources of data. First, the schools provided us with detailed
administrative data on educational outcomes for all students covering the entire academic year.
This includes grades in all courses taken, disciplinary information, and whether the student was
still enrolled in school by the end of the year. Second, schools provided us with standardized test
scores from the California Standardized Testing and Reporting (STAR) program. A major
advantage of these two administrative datasets is that the outcomes are measured without any
measurement error, and attrition is virtually non-existent. Third, the schools also provided pre-
treatment administrative data, such as quarter 1 grades, scores on the prior year’s California
STAR tests, and several student and household demographic variables obtained on school
registration forms. Fourth, we administered a baseline survey which was required to participate
in the project (as that was where consent was obtained). That survey includes additional
information on student and household characteristics, and several measures of parental
supervision and propensity for game use. Finally, we administered a follow-up survey at the end
of the school year, which included detailed questions about computer ownership, usage, and


current Internet options available through AT&T (these options were available to everyone, not just
participants).


                                                    8
knowledge, homework time, and other related outcomes. We use this survey to calculate a “first
stage” of the program on computer usage, and to examine intermediate inputs which are not
captured in the administrative data.
       Appendix Table A2 reports information on attrition from the various datasets for the
1,123 students initially enrolled in the study. Panel A focuses on administrative outcomes. For
the grade and other school outcome data 99% of students appear in the various administrative
datasets that the schools provided. Panel B focuses on the STAR test, which is also provided in
administrative data from the schools and is conducted in the late spring. For those students still
enrolled at the end of the year (and thus could have taken the test), we have test scores for 96%
of students (which may be driven by absent students during the day of the test). Another 9% of
the sample had left school by the time of the test, so our data includes 87% of the full sample.
Panel B also reports attrition information for the follow-up survey. We have follow-up surveys
for 76% of all students and 84% of all students enrolled at the end of the school year.
Reassuringly, none of the response rates differ between the treatment and control groups.


D. Summary Statistics and Randomization Verification
       Table 1 reports summary statistics for the treatment and control groups and provides a
balance check. In the table, Columns 1 and 2 report the means for the treatment and control
groups, respectively, while Column 3 reports the p-value for a t-test of equality. Panel A reports
demographic information from the school-provided administrative data. The average age of
study participants is 12.9 years. The sample has high concentrations of minority and non-primary
English language students: 55% of students are Latino, and 43% primarily speak English at
home. Most students, however, were born in the United States: the immigrant share is 19%. The
average education level of the highest educated parent is 12.8 years.
       Panel B reports information on grades in the quarter before the computers were disbursed
(the first quarter of the school year) and previous year California STAR test scores. The average
student had a baseline GPA of roughly 2.5 in all subjects and 2.3 in academic subjects (which we
define as Math, English, Social Studies, Science, and Computers). The average student received
a score of roughly 2.9 (out of 5) on both the English-Language Arts and Math sections of the
STAR test. Reassuringly, none of these means for baseline academic performance differ between
the treatment and control groups.



                                                 9
        Finally, Panel C reports information from the baseline survey. Ninety percent of children
live with their mothers, but only 58% live with their fathers. Students report that 47% of mothers
and 72% of fathers are employed (conditional on living with the student). The average student
reports spending about 3.7 hours a week on the computer, split about evenly between school and
outside of school. We also collected several measures of parental involvement and supervision,
to examine whether treatment impacts vary by these characteristics. Most students report that
their parents have rules for how much TV they watch, that they have a curfew, and that they
usually eat dinner with their parents.
        Overall, we find very little difference between the treatment and control groups. The only
variable with a difference that is statistically significant is that treatment children are more likely
to have rules on how much TV they watch (although the difference of 0.05 is small relative to
the base of 0.79). It is likely that this one difference is caused by random chance – nevertheless,
we control for a large number of covariates in all of the regressions which follow.


II. Main Results
A. Computer Ownership and Usage
        The experiment has a very large first-stage impact in terms of increasing computer
ownership and hours of computer use. Table 2, Panel A reports treatment effects on computer
ownership rates and total hours of computer use from the follow-up survey conducted at the end
of the school year.12 We find very large effects on computer ownership and usage. We find that
81% of the treatment group and 26% of the control group report having a computer at follow-up.
While this first-stage treatment effect of 55 percentage points is very large, if anything it is
understated because only a very small fraction of the 559 students in the treatment group did not
receive one (as noted above, we had reports of only 11 students who did not pick up their
computer). In addition, any measurement error in computer ownership would understate the first
stage. The treatment group is also 25 percentage points more likely to have Internet service at
12
  The estimated treatment effects are from linear regressions that control for school, year, age, gender,
ethnicity, grade, parental education, whether the student's primary language is English, whether the
student is an immigrant, whether the parents live with the student, whether parents have rules for how
much TV the student watches, and whether the parents have a job. Some of these variables are missing for
some students. To avoid dropping these observations, we also include a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
variable is missing for a student and code the original variable as a 0 (so that the coefficients are
identified from those with non‐missing values). Estimates of treatment effects are similar without
controls.


                                                   10
home than the control group (42% of treatment students have Internet service, compared to 17%
of control students).
        We also have some estimates of total time use. We do not want to overemphasize these
specific estimates of hours use, however, because of potential measurement error common in
self-reported time use estimates. With that caveat in mind, we find large first-stage results on
reported computer usage. The treatment group reports using a computer 2.5 hours more per week
than the control group, which represents a substantial gain over the control group average of 4.2
hours per week.13 Reassuringly, this increase in total hours of computer use comes from home
computer use. The similarity between the point estimate on total computer time and the point
estimate on home computer time suggests that home use does not crowd out computer use at
school or other locations.
        Panel B shows how children use the computers. The computers were used for both
educational and non-educational purposes. Children spend an additional 0.8 hours on
schoolwork, 0.8 hours per week on games, and 0.6 hours on social networking.14 All of these
increases are large relative to the control group means of 1.9, 0.8 and 0.6, respectively. Though
we do not want to overemphasize the specific point estimates given possible underreporting of
time use, the finding of home computer use for both schoolwork and entertainment purposes
among schoolchildren is common to numerous national surveys of computer use (see Pew
Internet Project 2008a, 2008b, U.S. Department of Education 2011, Kaiser Family Foundation
2010 for example).


B. Grades
        Table 3 reports estimates of treatment effects on third and fourth quarter grades.15 These
regressions are all at the course level, with standard errors clustered by student and with controls
for the subject and quarter. In all specifications, we pool the quarter 3 and 4 grades together. We



13
   The 4.2 hours that control students spend on computers is spent mostly at school and in other locations
(i.e. libraries, or a friend or relative’s house). But, we do not find evidence of more hours of computer use
by the control group at other locations which include a friend's house suggesting that these students did
not indirectly benefit from using the computers at the homes of the treatment students.
14
   We also find larger medians and distributions that are to the right for the treatment group for these
measures of schoolwork and game/networking use.
15
   The schools participating in our study provide quarterly grades instead of semester grades.


                                                     11
find similar results when we estimate separate regressions for quarter 3 and quarter 4.16 We also
include the same set of baseline controls as in Table 2. To further control for heterogeneity and
improve precision, we control for pre-treatment GPA (in quarter 1).17 In Panel A, Columns 1-2
we regress a numeric equivalent of course letter grades on treatment.18 Column 1 includes
courses taken in all subjects, while Column 2 restricts the sample to courses taken in “academic”
subjects (which we define as Math, English/Reading, Social Studies, Science, and Computers).19
The Intent-to-Treat estimates of treatment effects are very close to zero, and precisely
estimated.20 The standard errors on these estimates are only 0.04 for both specifications; thus,
each side of the 95 percent confidence interval is only 0.08 GPA points, which is equivalent to
roughly one-fourth of the effect of a “+” or “–“ grade modifier (i.e. the difference between a B
and a B+). The 95% confidence interval is therefore very precise (it is just [-0.10, 0.06] for all
subjects, and [-0.05, 0.11] for academic subjects). We can thus rule out even modestly sized
(positive or negative) effects of computers on grades.
        In Columns 3-4, we supplement the overall grade estimate by focusing on the effects of
home computers on the pass/fail part of the grade distribution. In all of our schools, a grade of D-
or higher is considering passing and provides credit towards moving to the next grade level and
graduation. Again, we find a small, very precisely estimated treatment effect. For both
specifications we find a treatment effect estimate of 0.00 and a standard error of 0.01 for the pass
rate.



16
   It is therefore not the case that our finding of a negligible effect of computers on grades is due to an
adjustment period in which students learn to use the computers at the expense of schoolwork, and then
later benefit from that investment.
17
   Estimates are similar without controlling for pre-treatment GPA or any of the individual controls. They
are also similar if we use GPA as the dependent variable instead of individual course grades.
18
   We code A as 4, B as 3, C as 2, D as 1, and F as 0, and we assign 0.33 points for a +/- modifier.
19
   A few students take computer classes which are included here, but we do not include recreational
courses such as Art and P.E.
20
   LATE (or IV) estimates would be about twice as large (since the difference in computer usage is 55
percentage points). We do not report these estimates, however, because we cannot technically scale up the
coefficients with the IV estimator because of differential timing of purchasing computers over the school
year by the control group (two thirds of the control group with a home computer at follow-up obtained
this computer after the fall). The finding that 82 percent of the treatment group reports having a computer
at the end of the school year also creates difficulty in scaling up the ITT estimates because we know that
essentially all treatment students picked up their computers and that many of the treatment group
reporting not having a computer at follow-up indeed had a computer at home (based on subsequent
conversations with the students by principals). For these reasons we focus on the ITT estimates.


                                                    12
        In Panel B of Table 3, we examine course grades separately by subject area (controlling
for the quarter 1 grade in that subject).21 In the Panel, we report course grade results for each
subject separately to test whether the overall null effect is hiding offsetting effects in specific
subjects.22 As before, we present results for grades in the first set of columns (Columns 1-4) and
for passing the course in the second set of columns (Columns 5-8). We find small, statistically
insignificant coefficients in all specifications, suggesting that treatment students did no better or
worse than control students in any subject.
        The finding of a zero average treatment effect also does not appear to be due to offsetting
effects at the bottom and top of the grade distribution. Figure 1 displays estimates and 95%
confidence intervals from quantile regressions to test for differential treatment effects across the
post-treatment achievement distribution that could be hidden by focusing only on mean impacts
(e.g. Bitler, et al. 2004). Estimates of quantile treatment effects are indistinguishable from zero
throughout the distribution.23
        Overall, the results in this section suggest that computers do not have an impact on grades
for students at any point in the distribution. The estimates are robust to focusing on the pass/fail
cutoff and quantile treatment effects. We now turn to examining impacts on test scores.


C. Test Scores
        Our second main outcome is performance on the California Standardized Testing and
Reporting (STAR) Program tests. As part of the STAR Program, all California students are
required to take standardized tests for English-Language Arts and math each spring. While
grades may be the most likely outcome to change because home computers might help or distract
students from turning in homework assignments, test scores focus on the impacts on the amount
of information children learned during the school year.
        Table 4 reports estimates of treatment effects for STAR scores in English (Columns 1 and
2) and math (Columns 3 and 4). The dependent variable in Panel A is the score on the test
(standardized within the control group, so that the dependent variable has mean 0 and standard

21
   We find no evidence of treatment/control differences in course subjects taken which is consistent with
students following their standard curriculum for the school year.
22
   We cannot estimate separate specifications for Computer classes because there are so few students who
take Computer classes.
23
   The estimates displayed in Figure 3 do not control for baseline covariates. Estimates that control for
baseline covariates look similar.


                                                   13
deviation 1 among control students), while in Panel B it is a dummy for whether the student is
proficient or advanced (getting a 4 or 5 out of 5 on the test). Proficiency and advanced scores
meet state standards and are important for schools to satisfy Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) as
part of the No Child Left Behind Act. In Columns 1 and 3 of both panels, we include the same
controls as in the previous tables. In Columns 2 and 4 we also include STAR scores from the
previous school year.
        From Panel A, we find no evidence of an effect of home computers on test scores (with
or without controlling for the previous year’s test score). The point estimates are small and very
close to zero in all specifications. Focusing on whether students meet proficiency standards in
Panel B, we also find no evidence of home computer effects on STAR scores. The treatment
effect point estimates are zero or very close to zero. Confidence intervals around these point
estimates are tight. For English, the 95% confidence interval is -0.15 to 0.05 standard deviations
for the standardized score and -0.04 to 0.04 for the proficiency indicator. For Math, the 95%
confidence intervals are -0.16 to 0.04 standard deviations and -0.08 to 0.04 for the standardized
score and proficiency indicator, respectively.
        Figure 2 examines the distribution of test scores. Since the STAR scores are lumped into
only 5 bins, we cannot estimate quantile treatment effects. Figure 2 therefore instead plots
inverse cumulative distribution functions (CDFs) for both STAR scores, for the treatment and
control groups. The CDFs have substantial overlap between the treatment and control groups for
both test scores. We find very small ranges over which the distributions do not perfectly overlap
suggesting that there are essentially no differential treatment effects at any part of the test score
distribution. Thus, mean impact estimates do not appear to be hiding offsetting effects at
different parts of the distribution.


D. Other Educational Outcomes
        The schools participating in the study provided us with a rich set of additional
educational outcomes. From administrative data we examine total credits earned by the end of
the third and fourth quarters, the number of unexcused absences, the number of tardies, and
whether the student was still enrolled in the school at the end of the year. These measures of
educational outcomes complement the results for grades and test scores.




                                                  14
        Table 5 reports estimates of treatment effects. Students receiving home computers do not
differ from the control group in the total number of credits earned by the end of the 3rd or 4th
quarters of the school year. Thus, the home computers are not changing the likelihood that
children will be able to move on to the next grade level. Receiving a home computer also does
not have an effect on the number of unexcused absences or tardies during the school year,
suggesting that it does not alter their motivations about school. Finally, treatment students are no
more likely to be enrolled in school at the end of the year than control students. Taken together,
these results on additional educational outcomes support the conclusions drawn from the grade
and test score results of no effects of home computers.24


E. Intermediate Inputs and Outcomes from the Follow-up Survey
        The follow-up survey provides information on several less-commonly measured
intermediate educational inputs and outcomes such as homework effort and time, receiving help
on assignments, software use, and computer knowledge. We examine the impact of home
computers on these intermediate inputs in Table 6. In Panel A, we find no evidence that
treatment students spent more time on the last essay or project they had for school. The treatment
group is also no more likely to turn their homework in on time. This latter result is interesting in
that reported homework effort is quite low such that there appears to be scope for improvement -
only 47% of control students reported that they “always” hand assignments in on time. We also
find no difference between treatment and control students in the likelihood that they receive help
on school assignments from other students, friends, or teachers by email or networking. Finally,
we examine whether having a home computer crowds out total time spent doing homework
(Column 6). High levels of use of home computers for games, social networking, and other
forms of entertainment have raised concerns about the displacement of homework time.25



24
   We also summarize the results for educational outcomes by aggregating the separate measures into a
standardized z-score as in Kling, Liebman, and Katz (2007). A regression of a z-score of the main 3
academic outcomes (grades and the 2 test scores) including the same set of controls as we have used
throughout yields a coefficient of -0.05 standard deviations with a standard error of 0.05. Also including
the five main administrative outcomes in Table 5 yields a coefficient of -0.02 standard deviations with a
standard error of 0.03.
25
   These concerns are similar to those over television (Zavodny 2006). There is consistent evidence across
many different surveys showing high levels of game, social networking, and other non-educational uses
of computers by children (see U.S. Department of Commerce 2004; Lenhart et al. 2008; Lenhart 2009;


                                                   15
However, we find no evidence that the treatment group reports lower hours of homework time
than the control group.
       We also asked students what they use computers for and what they know how to do with
computers.26 In Panel B, we include answers to questions about what types of software students
use (including word processing, researching projects or reports, using a spreadsheet, and
educational software). Even though baseline usage levels are low for some types of software use,
we find no major differences between the treatment and control groups in this dimension. In
Panel C, we asked students whether they knew how to use a computer for various tasks. Again,
baseline knowledge levels are low – for example, 49% of students report knowing how to
download a file from the Internet, 46% report knowing how to email a file, and 62% report
knowing how to save a file to the hard drive. Despite this, we find no treatment difference in any
of these measures. These results for software use and knowledge and the results for other
intermediate educational inputs are consistent with the lack of positive or negative effects for the
more ultimate academic outcomes examined above.


III. Treatment Heterogeneity
       The results presented thus far provide consistent evidence against the hypothesis that
home computers exert a positive or negative effect on academic outcomes at the average and at
notable cutoffs in the achievement distribution such as the pass rate and meeting proficiency
standards. In addition, the results from the quantile treatment effect regressions do not provide
evidence that home computers shift the achievement distribution at any point in the distribution
in a discernible way. In this section, we explore whether there might be heterogeneity in
treatment effects by various baseline characteristics. We focus specifically on pre-treatment
ability, parental supervision, propensity for game/social networking use, and basic demographic
characteristics. Focusing on these particular measures is partly motivated by findings from the
previous literature, and all of these measures were pre-identified at the start of the project (which
is why they were asked at baseline).



Pew Internet Project 2008a, 2008b; U.S. Department of Education 2011; Kaiser Family Foundation 2010
for example).
26
   These questions were loosely based on the CPS Computer and Internet Supplement, the Microsoft
Digital Literacy Test, and Hargittai (2005).


                                                 16
           We start by examining heterogeneity by baseline academic achievement. Figure 3
examines treatment effects focusing on potential differences across the pre-treatment grade
distribution. The graph presents coefficients from the following regression:
     (1)            ∗     ∗         ∗       ∗
In the regression,       is an indicator for whether individual i is in the pth percentile of the pre-
treatment GPA distribution. Percentiles are calculated within each school and are restricted to 20
different percentile categories.        is an indicator for the control group, and    is an indicator for
the treatment group. Thus,         and          are estimates of the relationship between pre- and post-
treatment performance in the control and treatment groups, respectively, and the difference,
              provides an estimate of the treatment effect at the pth percentile.      is a minimal set of
controls, including only subject and quarter indicators (so that the coefficients represent the
unconditional relationship between pre- and post-performance for the treatment and control
groups). Standard errors are clustered at the individual level, and the 95% confidence interval of
the difference between the treatment and control groups is plotted.
           The estimates displayed in the figure indicate that treatment effects are indistinguishable
from zero at almost all points of the pre-treatment grade distribution.27 Similarly, Figure 4
examines the effects of home computers on STAR scores by prior achievement levels. Again,
there is no discernible effect at almost any point in the pre-treatment STAR distribution. These
figures suggest minimal effects of computers across the pre-treatment ability distribution and
rule out the possibility that the null estimates of average treatment effects are due to offsetting
positive and negative treatment effects at different parts of the pre-treatment achievement
distribution.
           The null effects found above might instead be due to positive effects of home computers
on educational outcomes simply offsetting the negative effects from non-educational uses.
Computers might be particularly harmful to students who have a high propensity to use them for
non-educational purposes (either because their parents do not monitor them closely or because
the children are intrinsically more inclined to use them for entertainment).
           To explore this question, we first examine whether there is heterogeneity in treatment
effects based on parental supervision. In their study of Romanian schoolchildren, Malamud and

27
  Appendix Table A3 shows these results in a regression framework as well as treatment interactions
with pre-treatment levels.


                                                        17
Pop-Eleches (2011) find evidence that parental supervision through rules on homework activities
attenuates some of the negative effects of home computers on grades that they find in the main
specifications.28 In designing the baseline survey we asked questions about having rules over
how much TV they can watch and whether they have a curfew to measure parental supervision.29
Table 7 reports estimates of heterogeneous treatment effects for these two variables. We find that
treatment students with curfews increase game use less than other students. However, this
difference is evidently too small to have any meaningful impact on outcomes – we do not find a
relative increase in time devoted to doing homework, grades, or test scores. We also find no
evidence suggesting that children with rules for watching TV benefited more or less from home
computers.
        Computers might be harmful to students who have a high propensity to use them for non-
educational purposes. Although this is difficult to measure, we included questions on video game
use (e.g. Wii, Xbox) and having a social networking page on the baseline survey. These
measures are clearly not perfect because families that have a video game console or children who
have a social networking page, but do not have a computer at home, might differ along many
dimensions. But, both baseline measures are exogenous to treatment and provide some
suggestive evidence on the question. Table 8 reports estimates of heterogeneous treatment effects
by these two measures. The estimates generally show no differential effects of home computers
on outcomes by whether students have a propensity to use computers for non-educational
purposes. The one somewhat surprising result is that we find a negative level effect of having a
social networking page, but a positive interaction effect in the grade regression. One possible
interpretation of this result is that playing on a computer at home is less of a distraction than
going to a friend’s house to use a computer, though since this is the only significant result it may
well be due to sampling variation. Otherwise, we find no heterogeneity along these dimensions.30


28
   Malamud and Pop-Eleches (2011) also examine interactions with parental rules regarding computer
use, but do not find evidence that they mitigate the negative effects of home computers on school grades.
One concern that they note in the paper is that information on parental rules for homework activities and
computer use are gleaned from a survey after the children received computers - making these rules
potentially endogenous.
29
   We also collected information on whether the child usually eats dinner with his/her parents. We find
similar results as those for TV rules and having a curfew.
30
   Another reason that use of computers for entertainment might not affect academic outcomes is that very
few students report substantial amounts of game and social networking use on the computer on the
follow-up survey. Less than 6 percent of the treatment group reports using their home computers for


                                                   18
        We also examine how impacts vary with a few standard demographic background
characteristics – gender, race, and grade in school.31 Appendix Table A4 reports estimates. We
find no evidence of differential treatment effects. Although we do not find evidence of
heterogeneity in impacts across these groups for the sample of children that do not have
computers in the first place, it is important to note that we cannot necessarily infer that there is
no heterogeneity in computer impacts across demographic groups for the broader population of
schoolchildren. One issue that is especially salient for the comparison by minority status is that
we are likely sampling from a different part of the distribution of overall minority students than
non-minority students when we focus on non-computer owners (because of substantially lower
rates of ownership among minorities even conditioning on income). But, these results do tell us
whether there are differential benefits from home computers among schoolchildren that do not
currently own computers, which is clearly relevant for policies to expand access to home
computers.32


IV. Conclusion
        Even today, roughly one out of every four children in the United States does not have a
computer with Internet access at home (NTIA 2011). While this gap in access to home
computers seems troubling, there is no theoretical or empirical consensus on whether the home
computer is a valuable input in the educational production function and whether these disparities
limit academic achievement. Prior studies show both large positive and negative impacts. We
provide direct evidence on this question by performing an experiment in which 1,123
schoolchildren grades 6-10 across 15 different schools and 5 school districts in California were

games and social networking 10 or more hours per week. Another interesting finding from examining the
joint distribution of schoolwork use and game/networking use is that most students did both, instead of
there being a clear distinction between educational and game/social networking users.
31
   Previous survey evidence indicates that on average boys and girls use computers differently. Boys tend
to use computers more for video games while girls tend to use them more for social networking (Pew
Internet Project 2008a, 200b, U.S. Department of Education 2011, Kaiser Family Foundation 2010).
Treatment effects may differ by race because of varying rates of access to personal computers at
alternative locations such as at friends' and relatives' houses, and libraries, and social interactions with
other computer users (Fairlie 2004; Goldfarb and Prince 2008; Ono and Zavodny 2007; NTIA 2011).
Effects might also differ by grade because of curricular differences.
32
   We also test for social interactions in usage. To do this, we interact treatment with the percent of
students with home computers in each school (based on results of our in-class survey reported in
Appendix Table A1). We find no evidence of social interactions, which may be due to only having
variation across schools and not students for this variable.


                                                     19
randomly given computers to use at home. By only allowing children without computers to
participate, placing no restrictions on what they could do with the computers, and obtaining
administrative data with virtually no attrition and measurement error, the experiment was
designed to improve the likelihood of detecting effects, either positive or negative.
       Although the experiment substantially increased computer ownership and usage without
causing substitution away from use at school or other locations outside the home, we find no
evidence that home computers had an effect (either positive or negative) on any educational
outcome, including grades, standardized test scores, or a host of other outcomes. Our estimates
are precise enough to rule out even modestly-sized positive or negative impacts. We do not find
effects at notable points in the distribution such as pass rates and meeting proficiency standards,
throughout the distribution of post-treatment outcomes, throughout the distribution of pre-
treatment achievement, or for subgroups pre-identified as potentially more likely to benefit.
       These findings are consistent with a detailed analysis of time use on the computer and
"intermediate" inputs in education. We find that home computers increase total use of computers
for schoolwork, but also increase total use of computers for games, social networking and other
entertainment, which might offset each other. We also find no evidence of positive effects on
additional inputs such as turning assignments in on time, time spent on essays, getting help on
assignments, software use, and computer knowledge. On the other hand, we also find no
evidence of a displacement of homework time. Game and social networking use might not have
been extensive enough, within reasonable levels set by parents or interest by children, to
negatively affect homework time, grades and test scores. The potential negative effects of
computers for U.S. schoolchildren might also be much lower than the large negative effects on
homework time and grades found for Romanian schoolchildren in Malamud and Pop-Eleches
(2011), where most households do not have a computer at home, because there is less of a
novelty of home computers for low-income schoolchildren in the United States for game use.
Computers are also used much more extensively in U.S. schools which might exert more of a
positive offsetting effect. Thus, for U.S. schoolchildren, and perhaps schoolchildren from other
developed countries, concerns over the negative educational effects of computer use for games,
social networking, and other forms of entertainment may be overstated.
       An important caveat to our results is that there might be other effects of having a
computer that are not captured in measurable academic outcomes. For example, computers may



                                                20
be useful for finding information about colleges, jobs, health and consumer products, and may be
important for doing well later in higher education. It might also be useful for communicating
with teachers and schools and parental supervision of student performance through student
information system software.33 A better understanding of these potential benefits is important for
future research.
        Nevertheless, our results indicate that computer ownership alone is unlikely to have much
of an impact on short-term schooling outcomes for low-income children. Existing and proposed
interventions to reduce the remaining digital divide in the United States and other countries, such
as large-scale voucher programs, tax breaks for educational purchases of computers, Individual
Development Accounts (IDAs), and one-to-one laptop programs, need to be realistic about their
potential to reduce the current achievement gap.34




33
   Student information system software that provides parents with nearly instantaneous information on
their children's school performance, attendance and disciplinary actions is becoming increasingly popular
in U.S. schools (e.g. School Loop, Zangle, ParentConnect, and Aspen). We find evidence from the
follow-up survey of a positive effect of home computers on whether parents check assignments, grades
and attendance online using these types of software.
34
   In the United States, in addition to one-to-one laptop programs, the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act of 2009 provides tax breaks for education-related purchases of computers, and there are
many local IDAs in the United States that provide matching funds for education-related purchases of
computers. England recently provided free computers to nearly 300,000 low-income families with
children at a total cost of £194 million through the Home Access Programme. Another example is the
Romanian Euro 200 program which provides vouchers to low-income families with children to purchase
computers.


                                                   21
References

Angrist, Joshua, and Victor Lavy. 2002. "New Evidence on Classroom Computers and Pupil
Learning," Economic Journal 112(482): 735–765

Attewell, Paul, and Juan Battle. 1999. "Home Computers and School Performance," The
Information Society 15: 1-10.

Banerjee, A., Cole, S., Duflo, E. and Linden, L (2007) "Remedying Education: Evidence
from Two Randomized Experiments in India," Quarterly Journal of Economics
122(3): 1235-1264.

Barrow, Lisa, Lisa Markman, and Cecelia E. Rouse. 2009. "Technology's Edge: The Educational
Benefits of Computer-Aided Instruction," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1(1):
52-74.

Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, and Leigh L. Linden. 2009. “The Use and Misuse of Computers in
Education: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Colombia,” Policy Research Working
Paper 4836, Impact Evaluation Series No. 29, The World Bank.

Beltran, Daniel O., Kuntal K. Das, and Robert W. Fairlie. 2010. "Home Computers and
Educational Outcomes: Evidence from the NLSY97 and CPS," Economic Inquiry 48(3): 771-
792.

Bitler, Marianne, Jonah Gelbach and Hilary Hoynes. 2006. "What Mean Impacts Miss:
Distributional Effects of Welfare Reform Experiments,” American Economic
Review 96(4): 988–1012.

California Department of Education. 2010. 2010 STAR Test Results: California STAR Program,
http://star.cde.ca.gov/star2010/

Carrillo, Paul, Mercedes Onofa, and Juan Ponce. 2010. "Information Technology and Student
Achievement: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ecuador," Inter-American
Development Bank Working Paper.

Cristia, Julian P., Pablo Ibarraran, Santiago Cueto, Ana Santiago, and Eugenio Severin. 2012.
"Technology and Child Development: Evidence from the One Laptop per Child Program," Inter-
American Development Bank Working Paper No. IDB-WP-304.

Fairlie, Robert W. 2004. "Race and the Digital Divide," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis
& Policy 3(1), Contributions, Article 15: 1-38.

Fairlie, Robert W. 2005. "The Effects of Home Computers on School Enrollment," Economics of
Education Review 24(5): 533-547.




                                              22
Fairlie, Robert W., and Rebecca A. London. 2012. "The Effects of Home Computers on
Educational Outcomes: Evidence from a Field Experiment with Community College Students.”
Economic Journal 122(561): 727-753.

Fiorini, M. 2010. “The Effect of Home Computer Use on Children’s Cognitive and Non-
Cognitive Skills,” Economics of Education Review 29: 55-72.

Fuchs, Thomas, and Ludger Woessmann. 2004. "Computers and Student Learning: Bivariate and
Multivariate Evidence on the Availability and Use of Computers at Home and at School."
CESifo Working Paper No. 1321.

Goldfarb, Avi, and Jeffrey Prince. 2008. "Internet Adoption and Usage Patterns are Different:
Implications for the Digital Divide." Information Economics and Policy 20(1), 2-15.

Goolsbee, Austan, and Jonathan Guryan. 2006. "The Impact of Internet Subsidies in Public
Schools," The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(2): 336-347.

Hargittai, Eszter. 2005. "Survey Measures of Web-Oriented Digital Literacy," Social Science
Computer Review 23(3): 371-379.

Kaiser Family Foundation. 2010. Generation M2: Media in the Lives of 8- to 18-Year Olds.
Kaiser Family Foundation Study.

Kirkpatrick, H., and L. Cuban. 1998. "Computers Make Kids Smarter--Right?" Technos
Quarterly for Education and Technology 7:2.

Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. "Experimental Analysis of
Neighborhood Effects," Econometrica 75(1): 83–119.

Lenhart, Amanda. 2009. The Democratization of Online Social Networks: A look at the change
in demographics of social network users over time, Pew Internet & American Life Project,
Presentation at AoIR 10.0, October 8, 2009.

Lenhart, Amanda, Joseph Kahne, Ellen Middaugh, Alexandra Rankin Macgill, Chris Evans, and
Jessica Vitak. 2008. Teens, Video Games, and Civics: Teens’ gaming experiences are diverse
and include significant social interaction and civic engagement, Pew Internet and American Life
Project.

Lowther, Deborah L., J. Daniel Strahl, Fethi A. Inan, and Jerry Bates. 2007. Freedom to Learn
Program: Michigan 2005-2006 Evaluation Report, Center for Research in Educational Policy,
The University of Memphis.

Machin, Stephen, Sandra McNally, and Olmo Silva. 2007. "New Technology in Schools: Is
There a Payoff?" Economic Journal 117(522): 1145-1167.




                                               23
Malamud, Ofer, and Cristian Pop-Eleches. 2011. "Home Computer Use and the Development of
Human Capital," Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 987-1027.

Market Data Retrieval (MDR). 2004. Technology in Education. Market Data Retrieval: Shelton,
Connecticut.

Mathematica. 2009. "Effectiveness of Reading and Mathematics Software Products: Findings
from Two Student Cohorts," Report for U.S. Department of Education.

National Telecommunications and Information Administration. 2011. Current Population Survey
(CPS) Internet Use 2010, http://www.ntia.doc.gov/data/CPS2010_Tables_.

Noll, Roger G. Noll, Dina Older-Aguilar, Gregory L. Rosston, and Richard R. Ross. 2000. "The
Digital Divide: Definitions, Measurement, and Policy Issues," paper presented at Bridging the
Digital Divide: California Public Affairs Forum, Stanford University.

Ono, Hiroshi, and Madeline Zavodny, 2007. “Digital Inequality: A Five Country Comparison
Using Microdata,” Social Science Research 36: 1135-1155.

Pew Internet Project. 2008. Writing, Technology and Teens, Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet &
American Life Project.

Pew Internet Project. 2008. Teens, Video Games, and Civics, Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet &
American Life Project.

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. "Teachers, Schools, and
Academic Achievement," Econometrica 73(2): 417–458.

Schmitt, John, and Jonathan Wadsworth. 2006. "Is There an Impact of Household Computer
Ownership on Children's Educational Attainment in Britain?" Economics of Education Review,
25: 659-673.

Silvernail, David L., Caroline A. Pinkham, Sarah E. Wintle, Leanne C. Walker, and Courtney L.
Bartlett. 2011. A Middle School One-to-One Laptop Program: The Maine Experience, Maine
Education Policy Research Institute, University of Southern Maine.

Texas Center for Educational Research. 2009. Evaluation of the Texas Technology Immersion
Pilot: Final Outcomes for a Four-Year Study (2004-05 to 2007-08).

U.S. Department of Education. 2011. Digest of Education Statistics 2010 (NCES 2008-022).
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of
Education. Washington, DC.

U.S. Department of Education. 2011. “School Locator,” National Center for Educational
Statistics, http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/schoolsearch/




                                               24
Universal Services Administration Company. 2010. Annual Report
http://www.usac.org/about/tools/publications/annual-reports/2010/index.html.

Vigdor, Jacob L., and Helen F. Ladd. 2010. “Scaling the Digital Divide: Home Computer
Technology and Student Achievement,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 16078.

Zavodny, Madeline. 2006. “Does Watching Television Rot Your Mind? Estimates of the Effect
on Test Scores,” Economics of Education Review 25: 565-573.




                                              25
                                                         Figure 1: Quantile Treatment Effects (Grades)

                                                       Quantile Treatment Effect for Post-treatment Grade Average




                                 1
               -1 -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4 .6 .8
                      Estimated Treatment Effect




                                                   0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75 .8 .85 .9 .95 1
                                                                                  percentile

                                                                    Estimated Treatment Effect           95% CI




Notes: Dependent variable is the everage grade in post‐treatment quarters (quarters 3 and 4) in academic
                   subjects (Math, Science, Social Studies, English, and Computers).
                                 Figure 2. Inverse Post‐Treatment CDFs for STAR scores

                                              Panel A. English / Language Arts

                                            Inverse CDF for Endline English STAR Score




                 5
  Endline STAR score (English)
      2       3  1      4




                                 0           .2           .4              .6        .8         1
                                                        Proportion at or below

                                                                  Treatment
                                                                  Control




                                                       Panel B. Math

                                             Inverse CDF for Endline Math STAR Score
              5
Endline STAR score (Math)
   2       3  1      4




                                 0           .2          .4              .6         .8         1
                                                       Proportion at or below

                                                                  Treatment
                                                                  Control



                                 Notes: Figures depict inverse CDFs for endline STAR scores.
                Figure 3. Post‐Treatment Grades by Pre‐Treatment GPA Percentile (Quarter 1)

                                                  Post-Treatment Grades by Pre-Treatment GPA Percentile




                                4
                     1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5
                     Post-treatment grade
                                .5
                                0




                                            .05   .15    .25    .35       .45     .55    .65      .75    .85   .95
                                                          Percentile in pre-treatment grade distribution

                                                               Control                           Treatment
                                                               95% CI of difference



    Notes: The graph shows estimated coefficients from a regression of post‐treatment (quarters 3 and 4) grades on
interactions between treatment and pre‐treatment GPA percentile (in quarter 1, before the computers were given out).
   The vertical line is a 95% confidence interval for the difference between the treatment and control groups, at each
   percentile. The percentiles are calculated within each school. Regressions restricted to "academic subjects" (Math,
Science, English, Social Studies, and Computers). Regressions control for the subject and whether the class was taken in
                       quarter 3. There are 1,035 students and 7,202 observations in this regression.
       Figure 4. Post‐Treatment STAR scores by Pre‐Treatment Star Percentiles

                                                               Panel A. English / Language Arts

                                                    Endline STAR Score by Pre-Treatment STAR Score Percentile




            0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
                  Endline STAR score




                                              .05     .15     .25     .35      .45    .55    .65     .75      .85   .95
                                                            Percentile in pre-treatment STAR score distribution

                                                                    Control                           Treatment
                                                                    95% CI of difference




                                                                          Panel B. Math

                                                    Endline STAR Score by Pre-Treatment STAR Score Percentile
             0 .5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
                   Endline STAR score




                                              .05     .15     .25     .35      .45    .55    .65     .75      .85   .95
                                                            Percentile in pre-treatment STAR score distribution

                                                                    Control                           Treatment
                                                                    95% CI of difference




  Notes: The graph shows estimated coefficients from a regression of endline STAR scores on
  interactions between treatment and pre‐treatment STAR scores. The vertical line is a 95%
   confidence interval for the difference between the treatment and control groups, at each
percentile. The percentiles are calculated within each school. There are 865 students in Panel A
                                       and 790 in Panel B.
Table 1. Individual Level Summary Statistics and Balance Check
                                                                                         Equality of
                                                      Control          Treatment                               Obs.
                                                                                         means p‐val
Panel A. Administrative Data Provided by School
Age                                                         12.91             12.90              0.91               1107
                                                           (0.87)             (0.84)
Female                                                      0.51               0.50              0.66               1123
                                                           (0.50)             (0.50)
Ethnicity = African American                                0.13               0.14              0.86               1103
                                                           (0.34)             (0.34)
Ethnicity = Latino                                          0.56               0.55              0.76               1103
                                                           (0.50)             (0.50)
Ethnicity = Asian                                           0.12               0.14              0.42               1103
                                                           (0.33)             (0.34)
Ethnicity = White1                                          0.16               0.14              0.56               1103
                                                           (0.36)             (0.35)
Immigrant                                                   0.21               0.18              0.15               1092
                                                           (0.41)             (0.38)
Primary language is English                                 0.43               0.43              0.97               1102
                                                           (0.50)             (0.50)
Parent's education2                                         12.81             12.76              0.64                729
                                                           (1.44)             (1.49)
Number of people living in household                        4.98               5.02              0.79               1103
                                                           (2.43)             (2.55)
Panel B. Pre‐treatment grades and test scores
Grade point average in all subjects                         2.56               2.53              0.54               1098
  (in Quarter 1)                                           (0.92)             (0.92)
Grade point average in academic subjects                    2.35               2.29              0.30               1098
  (in Quarter 1)3                                          (1.05)             (1.05)
California STAR test in previous year                       2.89               2.92              0.76                929
  (English)                                                (1.06)             (1.11)
California STAR test in previous year                       2.91               2.92              0.80                899
  (Math)                                                   (1.10)             (1.12)
Panel C. Baseline Survey
Lives with mother                                           0.92               0.89              0.12               1123
                                                           (0.28)             (0.32)
Lives with father                                           0.58               0.58              0.90               1123
                                                           (0.49)             (0.49)
Hours of computer use (at school and                        3.57               3.85              0.45                979
  outside school)                                          (5.04)             (6.37)
Do your parents have rules for how                          0.79               0.74             0.04**              1110
  much TV you watch?                                       (0.41)             (0.44)
Do you have a curfew?                                       0.84               0.81              0.17               1076
                                                           (0.37)             (0.39)
Do you usually eat dinner with your                         0.90               0.87              0.11               1112
  parents?                                                 (0.31)             (0.34)
Does your mother have job?4                                 0.47               0.46              0.68                990
                                                           (0.50)             (0.50)
Does your father have a job?                                0.73               0.70              0.36                632
                                                           (0.44)             (0.46)
Notes: In Columns 1 and 2, means reported with standard errors in parentheses. Column 3 reports the p‐value for the t‐test
for the equality of means. ***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  Omitted ethnicity category is "not reported."
2
  This is the highest education level of either parent (which is the measure most schools in our sample collected).
3
  Academic subjects include math, science, English, social studies, and computers.
4
  The variables for mother's and father's job is reported only for households in which the given parent lives in the
household.
Table 2. Effect of Program on Computer Ownership and Usage
                               (1)          (2)          (3)                  (4)        (5)            (6)
                                                                           Hours of Computer Use Per Week
                                Owns a         Has Internet
                               Computer        Connection        Total      At Home     At School    At Other Location

Panel A. Computer Ownership and Usage

Treatment                        0.55             0.25           2.48         2.55        ‐0.01             ‐0.06
                               (0.03)***        (0.03)***      (0.48)***    (0.32)***    (0.17)            (0.29)
Observations                      852              831            755          755         755               755
Control mean                     0.26             0.17           4.23         0.76         1.59              1.89
Control std. dev.                0.44             0.38           5.22         2.31         2.32              3.98

                                             Hours of Computer Use Per Week
                                                                                                    Do you have a social
                                                                         Net‐
                              Schoolwork         Email       Games                       Other       networking page?
                                                                        working
Panel B. Activities on Computer

Treatment                             0.80             0.42           0.80        0.57       0.17            0.07
                                   (0.25)***        (0.12)***       (0.22)*** (0.18)***     (0.11)          (0.04)*
Observations                          671              671             671        671        671              692
Control mean                          1.89             0.25           0.84        0.57       0.62            0.53
Control std. dev.                     2.57             0.72           1.81        1.79       1.39            0.50
Notes: Data is from follow‐up survey completed by students. Regressions control for the sampling strata (school*year).
We also include controls for age, gender, ethnicity, grade, parental education, whether the student's primary language
is English, whether the student is an immigrant, whether the mother/father lives with the student, whether parents
have rules for how much TV the student watches, and whether the mother/father has a job. To avoid dropping
observations, for each variable, we create a dummy equal to 1 if the variable is missing for a student and code the
original variable as a 0 (so that the coefficients are identified from those with non‐missing values).
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table 3. Grades
                                            (1)             (2)             (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)            (7)          (8)
                                                                          Indicator for passing
                                                  Grades1
                                                                                  class

                                                       Academic                       Academic
                                        All subjects                 All subjects
                                                       Subjects2                      Subjects
Panel A. Class Grades

Treatment                                  ‐0.02         0.03           0.00            0.00
                                          (0.04)        (0.04)         (0.01)          (0.01)
Quarter 1 GPA3                             0.75          0.70           0.13            0.12
                                         (0.02)***     (0.02)***      (0.01)***       (0.01)***
Observations                              11514          7820          11514            7820
Number of students                         1036          1035           1036            1035
Control mean                                2.47         2.26           0.88            0.86
Control std. dev.                           1.36         1.36           0.33            0.35

                                                                  Grade                                      Indicator for passing class
                                                       English /           Social                              English /       Social
                                           Math                                        Science     Math                                     Science
                                                       Reading            Studies                              Reading        Studies
Panel B. Class Grades by Subject
Treatment                                      0.02        ‐0.09         0.10           0.08           0.01          ‐0.02        0.02         ‐0.01
                                              (0.06)      (0.06)        (0.06)         (0.06)         (0.02)        (0.02)       (0.02)       (0.02)
Quarter 1 GPA in academic subjects             0.69        0.65          0.76           0.73           0.15          0.11         0.12        0.13
                                            (0.03)***   (0.03)***      (0.03)***     (0.03)***       (0.01)***    (0.01)***    (0.01)***    (0.01)***
Observations                                   1886        2121          1784           1895           1886          2121         1784         1895
Number of students4                             969         903           921            960            969           903          921          960
Control mean                                   1.99         2.46         2.28           2.24           0.82           0.88        0.85          0.86
Control std. dev.                              1.35         1.32         1.36           1.36           0.38           0.32        0.35          0.35
Notes: Regressions restricted to 2nd semester. All regressions control for subject and for whether the class is in the 3rd or 4th quarter. Regressions
also include controls for the sampling strata (school*year) and the same controls as in Table 2.
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  Grades are coded as A‐4, B‐3, C‐2, D‐1, F‐0. +/‐ modifiers are set equal to 0.33 points. Passing is defined as D‐ or higher.
2
  "Academic subjects" include Math, English, Social Studies, Science, and Computers.
3
  The quarter 1 GPA is for all subjects in Columns 1 and 3, and for academic subjects only in Columns 2 and 4.
4
  Note that a small number of students take multiple science classes in the same term. A larger number of students take multiple English classes
concurrently (for example, English and Reading).
Table 4. California STAR Test
                                              (1)            (2)              (3)               (4)

                                          English / Language Arts                     Math

Panel A. Standardized Score
Treatment                                    ‐0.05          ‐0.05            ‐0.07             ‐0.06
                                            (0.06)         (0.05)           (0.06)            (0.05)
Prior year's test score                                     0.69                               0.62
                                                          (0.03)***                          (0.03)***
Observations                                 961             961             914                914
Control mean                                 0.00            0.00            0.00               0.00
Control std. dev.                            1.00            1.00            1.00               1.00

Panel B. Indicator for Proficiency1
Treatment                                    0.00              0.00             ‐0.02             ‐0.02
                                            (0.03)           (0.02)            (0.03)            (0.03)
Prior year's test score                                       0.25                                0.26
                                                            (0.01)***                           (0.01)***
Observations                                    961            961               914               914
Control mean                                   0.29            0.29              0.30              0.30
Control std. dev.                              0.46            0.46              0.46              0.46
Notes: Test scores are normalized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. See the notes to Table 2
for the list of controls. Regressions also control for the sampling strata (school*year). To avoid
dropping observations, for each control variable (including the prior year's test score), we create a
dummy equal to 1 if the variable is missing for a student and code the original variable as a 0 (so that
the coefficients are identified from those with non‐missing values).
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  This variable is coded as 1 if the student receive a 4 or 5 (out of 5) on the test, and 0 otherwise.




Table 5. Administrative Outcomes
                                              (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)                  (5)
                                        Total credits Total credits
                                                                         Unexcused         Number of        Still enrolled at
                                            in 3rd          in 4th
                                                                          Absences          Tardies            End of Year
                                           quarter         quarter
Treatment                                    0.04            ‐0.03          ‐0.37             ‐0.21                0.01
                                            (0.09)          (0.10)         (0.38)            (0.93)               (0.02)
Observations                                 1123            1123           1104              1104                 1123
R‐squared                                    0.40            0.35           0.34              0.24                 0.20
Control mean                                 5.36             5.48           4.94            11.53                 0.88
Control std. dev.                            1.87             1.91           7.84            17.00                 0.33
Notes: Regressions acontrol for the sampling strata (school*year), and the same list of control as Table 2. The variable
"Left School by End of Year" is coded as a 1 if the student had no grade data in the 4th quarter. ***, **, * indicates
significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Table 6. Effort in School, Software Use, and Computer Knowledge
                                 (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)               (5)               (6)                          (7)
                                           How often do you turn in homework on
                           How much time                                         Received help from How many hours per
                                                           time?
                            did you spend                                       teacher or classmate week do you spend
                            on last essay?  Always      Usually      Sometimes   via Internet / email on homework?
Panel A. Self‐Reported School Effort
Treatment                      0.04            ‐0.04         0.02           0.01               0.02                   ‐0.08
                              (0.81)          (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)             (0.03)                 (0.27)
Observations                   805              853          853            853                851                     825
Control mean                   4.38             0.47         0.37           0.16               0.37                    2.64
Control std. dev.             10.16             0.50         0.48           0.37               0.48                    3.52

                               Word                                     Educational
                                             Research Spreadsheet                          Usage Index2
                             Processing                                  software
Panel B. Uses a Computer for:1
Treatment                      0.02            ‐0.04         0.02           ‐0.03              ‐0.01
                             (0.04)           (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.04)             (0.02)
Observations                   707              707          707             707                707
Control mean                   0.36             0.75         0.12            0.32               0.39
Control std. dev.              0.48             0.43         0.33            0.47               0.26


                            Download file     Email a   Save a report Save a report                           Enter a formula in a Knowledge
                                                                                       Create a new folder
                            from Internet      file     to hard drive to flash drive                             spreadsheet         Index2

Panel C. Knows How to:
Treatment                             0.03          0.04      ‐0.04           0.06                  0.00               ‐0.03             0.01
                                     (0.04)        (0.04)    (0.04)          (0.04)                (0.04)             (0.03)            (0.02)
Observations                          707           707        707            707                   707                 707              707
Control mean                          0.49          0.46       0.62           0.55                  0.66                0.21             0.50
Control std. dev.                     0.50          0.50       0.49           0.50                  0.48                0.40             0.32
Notes: Data is from follow‐up survey completed by students. See the notes to Table 2 for the list of controls.
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  The questions in Panels B and C were only asked in the 2nd year of the program (2009‐2010).
2
  For both knowledge and usage, the index sums the number of questions for which the student reported "yes" and divides by the total number of
questions.
Table 7. Heterogeneity by Baseline Measures of Parental Oversight
                                                   (1)                  (2)              (3)                               (4)              (5)           (6)
                                                             Weekly Hours Computer Hours per week                       Grades in        Standardized STAR score
                                              Weekly Hours
                                                             Use on Video Games and   spent on                          Academic
                                              Computer Use                                                                               English            Math
                                                                Social Networking    homework                           Subjects1

Panel A. TV Rules

Treatment                                                 2.96                    2.28                   ‐0.10            0.02             ‐0.06             0.05
                                                       (0.95)***               (0.65)***                (0.55)           (0.09)           (0.09)           (0.10)
Parents have rules for TV at baseline                    ‐0.28                   ‐0.12                    0.30            0.02             ‐0.03             0.02
                                                        (0.83)                  (0.56)                  (0.47)           (0.08)           (0.08)           (0.09)
Parents have TV rules at baseline * treatment            ‐0.65                   ‐1.21                    0.03            0.01              0.01            ‐0.15
                                                        (1.09)                  (0.75)                  (0.63)           (0.10)           (0.11)           (0.12)
p ‐value for interaction + main treatment effect        0.01***                 0.01***                  0.82             0.57             0.38             0.11
Mean of interacted variable                              0.75                    0.74                    0.75             0.75              0.75             0.75
Observations                                              755                     671                     825             7820              961              914
Number of students                                        755                     671                     825             1035              961              914
Control mean of dependent variable                        4.23                    1.41                    2.64            2.26              0.00             0.00
Control std. dev.                                         5.22                    3.01                    3.52            1.36              1.00             1.00

Panel B. Curfew

Treatment                                                   4.02                    2.85                 ‐0.28            ‐0.02            ‐0.15             ‐0.22
                                                        (1.10)***               (0.73)***               (0.64)           (0.10)           (0.11)           (0.12)*
Has curfew at baseline                                      0.08                   ‐0.08                 ‐0.74            ‐0.08            ‐0.08              0.02
                                                          (0.95)                  (0.64)                (0.55)           (0.09)           (0.09)            (0.10)
Has curfew at baseline * treatment                         ‐1.60                   ‐1.67                  0.28             0.05             0.13              0.17
                                                          (1.22)                 (0.81)**               (0.72)           (0.11)           (0.12)            (0.14)
p ‐value for interaction + main treatment effect         0.01***                 0.01***                 1.00             0.56             0.62              0.38
Mean of interacted variable                                0.82                   0.81                   0.80              0.83             0.82              0.82
Observations                                                723                     641                   788             7501              926               880
Number of students                                          723                     641                   788              991              926               880
Control mean of dependent variable                          4.03                    1.29                  2.68             2.25             0.01              0.01
Control std. dev.                                           4.20                    2.12                  3.56             1.35             1.00              1.00
Notes: All regressions include controls for the sampling strata (school*year) and the same controls as in Table 2. GPA and test score regressions control for the pre‐
treatment level of the given variable. Mean and median reported baseline video game playing are 1.8 and 1 hours per week.
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  Course are restricted to "Academic subjects" (Math, English, Social Studies, Science, and Computers).
Table 8. Heterogeneity by Baseline Propensity to Use Computers for Non‐Educational Purposes
                                                   (1)                  (2)               (3)                             (4)               (5)           (6)
                                                             Weekly Hours Computer Hours per week                      Grades in         Standardized STAR score
                                              Weekly Hours
                                                             Use on Video Games and     spent on                       Academic
                                              Computer Use                                                                               English            Math
                                                                Social Networking      homework                        Subjects1
Panel A. Has social networking page

Treatment                                                 2.19                   1.24                    ‐0.38             ‐0.04           ‐0.08            ‐0.09
                                                       (0.61)***               (0.42)***                (0.35)            (0.05)          (0.06)           (0.07)
Has social networking page at baseline                   ‐0.55                   0.19                    ‐0.54             ‐0.30           ‐0.04            ‐0.09
                                                        (0.73)                  (0.51)                  (0.42)          (0.07)***         (0.07)           (0.08)
Has social networking page at baseline                    1.12                   0.47                     0.85              0.21            0.08             0.08
  * treatment                                           (1.00)                  (0.69)                  (0.57)           (0.09)**         (0.10)           (0.11)
p ‐value for interaction + main treatment effect        0.01***                 0.01***                  0.30             0.03**           1.00             0.91
Mean of interacted variable                              0.38                    0.38                    0.38               0.40            0.39             0.40
Observations                                              743                     660                     813              7729             951              905
Number of students                                        743                     660                     813              1023             951              905
Control mean of dependent variable                        4.17                   1.39                     2.67              2.25            0.01             0.01
Control std. dev.                                         5.05                   2.97                     3.54              1.36            1.00             1.00

Panel B. Video Game Playing

Treatment                                                   2.66                    1.61                 ‐0.46            ‐0.03            ‐0.07            ‐0.04
                                                        (0.79)***               (0.55)***               (0.45)           (0.07)           (0.07)           (0.08)
Played video games at baseline                              1.18                    0.47                  0.24            ‐0.13            ‐0.02            ‐0.03
                                                         (0.71)*                  (0.49)                (0.41)          (0.06)**          (0.07)           (0.08)
Played video games at baseline * treatment                 ‐0.12                   ‐0.26                  0.59             0.10             0.02            ‐0.05
                                                          (1.00)                  (0.69)                (0.57)           (0.09)           (0.10)           (0.11)
p ‐value for interaction + main treatment effect         0.01***                 0.01***                 0.70             0.27            0.45              0.15
Mean of interacted variable                                0.63                    0.63                  0.62              0.61             0.61             0.61
Observations                                                742                     660                   810             7663              944              897
Number of students                                          742                     660                   810             1014              944              897
Control mean                                                4.15                    1.35                  2.65             2.26             0.01             0.02
Control std. dev.                                           5.04                    2.90                  3.54             1.36             1.00             1.00
Notes: All regressions include controls for the sampling strata (school*year) and the same controls as in Table 2. GPA and test score regressions control for the pre‐
treatment level of the given variable. Mean and median reported baseline video game playing are 1.8 and 1 hours per week.
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  Course are restricted to "Academic subjects" (Math, English, Social Studies, Science, and Computers).
Appendix Table A1. Computer Ownership and Participation Rates

Number of students completing in‐class survey                              7337

Of those completing survey:
 Number of students without a computer                                     1636
 Percentage1                                                               0.24

Of those without a computer:
  Number of students returning baseline survey                              1123
  Percentage                                                                0.67
Notes:
1
  Percentages (Columns 3 and 5) exclude one school which did not provide figures on
the total number of eligible children.
Appendix Table A2. Attrition
                          (1)                  (2)               (3)             (4)
                         Appears in        Appears in
                          baseline         follow‐up         Appears in
                        adminstrative    administrative     grade dataset
                          dataset           dataset
Panel A. Administrative Outcomes

Treatment                    0.00              0.00              ‐0.01
                            (0.01)            (0.01)            (0.01)
Observations                 1123              1123              1123
Sample                        Full             Full               Full
Control mean                 0.99              0.99               0.99

                                       Returned                              Returned
                          Has STAR                            Has STAR
                                       follow‐up                             follow‐up
                           scores                              scores
                                         survey                                survey
Panel B. Test Scores and Follow‐up Survey

Treatment                    0.01              0.02              ‐0.01         0.00
                            (0.02)            (0.02)            (0.01)        (0.02)
Observations                 1123              1123               992          992
                                                             Restricted to those still
Sample                          Full              Full
                                                             enrolled at end of year
Control mean                    0.87             0.76             0.96         0.84
Notes: Regressions restricted to those students who enrolled in the program at
baseline (those who completed a baseline survey and a consent form).
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
Appendix Table A3. Heterogeneity by pre‐treatment performance
                                                    (1)        (2)                  (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                Grades in academic                           Standardized STAR score
                                                      Subjects1                          English                   Math
Treatment                                          0.03       0.15                  ‐0.06        ‐0.12       ‐0.10       ‐0.07
                                                 (0.10)      (0.10)                (0.05)       (0.08)      (0.05)*     (0.09)
Levels
Quarter 1 GPA in academic subjects                ‐0.01
 * Treatment                                     (0.04)
Quarter 1 GPA in academic subjects                 0.70
                                                (0.03)***
Standardized pre‐treatment STAR score (English)                                    0.01
 * Treatment                                                                      (0.05)
Standardized pre‐treatment STAR score (English)                                    0.69
                                                                                 (0.03)***
Standardized pre‐treatment STAR score (Math)                                                                   ‐0.05
 * Treatment                                                                                                  (0.05)
Standardized pre‐treatment STAR score (Math)                                                                    0.65
                                                                                                             (0.04)***
Quartiles2
In 2nd quartile at baseline                                               ‐0.27                   0.04                       0.02
 * Treatment                                                            (0.14)*                  (0.11)                    (0.13)
In 3rd quartile at baseline                                               ‐0.30                   0.12                       0.00
 * Treatment                                                           (0.13)**                  (0.13)                    (0.01)
In 4th quartile at baseline                                                0.02                   0.08                      ‐0.10
 * Treatment                                                             (0.13)                  (0.21)                    (0.13)
In 2nd quartile at baseline                                                0.79                   0.86                       0.79
                                                                      (0.10)***                 (0.08)***                 (0.09)***
In 3rd quartile at baseline                                                1.27                   1.62                       0.00
                                                                      (0.08)***                 (0.09)***                  (0.01)
In 4th quartile at baseline                                                1.91                   2.12                       1.53
                                                                      (0.09)***                 (0.16)***                 (0.10)***
Observations                                                7795          7795        865          865            790        790
Number of students                                          1032          1032        865          865            790        790
R‐squared                                                   0.37           0.36       0.58        0.58           0.48        0.46
Control mean                                                2.26           2.26       0.05        0.05           0.07        0.07
Control std. dev.                                           1.35           1.35       1.00        1.00           0.99        0.99
Notes: All regressions include controls for the sampling strata (school*year) and the same controls as in Table 2.
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  "Academic subjects" include Math, English, Social Studies, Science, and Computers.
2
  The quartiles are for the pre‐treatment levels of the dependent variables (quarter 1 GPA in Columns 1‐2, pre‐treatment English
STAR score in Columns 3‐4, and pre‐treatment Math STAR score in Columns 5‐6).
Appendix Table A4. Heterogeneity by demographic characteristics
                                             (1)        (2)                     (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)           (8)         (9)
                                                                                                                  Standardized STAR score
                                                      Grades in Academic Subjects1
                                                                                                        English                                Math

Treatment                                              0.17      0.01      0.00              ‐0.02       0.00        0.17           ‐0.12      ‐0.13       ‐0.05
                                                      (0.09)*   (0.06)    (0.12)            (0.11)      (0.07)      (0.15)         (0.12)     (0.07)*     (0.16)
Quarter 1 GPA in academic subjects                     0.70      0.70      0.70
                                                     (0.02)*** (0.02)*** (0.02)***
Pre‐treatment STAR score (English)                                                           0.69      0.69      0.69
                                                                                           (0.03)*** (0.03)*** (0.03)***
Pre‐treatment STAR score (Math)                                                                                                    0.62         0.62        0.62
                                                                                                                                (0.03)*** (0.03)*** (0.03)***
Minority student                                        ‐0.13                                 0.00                                 0.01
                                                       (0.16)                               (0.18)                                (0.19)
Minority student * treatment                            ‐0.17                                ‐0.04                                 0.08
                                                      (0.11)*                               (0.12)                                (0.13)
Female                                                              0.12                                  0.14                                 ‐0.11
                                                                  (0.06)*                              (0.07)**                               (0.07)
Female * treatment                                                  0.04                                 ‐0.10                                  0.14
                                                                   (0.09)                               (0.09)                                (0.10)
Grade 7                                                                        1.12                                   0.04                                  0.08
                                                                             (0.54)**                               (0.14)                                (0.86)
Grade 7 * treatment                                                            0.01                                  ‐0.24                                 ‐0.10
                                                                              (0.14)                                (0.16)                                (0.18)
Grade 8                                                                        1.17                                   0.15                                  0.10
                                                                             (0.53)**                               (0.16)                                (0.86)
Grade 8 * treatment                                                            0.04                                  ‐0.27                                  0.06
                                                                              (0.14)                                (0.17)                                (0.18)
p ‐value for interaction + main treatment effect        0.94        0.47         ‐           0.24        0.13           ‐          0.43        0.87           ‐
Mean of interacted variable                              0.83       0.50         ‐            0.83        0.51          ‐          0.83         0.51          ‐
Observations                                            7792        7820       7820           958         961         961           913         914         914
Number of students                                      1031        1035       1035           958         961         961           913         914         914
Control mean                                             2.25       2.26       2.26           0.00        0.00        0.00         0.00         0.00        0.00
Control std. dev.                                        1.36       1.36       1.36           1.00        1.00        1.00         1.00         1.00        1.00
Notes: All regressions include controls for the sampling strata (school*year) and the same controls as in Table 2. In the grade level regressions, the coefficients
for high school is included but not shown as there are very few students in the sample in high school.
***, **, * indicates significance at 1, 5 and 10%.
1
  GPA is in "Academic subjects" (Math, English, Social Studies, Science, and Computers).
