                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WAGE EFFECTS OF UNIONIZATION AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING COVERAGE
                        IN THE UNITED STATES

                                          Maury Gittleman
                                          Morris M. Kleiner

                                        Working Paper 19061
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19061


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the meetings of the Allied Social Science Associations
in San Diego in January 2013. We are grateful to our discussant, Mindy Marks, for her insightful
remarks. We also thank Tony Barkume and Hwikwon Ham for comments, Brooks Pierce for very
helpful discussions, William Nissan for research assistance, and Steve McClaskie for answering questions
about the NLSY79. We are appreciative of support from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and the Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. The views expressed here are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, any other agency
of the U.S. Department of Labor, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Maury Gittleman and Morris M. Kleiner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Wage Effects of Unionization and Occupational Licensing Coverage in the United States
Maury Gittleman and Morris M. Kleiner
NBER Working Paper No. 19061
May 2013
JEL No. J18,J24,J44,J5,J51,J82,J88,K2,K31,L43,L5,L51,L98

                                               ABSTRACT

Recent estimates in standard models of wage determination for both unionization and occupational
licensing have shown wage effects that are similar across the two institutions. These cross-sectional
estimates use specialized data sets, with small sample sizes, for the period 2006 through 2008. Our
analysis examines the impact of unions and licensing coverage on wage determination using new data
collected on licensing statutes that are then linked to longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Youth (NLSY79) from 1979 to 2010. We develop several approaches, using both cross-sectional
and longitudinal analyses, to measure the impact of these two labor market institutions on wage determination.
Our estimates of the economic returns to union coverage are greater than those for licensing requirements.


Maury Gittleman
Bureau of Labor Statistics
2 Massachusetts Avenue NE, Rm 4130
Washington, DC 20212
gittleman_m@bls.gov

Morris M. Kleiner
University of Minnesota
Humphrey School of Public Affairs
260 Humphrey Center
301 19th Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
kleiner@umn.edu
                                          I. Introduction


       During the past 50 years in the United States, union membership has been declining, but

the number of individuals who work in licensed occupations has been increasing (Kleiner and

Krueger 2010). Recent cross-sectional estimates in standard models of wage determination for

both of these important labor market institutions across the same data sets have shown similar

wage effects for the two, averaging about 15 percent (Kleiner and Krueger 2010 and Kleiner and

Krueger 2013). These estimates use specialized data sets during the period 2006 through 2008.

Given the small sample size and cross-sectional construction of the surveys used in these studies

on the wage outcomes of unions and occupational licensing, more research is needed to more

fully understand the specific outcomes of such regulations.

       We examine the impact of unions and licensing coverage on wage determination using

new data collected on licensing statutes that are then linked to longitudinal data from the

National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79) from 1979 to 2010. This approach provides a

fuller examination of the role of each of these institutions in the labor market.

       In our examination of these two labor market institutions, we first review past studies on

the role of both unions and occupational licensing on wage determination. The literature on wage

determination under unions is well-developed and includes several syntheses by researchers such

as Freeman and Medoff (1984), Lewis (1986), and Hirsch (2004). In contrast, the analysis of the

wage effects of occupational licensing generally consists of cross-sectional estimates with

appropriate human capital covariates but with few panel or time series examinations of the issue.

Exceptions to these approaches include panel estimates and longitudinal measures of regulation

(Kleiner 2006 and Thornton and Timmons 2013).




                                                  3
Next in the empirical section we present cross-sectional estimates using the NLSY79 as a

baseline in order to compare our estimates with those in the literature. Third, we specify the

longitudinal methods that we utilize in the NLSY79. Our approach uses switchers, or workers

who move into and out of unionization and licensing coverage, as well as individuals who do not

move between these categories. Fourth, we are able to estimate the influence of licensing by

linking each individual in the NLSY to whether the state they were in at the time of the switch

had a licensing law covering the relevant occupations. In the conclusions, we state the

implications for current and future research on the role of labor market institutions on wage

determination.



             II. Labor Market Research on Unions and Occupational Licensing

A. Unions

       Traditional economic theory has generally treated the actions of trade unions in the labor

market as a variant of monopoly behavior in product markets (Cartter 1959). For example, at the

time of contract negotiations, the trade union acts as a single voice representing its members.

Consequently, the employer is faced with a “single seller” of labor. Subsequent analysis by

Freeman and Medoff (1984) argues that unions have both a monopoly and voice effect. The

monopoly effect is similar to what has been presented by Cartter who suggests that supply is

reduced, but the voice effect provides benefits beyond just the financial ones. For example, these

include grievance procedures and the ability to have seniority determine promotions and wages,

rather than only the assignment by the employer.

       Unions also can engage in concerted activities such as strikes or work to rule which can

raise the cost to the firm of employing organized workers relative to nonunion ones. If the



                                                 4
company or plant wants to avoid these concerted activities, they have to pay the higher wage and

benefit package. Therefore, unions have the ability to reallocate the firm’s resources away from

shareholders or capital investment and toward workers. Recent estimates of these reallocations

are the present value of $40,500 per worker over the duration of the worker’s employment with

the firm (Lee and Mas 2012). To the extent that there are economic rents within the firm due to

patents, location advantages, or economies of scale, unions are able to reallocate part of those

resources toward union members. In addition, unions are given legitimacy and certain levels of

economic protection through federal and state legislation, such as the National Labor Relations

Act (Kleiner and Weil 2012). Consequently, through their ability to monopolize labor at the firm

level and public policy protections, unions should be able to drive up wages.

       Evidence from firms that have experienced new organizing drives shows that initially

unions have small effects on wage determination (Freeman and Kleiner 1990 and Lee and Mas

2012). However, unions appear to have larger influences over time (Lee and Mas 2012). Since

unions reached their highest level of organization and influence during the 1950s, their ability to

drive up wages could reflect the long duration of their existence within an establishment.

       There is a large body of labor market literature that has documented the wage gains from

unionization (Lewis 1986). One of the major efforts of the empirical work is to estimate the

union/nonunion relative wage differential or the wage gap. The estimates have been broken down

by age, sex, region, industry, and occupation. The methods used have varied from cross-sectional

and time-series approaches to panel estimates using difference-in-difference modeling. Further

methodological techniques have included the use of both selection correction approaches and

ones with vast arrays of observable covariates. A significant part of the literature has also

focused on the simple "threat" or "spillover" interpretation of the wage effects. The general



                                                  5
macro union relative wage effect estimates range from 15 to 20 percent (Lewis 1986). Updates in

the U.S. find these estimates are robust up to the early 2000s (Hirsch 2004).

B. Occupational Licensing

       In contrast to unionization, the stated objective of which is to protect workers, the

perceived goal of occupational licensing is to protect the public against incompetent,

untrustworthy, or irresponsible practitioners. Occupational regulation in the United States

generally takes three forms. The least restrictive form is registration, in which individuals file

their names, addresses, and qualifications with a government agency before practicing their

occupation. The registration process may include posting a bond or filing a fee. In contrast,

certification permits any person to perform the relevant tasks, but the government—or

sometimes a private, nonprofit agency—administers an examination and certifies those who have

achieved the level of skill and knowledge for certification. For example, travel agents and car

mechanics are generally certified but not licensed. The toughest form of regulation is licensure;

this form of regulation is often referred to as “the right to practice.” Under licensure laws,

working in an occupation for compensation without first meeting government standards is

illegal. In 2003, the Council of State Governments estimated that more than 800 occupations

were licensed in at least one state, and more than 1,100 occupations were licensed, certified, or

registered (Council on Licensure, Enforcement, and Regulation [CLEAR] 2004). The vast

majority of occupations are licensed in some states and not in others.

       Figure 1 shows trends in the growth of unionization and occupational licensing from

1950 to 2008 (Kleiner and Krueger 2013). Licensing data for earlier periods are available only

at the state/occupational level; the data gathered through the Gallup and Westat surveys for 2006

and 2008 are denoted with a dashed line in the figure and represent the attainment of an



                                                  6
occupational license (see Kleiner and Krueger, 2010 and 2013). Despite possible problems in

both data series, occupational licensing clearly is rising, and unionization is clearly declining.1

By 2008, approximately 29 percent of workers polled in the Westat survey said they were

required to have a government-issued license to do their job, compared with about 12.4 percent

who said they were union members in the Current Population Survey (CPS) for the same year.

Since occupational licensing experienced its more rapid growth since the 1970s, its economic

impact may not be as high as unionization which has had a longer period to use collective

bargaining to enhance earnings.

         A basic explanation of occupational licensing suggests that administrative procedures

regulate the supply of labor in the market. The regulators screen entrants to the profession and

bar those whose skills or character traits suggest a tendency toward low-quality output. The

regulators further monitor incumbents and discipline those whose performance is below

standards, with punishments that may include revocation of the license needed to practice.

Assuming that entry and ongoing performance are controlled in these ways, we would expect the

quality of service in the profession to be raised by occupational licensing, but supply and access

to services to be diminished.

         Additional costs could include imposition of fines and screening to prevent expelled

practitioners from reentering the occupation or the requirement that incumbents put up capital

that would be forfeited upon loss of the license or incompetent or unscrupulous behavior. Entry

requirements limit supply and create monopoly rents within the licensed occupation. The threat



1
  Growth in employment in occupations requiring licensing can be decomposed into shares attributable to growth in
employment in occupations requiring licensing and to occupations becoming newly licensed. Kleiner (2006) finds
that, for the state of Minnesota between 1990 and 2000, three-quarters of the growth was due to the first factor.
While the general tendency over time is for more occupations to require licenses in more states, it seems safe to say
that the majority of growth in occupational licensing is coming from employment increases in occupations in which
licenses were already required.

                                                          7
of losing these monopoly rents could, in principle, give incentives to incumbents to meet high

standards. The rents also could motivate potential entrants to invest in high levels of training in

order to gain admittance. Demand for the services of licensed workers could increase due to

higher perceived quality and lower risk, but demand might also decrease for some segments of

the occupation if some consumers demand lower quality services that are precluded by the

licensing procedures (Shapiro 1986). An outward shift in demand could accentuate the increase

in the price of services resulting from diminished supply, and further boost provider incomes.

These models of licensing assume that consumers can choose among three markets: a market for

mature producers known to sell high-quality services, a market for mature producers known to

produce low-quality services, and a market for young producers whose quality of service (low or

high) is not known by the consumer at the time of purchase (Shapiro 1986). The result is that

seekers of high-quality services gain by regulation and seekers of low-quality services are worse

off because prices are higher and choices more limited.

       The source of market influence for occupational licensing is that the members of the

occupation can manipulate the pass rate to restrict entry and raise wages (Friedman 1962;

Maurizi 1974; and Pagliero 2010). Across a large number of recent studies on occupational

licensing, which are primarily cross-sectional in methodology, the main result is that

occupational licensing attainment increases wages by approximately 15 percent (Bryson and

Kleiner 2010). This result is remarkably similar to those found for unionization. Unfortunately,

the ability to examine the influence of licensing on wage determination using panel data analysis

has been limited (Kleiner 2006, 2013; and Thornton and Timmons 2013).

       In comparing licensing to unionization, the expectation is that unionization would have a

larger influence on wage determination than licensing because unions showed sizeable growth



                                                  8
during the 1940s through the 1950s, well before much of the growth of occupational licensing,

which occurred after the 1970s. Several studies on the impact of licensing over time show that its

influence grows over time as the occupations and administrative agencies are able to increase

requirements for entry and restrict the supply of new practitioners (Kleiner and Vorotnikov 2012;

Thornton and Timmons, 2013). To the extent that duration of the labor market institution

matters in wage determination, then, unions would be the dominant labor market institution. In

the following segments of the paper we show how the estimated longitudinal approach to unions

and licensing is a better method of evaluating the wage effects of these two labor market

institutions.



                                           III. The Data

        Given our interest in applying longitudinal methods to the analysis of the impact of

unionization and licensing on wages, the main dataset we use is the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth, 1979 (NLSY79). The NLSY79 is a nationally representative sample of young

men and women who were between the ages of 14 and 22 at the time of their first interview in

1979. Individuals have been surveyed annually beginning in 1979 and biennially beginning with

1994. The latest data available are for 2010. The NLSY79 has been widely used in studies of

the labor market, because of the wealth of information it collects in this area.

        The NLSY79 collects wage information on up to five jobs in each wave of the survey.

For the purposes of our analysis, however, we restrict attention to the current/most recent job,

also known as the Current Population Survey (CPS) job, in part because other labor market

variables that we need are more readily available for this job. For brevity, we will refer to this

job as the current one. To be included in our samples, we generally require, for each year for the



                                                  9
current job, that an individual must be working for pay, have a valid wage, and a valid

occupation in the data. In addition, the individual must not be enrolled in school (as of May of

the survey year) and must have valid information on the state of residence (which is needed to

determine whether the occupation requires a license).2 Further, to limit the influence of wage

outliers, we also require that the wage be higher than one-half the real value of the minimum

wage as of January 1, 19813 ($3.35 in 1981 dollars) and be lower than $75 per hour (in 2010

dollars).4

         The occupation coding that the NLSY79 uses has changed over time. From 1979 through

2000, it uses the U.S. Census Bureau’s 1970 occupation codes, while, from 2002 on, it uses the

Census codes for 2000. Characteristics of the sample are summarized in Table 1.

         Despite the breadth of the labor market data collected in the NLSY79, that survey, in

common with other large-scale surveys, does not collect information on whether a license is

required for the individual’s job. Thus, it is necessary to impute that information, which we do

by using information from state laws for each individual in the sample. CareerOneStop, which is

sponsored by the Employment and Training Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor,

maintains a Web site containing a listing of occupations requiring licenses by state

(http://www.acinet.org/licensedoccupations/, accessed April 13, 2012). This information is

gathered by each state’s Labor Market Information unit, under a grant from the U.S. Department

2
  Licensing information is not available for the District of Columbia, so all individuals with residence there are
eliminated from the sample. As discussed below, our information is on licensing at the state level, so that we do not
have information on requirements at the local or federal levels.
3
  The deflator we use is the consumer price index research series (CPI-U-RS) from the Bureau of Labor of Statistics.
4
  Our results are not sensitive to the imposition of the $75 limit, which was decided upon because of the way wage
data are collected and computed in the NLSY79. The NLSY79 computes hourly wage rates by collecting a rate of
pay and a time unit for that rate of pay (for example, hourly, weekly, annually). There is no top coding, but if an
individual’s rate of pay exceeds a maximum, his/her hourly wage will be marked as missing. From 1979 to 1993,
the maximum rate of pay for any time unit was $99,999.99; it was raised by a factor of 10 in 1994, and there were
further upward adjustments thereafter. Thus, the lowest maximum rate of pay in real terms occurs in 1993. If
individuals reporting annually are working 2,000 hours a year, then the lowest maximum is equivalent to somewhat
less than $75 per hour in 2010 dollars.

                                                         10
of Labor. The website provides four pieces of information for each listing: occupation, license

name, licensing agency, and state. A screenshot of a page of the Web site is shown in Appendix

A.

       The occupations are based on those in the Standard Occupational Classification (SOC)

system manual, so that each one listed either corresponds to a six-digit SOC code or fits neatly

into one. Given that the 2000 Census codes are SOC-based, it is straightforward to map the

occupations requiring licenses in a given state to their corresponding 2000 Census codes. For

those 2000 Census codes involving at least some licensing requirement, we wish to assess

whether the state requires all those in a given 2000 Census code to hold a license or whether only

some in that code are required to have a license. Such partial licensing can come about for two

sets of reasons. First, the group for which a license is required may be a subset of the 2000

Census code. For example, some states require licenses of electricians who are contractors but

not of other electricians. As another example, certain licenses may be required of certain food

and beverage workers only if they are employed in the gaming industry. Second, even if the

occupation in the statute is the same as that in the 2000 Census code, it may be the case that not

everyone is required to have a license in that occupation. Common examples of this type are the

engineering professions, in which licenses are required but not everyone has one. We have more

information on the first type of partial licensing than on the second. At the end of our efforts, we

have a dataset which classifies every possible state by 2000 Census occupation pair into one of

three categories: (1) no licensing requirement; (2) a license is required for some of the job-

holders in the occupation; and (3) a license is required of all occupational incumbents.

       A similar but more error-prone procedure is used to categorize each state by 1970 Census

occupation pair. As with the 2000 Census codes, the occupations requiring licenses in each state



                                                11
need to be matched to a 1970 Census code. In many cases, this process is straightforward

because many of the licensed occupations that have their own codes in the 2000 classification

system had them in the 1970 system as well, or fit neatly into 1970 categories. When this is not

the case, however, we have to surmount the obstacle that the occupation classification system has

undergone major changes over the last four decades, particularly between the 1970 and 1980

Censuses and the 1990 and the 2000 ones. As there is no crosswalk from 1970 to 2000 that we

are aware of, for some occupations it was necessary to track back over the different classification

schemes to arrive at the best match in 1970.5

         Once the categorization of the state by 1970 occupation pairs is complete, we are in

possession of a current licensing scheme that works for two different occupation classification

systems. What we really want, however, are licensing schemes for every survey year from 1979

to 2000 using 1970 codes and ones for 2002 to the present using 2000 codes. Put differently, we

want to know the starting date for the licensing requirement for all the state by occupation pairs.6

Unfortunately, we know of no source for this information. Instead, we are forced to make

different sets of assumptions about how the current licensing schemes that we do have may have

evolved over time and examine how sensitive our results are to these sets of assumptions. As we

indicate below, for one set of assumptions, we have been able to narrow the number of

occupations with a licensing requirement start date that needs researching down to the hundreds

5
  Detailed crosswalks are available for the changes from 1970 to 1980 (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1989) and 1990
to 2000 (Scopp 2003); the changes from 1980 to 1990 are quite minor, especially in comparison. The closest we
have seen to a 1970–2000 concordance is the valiant effort of Meyer and Osborne (2005) to put the occupation
codes for the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 Censuses onto a single, consistent basis. While we find their work
to be a useful check on ours, we cannot apply it directly for a few reasons. First, our purpose is somewhat different
in that, from the occupation or license name, we often know that we are working with a subset of a 2000 code rather
than having to take all occupations in a 2000 code and match it to a 1970 code or codes. Second, for many 2000
codes there is no 1970 match in the Meyer and Osborne (2005) work. Third, it made sense for Meyer and Osborne
to aggregate occupations to get better matches over time, but, in general, it does not for us, because we don’t want to
combine occupations that may be treated differently as far as licensing requirements are concerned.
6
  Implicitly, this formulation assumes that no occupations became unlicensed during the period, an assumption,
which while not literally true, is probably not far off the mark (Timmons and Thornton 2013).

                                                          12
from the thousands and have been able to check state statutes to see when these occupations first

became licensed.

           Our first step in the general process of assigning start dates is to take all the occupations

that have some sort of licensing requirement in the current data, under both the 1970 and 2000

codes, and place them into one of three categories based on our knowledge of their licensing

history. Those occupations with such a lengthy history of licensing that widespread

requirements were in place before the start of the NLSY79 we placed in an Always licensed

group, or group I. Examples of the Always licensed group include hairdressers, physicians, and

accountants. Those occupations with little or no history of licensing requirements we placed in a

Rarely licensed category (group III), which includes roofers, cooks, and upholsterers. The

remaining occupations we placed in a middle group, the Moderately licensed (group II), which

includes such occupations as electricians, librarians, and massage therapists.7

           We use three different assumptions in terms of the timing of the start dates for licensing

requirements. In order to simplify, we assume, with the one exception we note below, that the

start date for all occupations in a group either precedes or follows the start of the NLSY79 panel.

For the Always group, the start date is prior to the beginning of the panel in all three scenarios.

For the Moderately group, it is prior to the panel in the second and third scenarios, and for the

Rarely group, it is prior to the panel only in the third.

           We are also interested in testing the sensitivity of the results to the treatment of the state

by occupation pairs in which some licensing is required, given that an individual may be in a

portion of the occupation not covered by licensing requirements or may be in a covered portion

but not actually have a license. We place such pairs either with the wholly licensed or with the

unlicensed. While the three scenarios times the two ways of treating the partially licensed
7
    A complete list for each group is available upon request.

                                                            13
potentially lead to six different sets of assumptions, when only the Always occupations have a

start date prior to the beginning of the panel, we only consider the case in which the partially

licensed are treated as wholly licensed. That is because there are few occupations in group I that

are not universally licensed. In the case with only wholly licensed occupations, we have actual

dates for the start of licensing requirements for the Moderately and Rarely occupations. Table 2

lays out the five different sets of assumptions we consider.

       The licensing definition names on Table 2, which will be used later, in the text and on

other tables, have two parts. The Roman numeral is the highest number of the occupation groups

that are assumed to have starting dates prior to the NLSY79 panel. Whole indicates that only

occupations for which a license is required of the entire occupation is included, while Partial

suggests that those occupations for which a license is required for just a portion of the

incumbents are included as well.

       To be clear about the interpretation of Table 2, let’s consider the line with the licensing

definition name of III-Whole. The second column entry of No indicates that occupations are

only considered to require licenses when they are needed for the entire occupation. All three

occupation groups—Always, Moderately, and Rarely—are included, so normally this would

mean that we are assuming that the state by occupation pairs in each of these groups had

licensing requirements beginning before the start of the NLSY79 panel. That is the case for the

Always group, but the asterisks on Moderately and Rarely indicate that we have researched the

relevant state by occupation pairs and determined the actual start date for the licensing

requirements.

       In Table 1, we show the prevalence of licensing requirements in our samples under each

of the five definitions. By far, the most inclusive definition is the III-Partial, at an average of



                                                  14
about 31 percent over the period. Next comes II-Partial at 18 percent and then II-Whole at 13

percent. The two remaining definitions include less than 11 percent of the sample. By way of

comparison, Kleiner and Krueger (2013) estimate that 29 percent of the U.S. workforce attained

a governmental license in 2008, but their estimates include those licensed not only by the state,

but also by the federal and local governments. Their state-licensed only value was about 23

percent in 2008.



                                          IV. Empirical Methods

        We are interested in the influence of two labor market institutions on wages. At the center

of the analysis is the question, what is the impact of occupational licensing requirements on

wages? Similarly, we are also interested in measuring the wage effect of unions, the presence of

which we will measure by whether an individual is covered by a collective bargaining

agreement.8 While it is easy enough to state what we wish to measure, getting unbiased

estimates is difficult for the usual reason: Even after controlling for the standard human capital

characteristics when running a wage regression, one might still suspect that those who enter

licensed occupations or obtain union coverage might differ from those who do not in ways that

are unobservable to an econometrician. As a result, the variables of interest may be correlated

with the error term, which would render ordinary least squares biased.

        To address our questions, we try a number of different approaches. Our multivariate

analysis begins with cross-sectional regressions with fairly standard controls, an approach which

allows us to compare our results to past research. In addition, in the case of unions, Freeman

(1984) argues that such an approach is superior to fixed effects, at least when one uses the short


8
 It is possible to determine union membership only in selected years in the NLSY79, but union coverage is
available in all years, except for 1994, when the union questions were not asked of everyone.

                                                       15
(two-year panels) that are produced from matching Current Population Surveys from adjacent

years, because of a greater robustness to measurement error.

       Our second approach is to attempt to control for the unobserved heterogeneity that may

be biasing the results by including proxies for ability. The indicators of ability we use are Armed

Services Vocational Aptitude Battery (ASVAB) test scores, which have been standardized and

adjusted for year and quarter of birth. These tests consist of 10 categories: paragraph

comprehension, general science, arithmetic reasoning, mathematics knowledge, word

knowledge, mechanical comprehension, numerical operations, electronic information, auto and

shop information, and coding speed.

       Our third and fourth methods take advantage of the longitudinal structure of the NLSY79.

We employ a nonparametric approach that classifies individuals on the basis of their licensing

and union statuses in adjacent waves of the survey. Wage growth is then compared across the

different categories, yielding the estimates of interest. For instance, in the simplest case, we

compare the wage growth of those whose licensing status did not change to those who moved

into a job requiring a license and those who moved out of such a job.

       Finally, in our last approach, we use a more formal longitudinal method and estimate

fixed-effects regressions. If one assumes that there is a fixed effect for each individual that is

independent of sector and that is the source of the correlation between the sector status variables

and the error term, then fixed effects will provide unbiased estimates.

       In the analysis, we focus on one of the licensing definition variables, III-Whole, which is

the one that includes our research on licensing requirement start dates for state by occupation

pairs in the Moderately and Rarely categories. Besides the greater accuracy that comes from this

research, we also gain an important source of variation, since we can observe occupations before



                                                 16
and after they were licensed in a given state. As one of our robustness checks, however, we will

also present results for the other licensing variables.

       In addition, we know that all the licensing definition variables are affected by

measurement error, an issue that is of particular importance when we do fixed-effects estimation.

To address the measurement error issue directly, we will use techniques developed by Bollinger

(1996, 2001) to bound the licensing parameters.



                                             IV. Results

       Before turning to the multivariate analysis, it is of interest to examine briefly how those

who face licensing requirements differ from those who do not. In Table 3, we show for each

definition of licensing and for both the entire sample and the full-time only sample, means for

certain key characteristics. Across all the definitions, those who face licensing requirements tend

to have higher levels of schooling, to be somewhat older, to be somewhat less likely to be

African-American, and to be more apt to work in the government. Except for the most inclusive

definition, union coverage and percentage female are somewhat higher in the licensed sector.

These estimates are similar though not identical to the basic data found in the Princeton Data

Improvement Initiative (PDII) on occupational licensing (Kleiner and Krueger 2013).

A. Cross-Sectional Estimates

       Table 4 presents cross-sectional estimates of the effects of licensing requirements and

union coverage on the log of wages. We use the III-Whole licensing definition and begin with

the entire sample results. In the first column of estimates, to get a sense of the upper bound on

the impact of licensing using this variable, we show the results of using an indicator for a




                                                  17
licensing requirement as the sole regressor.9 We get a coefficient of 0.281 log points, similar to

the 0.297 log points that Kleiner and Krueger (2013) estimate in a similar model for attaining a

license. Second, we add what we will refer to as our standard set of regressors. These include

demographic and human capital variables (indicators for female, Hispanic and African-

American, as well as controls for years of schooling, potential experience, and potential

experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government employment, self-employment,

part-time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry,10 state of residence, and year.

The coefficient is sharply reduced, falling to 0.123 log points, suggesting that a good portion of

the higher pay for those licensed is coming from such individuals having higher levels of

schooling and other characteristics that are rewarded in the labor market.

         Our next specifications add occupation controls. Though their use has become more

common in labor economics in recent years, we recognize that controversy remains. We use

them to enable within-occupation comparisons of those with licenses to those without, with the

level of occupation aggregation going from major to two-digit to detailed. 11 The addition of

major occupation dummies (third column) leads to a further significant reduction in the return to

licensing in percentage terms, with the coefficient declining to 0.078 log points. Thus, it seems

that licensed occupations belong disproportionately to major occupations that tend to be higher

paying even in the absence of licensing requirements. There is still considerable heterogeneity

within major occupations, so we could be comparing, say, licensed electricians to unlicensed

plumbers. The replacement of controls for major occupations with those for two-digit

occupations (fourth column) results has almost no impact, but when controls are added for


9
  As will be noted later, because of measurement error, this is not actually an upper bound.
10
   There are 20 categories for major industry under the 1970 codes and 13 under the 2000 codes.
11
   Under the 1970 codes, there are 12 categories for major occupations, 44 for two-digits, and 450 for detailed.
Under the 2000 codes, there are 10 categories for major occupations, 22 for two-digits, and 454 for detailed.

                                                         18
detailed occupations (fifth column), the coefficients move very close to zero and are not

statistically significant.

        Our primary information on licensing refers to state by detailed occupation, although our

research of state legislation has added some variation by year for this licensing definition.

Because we include state and detailed occupation effects, along with year dummies, for licensing

to have a significant measured impact on log wages, it must be the case that, all else equal, those

in detailed occupations in the licensed states must either be higher paid than those in the same

occupations in the states not requiring licenses or be higher paid relative to those in the same

occupation in the same state when it did not require a license. According to the results in this

table, that is not the case for the entire sample.

        There are, however, two reasons to regard the results for the detailed occupations with

some caution. First, there are a large number of detailed occupations, which would exacerbate

the bias toward zero that results from measurement error. We will return to the impact of

measurement error in the next section. Second, there is a question of how one is identifying the

coefficient on licensing when detailed occupational controls are included. It turns out that, under

the present licensing definition, only about one-fifth to one-quarter of employment is in detailed

occupations in which some individuals are licensed and some are not, with most employment in

occupations in which no individuals are licensed and a small amount (about 1 percent) in

occupations in which all individuals are licensed. Thus, the coefficient on licensing will be

identified on a subset of occupations, though a subset that includes the majority of occupations

requiring licensing.

        What are the results for union coverage? The coefficient on that variable is always

statistically significant and is 0.155 log points for the second specification, 0.180 log points with



                                                     19
major occupation dummies, and around 0.19 log points for the two remaining specifications.

Thus, in contrast to the case for licensing, with unionization the results for occupation controls

indicate a slight tendency for those covered by a collective-bargaining agreement to be in

occupations that tend to be low paying.

           Turning briefly to the results for the full-time only sample,12 we see a similar pattern for

the licensing coefficients, although starting from a lower base. The coefficient when licensing is

the sole regressor is 0.247 log points, which falls to 0.096 points with standard controls, 0.059

and 0.066 points with major and two-digit occupations, and very close to zero with detailed

occupations. The union coefficients tend to be 0.01 log points lower than in the full sample

results.

           Our second cross-sectional approach to estimating the returns to licensing requirements

involves the inclusion of the ASVAB test scores as proxies for ability in the second through fifth

specifications noted above. These results are presented in the second panel of Table 4. It turns

out that the inclusion of the ASVAB test scores has virtually no impact on the licensing

coefficients. It is not the case that the ASVAB scores are uncorrelated with both wages and with

membership in a licensed occupation. Rather, it seems that, conditional on the inclusion of the

standard controls, there is little relationship between the ASVAB scores and the licensing

indicators. Similarly, the results for union coverage with the proxies for ability included are little

different from those without them.

B. Longitudinal Estimates

           Nonparametric. We begin the longitudinal analysis with a simple, nonparametric

comparison of the growth of average log wages by group, with the groups defined on the basis of

how licensing and union status evolved over time. In the first panel of Table 5, we show the
12
     The part-time indicator is not needed as a regressor in this sample.

                                                             20
average growth of log wages in adjacent survey years for three groups: (1) those who move out

of jobs requiring licenses; (2) those who move into jobs requiring licenses; and (3) those whose

licensing status does not change, which combines those who remain in unlicensed jobs with

those who remain in licensed jobs. One can estimate the return to licensing either by subtracting

the growth of the average log wages of those in category (1) from that of those in category (3) or

by subtracting the growth in average log wages in category (3) from that of those in category (2).

If the return to licensing is stable over time, then the two estimates should be equal.

       The point estimate derived from comparing those who move out of licensed occupations

to all who do not move is zero. The point estimates derived from comparing those who move

into licensed occupations to all stayers is 0.01 log points and is not statistically significant. In

other words, according to this approach, the return to licensing is estimated to be quite small or

nonexistent.

       The second panel repeats the analysis in terms of union coverage instead of licensing

status. Both possible estimates of union coverage are 0.06 log points and statistically significant,

which is considerably lower than the estimates from the cross-sectional results, but consistent

with other findings that show longitudinal results are smaller.

       Finally, for the purposes of the third panel, we examine switches into and out of licensing

and union coverage simultaneously. In any given year, an individual may be in one of four

categories in terms of union coverage and license requirements. Given that, there are sixteen

different possible patterns (4 by 4) for two adjacent years. Excluding those cases in which an

individual switches into licensing and out of union coverage or vice versa, these categories can

be summarized into the seven categories presented in the third panel. Making the appropriate

subtractions yields estimates of returns to licensing and to union coverage or to the sum of the



                                                  21
two. The only cases in which the wage changes are statistically different from those for the no

switch group are those for switching into and out of a union job, in both cases with the licensing

status unchanged. Both imply a return to unions of 0.06 log points, as in the second panel. The

group in which individuals move into a job with union coverage and requiring a license tends to

have fairly fast wage growth, but because that group tends to be a small one (for the number of

observations, see Appendix B), the difference in wage growth for this group and that with no

change in either status is not statistically significant.

        Fixed Effects. We now turn to a formal longitudinal analysis using fixed effects, with

results summarized in Table 6. We estimate a series of regressions, similar to those in our cross-

sectional analysis, except our standard set of regressors needs no longer to include variables that

remain constant over time, namely, the indicators for female, Hispanic, and African-American.

The first specification for the entire sample, the one with standard controls, suggests that those in

licensed occupations earn 0.038 log points more than their unlicensed counterparts.

Identification of this effect comes from the switches of individuals from an unlicensed job to a

licensed one or vice versa. Through our sample criteria—in particular, the requirement that

individuals cannot be enrolled in school—we have tried to avoid cases in which individuals are

in one unlicensed occupation finishing training before switching to a different occupation that is

licensed. In such a case, the individual might receive a wage increase, not as a result of

licensing, but simply because the individual finished training or moved to a different occupation.

As additional tests, we also try specifications in which we include occupation controls, ranging

from major to detailed. Inclusion of major occupation controls nearly halves the coefficient to

0.020 log points, a small reduction in an absolute sense. Moving to the next level of occupation




                                                   22
detail actually increases the returns to licensing somewhat, to 0.026 points. Finally, when

detailed controls are included, the coefficient is reduced to essentially zero.

       As mentioned earlier, the attenuation bias of measurement error is more pronounced in

the presence of fixed effects (Griliches and Hausman 1986). Thus, it will be of interest to see

what the bounds are when one takes into account measurement error.

       The results for union premiums in the fixed-effects models are quite different from those

for licensing returns. Irrespective of which occupational controls are included, those with union

coverage are estimated to have earnings exceeding those who do not by 0.12–0.13 log points, all

else equal. Thus, the results fall somewhere in between those from the nonparametric

longitudinal approach and those from the cross-sectional approaches.

       Turning to the results for the full-time only sample, the same general patterns are present,

but the coefficients for licensing tend to be a bit lower, as are those for union coverage.



                                      VI. Robustness Checks

       In this section, we engage in four exercises to check on the robustness of our results in

the previous section. First, we rerun the results using our alternative definitions of licensing.

Second, we bound the licensing parameters, taking into account measurement error. Third, we

rerun the results using just the 2002–2008 period, when measurement error is apt to be less of an

issue because we do not need to recode the statute date to 1970 codes. Finally, we broaden our

search for the impact of licensing, by considering aspects of nonwage compensation.

A. Alternative Definitions of Licensing

       We now see if the results are robust to our alternative definitions of licensing, both those

for the cross-sectional ones of Table 4 and the longitudinal ones of Table 6. Though the



                                                 23
licensing definition used thus far, III-Whole, includes all three groups—Always, Moderately,

and Rarely—it actually has the lowest incidence of employment in occupations requiring

licenses (Table 1). This low incidence rate is primarily due to its exclusion of occupations in

which only part of the occupation requires a license.13

         How do the results for the other definitions compare to those for III-Whole? In the cross-

sectional results for the entire sample (Table 7), first, when it is the sole regressor, licensing has a

coefficient ranging from 0.160 to 0.285 log points, with an almost perfect inverse relationship

between the restrictiveness of the definition and the impact. Thus, the results we have seen

already are near the upper edge of this range, something that will be the case for all

specifications. Second, the coefficients are reduced by more than one half with the inclusion of

the standard controls, with the returns to licensing now running from 0.069 to 0.126 log points.

The addition of major occupation dummies leads to a further significant reduction in the return to

licensing in percentage terms, with the coefficients now ranging from 0.022 to 0.089 log points.

As already seen, the replacement of controls for major occupations with those for two-digit

occupations does not have a substantial additional impact, but when controls are added for

detailed occupations, the coefficients move very close to zero and are never statistically

significant, just as was the case for III-Whole.

         For union coverage, the results are quite robust across the different definitions of

licensing. The coefficient on that variable is always statistically significant and is consistently

0.16 log points for the second specification, 0.18 log points with major occupation dummies, and

0.19 points with two-digit and detailed occupation controls.




13
  The incidence rate of III-Whole is even lower than that for II-Whole because the latter actually includes the small
set of Always occupations that are partially licensed, while the former does not.

                                                         24
       The results for the full-time only sample are similar to those for the entire sample. The

coefficients for licensing tend to be 0.01–0.02 points lower, but the patterns as covariates are

added tend to be virtually identical. The difference between the returns to union coverage in the

two samples tends to be somewhat smaller, about 0.01 points.

       With the fixed-effects approach (Table 8), the parameters tend to be fairly robust across

different licensing definitions, with those for III-Whole occurring near the upper end of a narrow

range. The first specification for the entire sample, the one with standard controls, suggests that

those in licensed occupations earn 0.027–0.044 log points more than their unlicensed

counterparts. Inclusion of major occupation controls tends to lower the return to licensing by

about 0.01–0.02 log points, a small reduction in an absolute sense, but more substantial in

percentage terms. Moving to the next level of occupation detail tends to have less effect, but, if

anything, the direction is toward increasing the returns to licensing. Finally, when detailed

controls are included, the coefficients on licensing are sharply reduced. They are, however,

statistically significant in two cases, though always below 0.02 log points. Union premiums tend

to be quite robust to licensing definition.

       Turning to the results for the full-time only sample, the same general patterns are present,

but the coefficients for licensing tend to be a bit lower, as are those for union coverage.

B. Bounding the Licensing Parameters

       Bollinger (1996, 2001) extends the work of Aigner (1973) and others to show how

bounds can be placed on the parameters of binary regressors, such as the licensing variables, and

how such bounds can be tightened when auxiliary information is available on misclassification

rates. These bounds are estimated on the assumptions that only the variable of interest is

mismeasured and measurement error is independent of the other regressors. While such



                                                 25
conditions may not hold exactly—for instance, there is likely measurement error in the union

coverage variable as well—we think the bounds that can be calculated are still informative.

       In general, there are two types of misclassification rates when dealing with binary

variables. Let p equal the probability of reporting the individual as licensed when that person is

not and q equal the probability of reporting the individual as not licensed when the person

actually has a license. Bounds can be computed without knowledge of p and q, but Bollinger

also shows that information on these misclassification rates can enable a narrowing of the

bounds.

       The PDII 2008 was conducted by Westat, and analyzed by Kleiner and Krueger (2013),

provides a source of such information. Individuals are first asked:

       “Do you have a license or certification issued by a federal, state, or local government

       agency to do your job?”

To distinguish between those who have a license and those who have a certification, those who

say “yes” are then asked:

       “Would someone who does not have a license or certificate be legally allowed to do your

       job?”

Those who answer “no” to the second question after having said “yes” to the first question are

coded as licensed, while the remaining individuals are not. One can then consider this variable

as providing a true measure of licensing.

       Using the occupation codes and states of residence in the Westat survey, we can then

recode individuals as being licensed or not based on the five licensing definitions that we used

for the NLSY79. For each of these definitions, one can calculate a p and a q. Using formulas

from Bollinger (1996, 2001), one can then develop bounds for the licensing coefficients. The



                                                26
lower bounds are the actual coefficients, under the assumption that there is zero measurement

error. The upper bounds assume that there is maximal measurement error, given the estimated p

and q.

         For licensing definition III-Whole, the p, the estimated probability of incorrectly coding

an individual as licensed is 0.034. That is, our methodology codes as licensed only about 3

percent of those who are actually unlicensed. The other misclassification rate, q, at 0.170,

indicates that about one-sixth of those we code as licensed are not actually licensed. Using both

these error rates, we calculate an upper bound for the licensing coefficient for each of the cross-

sectional models in Table 4 (excluding those with ASVAB scores as regressors) and fixed-

effects models in Table 6, which we show in brackets on those same tables.

         For all the models, the upper bound is roughly 50 percent higher than the lower bound

estimated by the regression. Thus, despite the same relative impact, whether accounting for

measurement error makes a substantial absolute difference depends on which model one believes

to be most appropriate. If, for example, one views a cross-sectional model with one- or two-digit

controls as most appropriate, then the upper bounds allow for returns to licensing as high as 0.12

log points for the full sample and from 0.09 to 0.10 log points for full-time only. For the cross-

sectional models with detailed occupational controls or for the fixed-effects models, the upper

bound tends to be much lower (or even negative) because of the lower base.

C. Limiting Samples to 2002–2008

         We are likely to have less measurement error in our licensing variable during the 2002–

2008 period for two reasons. First, this span is more recent, so our current data are more likely

to be applicable. Second, for this period we do not have to recode the occupations in our




                                                  27
licensing data, since the NLSY79 and the statutory licensing data are both SOC-based during this

period.

          A comparison of the cross-sectional licensing coefficients in Table 9 for 2002–2008 with

those in Table 4 for the entire period reveals that they are quite similar for the entire sample, and

perhaps a little bit lower for the full-time only sample. There are, however, bigger differences in

a comparison with the fixed-effects coefficients of Table 6. For the more recent period, the

licensing coefficient is significant in one case, for the full-time sample when detailed

occupational controls are used, and in this case the coefficient is negative (–0.080). Thus,

evidence from most recent period does not support the hypothesis that measurement error in

1979–2000 is lowering the return to licensing.

D. Nonwage Compensation

          One possibility we have not considered thus far is that at least part of the payoff to

licensing requirements comes in the form of nonwage compensation, something that has long

been known to be the case for labor unions (e.g., Freeman and Medoff 1984; Lewis 1986).

During each interview, the NLSY79 has usually collected information on access to the two most

important fringe benefits: employer-provided health insurance and retirement plans.14 With our

wage samples, we estimated linear probability models of access to these two benefits, using the

same specification as in our other cross-sectional models.15

          The results, shown in Table 10, confirm those of the earlier literature indicating that any

estimates of the union wage gap are understatements of the union compensation gap. Those

covered by a collective bargaining agreement are 12–13 percentage points more likely to have

14
   Information does not tend to be collected from some of the self-employed, those in unincorporated businesses.
We tried the analysis two ways, including everyone but having a dummy variable for self-employed and excluding
the self-employed and did not find the results to be sensitive.
15
   We estimated linear probability models rather than logits or probits for ease of convergence and for correcting for
two-way clustering.

                                                          28
access to employer-provided health insurance in the entire sample, 10–11 percentage points in

the full-time sample. The union fringe benefit effect is even greater for retirement plans, with

the difference being 17–19 percentage points and 16–17 percentage points, in the two samples.

       The situation is quite different in the case of licensing. Without controls, those who are

in occupations requiring licenses are about 6 percent more likely to have access to employer-

provided health plans and about 10 percent more likely to have access to an employer-run

retirement plan. The difference is completely erased, however, as soon as any controls are put

into the regression.



                                         VII. Discussion

       One overarching issue that separates the two institutions we have examined is the issue of

coverage versus membership. For example, the effect of actually having a license may be much

larger than that for just being in an occupation in which a license is required. This difference

may be bigger than the effect for being covered by a collective bargaining agreement relative to

that for being a union member. In Appendix C, we show the impact of membership versus

coverage in the PDII for occupational licensing. The results show the difference is about 18

percent. Estimates for the difference between union membership and coverage are dramatically

smaller, averaging about 6.7 percent (Blanchflower and Bryson 2004). Thus, part of the

differences in the wage gaps for licensing and unionization that we find may be due to the larger

premium for being a member of a licensed occupation relative to actual membership in

comparison to these effects for unionization.

       One other potential source of differences is that unionization’s peak was in the 1950s and

this institution has had a longer period during which to influence wages than occupational



                                                 29
licensing which has seen its largest growth in the 1970s through 2010. Several studies have

shown that occupational licensing takes longer to influence public policy and for lower quality

members of the occupation who have not met current requirements to retire or leave the

occupation and consequently influence labor supply (Kleiner and Vorotnikov 2012; Thornton

and Timmons 2013). Consequently, the longer duration of unionization in the labor market may

also be a source of the wage gap.



                                       VIII. Conclusions

       We have conducted a number of analyses, using both cross-sectional and longitudinal

approaches, to measure the impact of two important labor market institutions, licensing and

unionization, on wage determination in the United States. Using these different broad

approaches, our estimates of the economic returns to union coverage are greater than those for

licensing requirements.

       We have performed a number of exercises to understand why the preponderance of our

evidence suggests a generally small return to licensing requirements, when past research, though

usually cross-sectional in nature, has tended to find a much larger one. Measurement error,

while certainly an important issue, does not seem to fully explain it, and we have found no

evidence of a return to licensing in the form of fringe benefits. Obtaining an occupational

license, rather than being covered by a licensing law in an occupation, may matter more for wage

determination than coverage in the unionized sector. Further research using the kind of analysis

we have used here with longitudinal data and both membership and coverage will help labor

economists and policymakers better understand the role of these two institutions on labor market

outcomes.



                                                30
                                          References


Aigner, Dennis J. 1973. “Regression with a Binary Independent Variable Subject to Errors of

       Observation.” Journal of Econometrics 1(1): 49–59.

Blanchflower, David G. and Alex Bryson. 2004. “The Union Wage Premium in the US and the

       UK.” CEP Discussion Paper 612, Centre for Economic Performance, London School of

       Economics and Political Science.

Bollinger, Christopher R. 1996. “Bounding Mean Regressions When a Binary Regressor Is

       Mismeasured.” Journal of Econometrics 73(2): 387–99.

______. 2001. “Response Error and the Union Wage Differential.” Southern Economic Journal

       68(1): 60–76.

Bryson, Alex, and Morris M. Kleiner. 2010. “The Regulation of Occupations.” British Journal

       of Industrial Relations 48(4): 670–75.

Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference With

       Multiway Clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29(2): 238–49.

Cartter, Allan M. 1959. Theory of Wages and Employment. Homewood, IL: R. D. Irwin.

Council on Licensure, Enforcement, and Regulation (CLEAR), 2004.

       http://www.clearhq.org/mission.

Freeman, Richard B. 1984. “Longitudinal Analyses of the Effects of Trade Unions.” Journal of

       Labor Economics 2(1):1–26.

Freeman, Richard B., and Morris M. Kleiner. 1990. “The Impact of New Unionization on

       Wages and Working Conditions.” Journal of Labor Economics 8(1, pt. 2): S8–25.

Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic

       Books.

                                                31
Friedman, Milton 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Griliches, Zvi, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1986. “Errors in Variables in Panel Data.” Journal of

       Econometrics. 31(1): 93–118.

Hirsch, Barry T. 2004. “Reconsidering Union Wage Effects: Surveying New Evidence on an Old

       Topic.” Journal of Labor Research 25(2): 233–66.

Kleiner, Morris M. 2006. Licensing Occupations: Enhancing Quality or Restricting

       Competition? Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

______. 2013. Stages of Occupational Regulation, Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute for

       Employment Research.

Kleiner, Morris M., and Alan B. Krueger. 2010. “The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational

       Licensing.” British Journal of Industrial Relations 48(4): 676–87.

Kleiner, Morris M. and Alan B. Krueger. 2013. “Analyzing the Extent and Influence of

       Occupational Licensing on the Labor Market.” Journal of Labor Economics.Vol. 31, S1,

       April. Pp. S173-S202.

Kleiner, Morris M., and Evgeny Vorotnikov. 2012. “Complementarity and Substitution Between

       Licensed and Certified Occupations: An Analysis of Architects and Interior Designers.”

       Working Paper, University of Minnesota. Unpublished.

Kleiner, Morris M., and David Weil. 2012. “Evaluating the Effectiveness of National Labor

       Relations Act Remedies: Analysis and Comparison with Other Workplace Penalty

       Policies.” In Research Handbook on the Economics of Labor and Employment Law, ed.

       Cynthia L. Estlund and Michael L. Wachter, 209–47. Cheltenham, U.K.: Elgar.




                                               32
Lee, David S., and Mas, Alexandre. 2012. “Long-Run Impacts of Unions on Firms: New

       Evidence from Financial Markets, 1961–1999.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(1):

       333–78.


Lewis, H. Gregg, 1986. “Union Relative Wage Effects.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.

       2, ed. Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, 1139–81. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Maurizi, Alex R. 1974. “Occupational Licensing and the Public Interest.” Journal of Political

       Economy 82(2): 399–413.

Meyer, Peter B., and Anastasiya M. Osborne. 2005. “Proposed Category System for 1960–2000

       Census Occupations.” Working Paper 383, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Moulton, Brent R. 1990. “An Illustration of a Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate

       Variables on Micro Units.” Review of Economics and Statistics 72(2): 334–38.

Pagliero, Mario. 2010. “Licensing Exam Difficulty and Entry Salaries in the US Market for

       Lawyers.” British Journal of Industrial Relations 48(4): 726–39.

Scopp, Thomas S. 2003. “The Relationship Between the 1990 Census and Census 2000

       Industry and Occupation Classification Systems.” Technical Paper 65, U.S. Census

       Bureau.

Shapiro, Carl. 1986. “Investment, Moral Hazard and Occupational Licensing.” Review of

       Economic Studies 53(5): 843–62.

Timmons, Edward J., and Robert Thornton. 2013. “The De-Licensing of Occupations in the

       United States.” Paper presented at the Labor and Employment Relations Association

       Meetings, San Diego, CA. Lehigh University. Unpublished.

Timmons, Edward J., and Robert Thornton. 2013. “Licensing One of the World’s Oldest

       Professions: Massage.” Journal of Law and Economics Vol. 55 (4).

                                               33
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1989. “The Relationship Between the 1970 and 1980 Industry and

       Occupation Classification Systems.” Technical Paper 59, U.S. Government Printing

       Office, Washington, DC.




                                            34
Figure 1
Comparisons in the Time-Trends of Two Labor Market Institutions:
Percent Licensed and Unionized*




              30                                                      30




              20                                                      20




              10                                                      10




               0                                                      0
                   1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s       2000   2008

                                 Union          Licensed



*Dashed line extends from State only estimates to the Gallup and Westat PDII estimates that
includes licensing by all levels of government. Percent unionized are from the Current
Population Report for various years




                                              35
                                           Table 1
                                   Characteristics of Samples
                                     NLSY79, 1979–2008

                               Entire Sample                          Full-Time Only
Variable                  Mean            Std. Dev.                Mean          Std. Dev.

Licensing
Definitions:
 III-Partial              0.307               0.461                0.307               0.461
 II-Partial               0.180               0.384                0.181               0.385
 II-Whole                 0.129               0.334                0.127               0.333
 I-Partial                0.109               0.312                0.106               0.308
 III-Whole                0.101               0.301                0.099               0.298
Union                     0.172               0.377                0.184               0.388
Age (yrs.)                 30.9                8.1                  30.7                8.0
Female                    0.476               0.499                0.428               0.495
Hispanic                  0.062               0.240                0.063               0.243
African                   0.131               0.338                0.132               0.338
American
Schooling (yrs.)           13.0                 2.3                13.0                 2.3
Potential                  11.9                 8.0                11.7                 7.9
experience (yrs.)
Govt.                     0.113               0.317                0.117               0.322
Self-employed             0.063               0.242                0.043               0.204
Part-time                 0.149               0.356                  0                   0

Number of                          136,368                                  112,273
observations

Notes: Unless otherwise indicated, variables are 0-1, where 1 represents the presence of the
characteristic. All labor market variables apply to current/most recent job. See text for licensing
definitions. Union is an indicator variable for whether or not the job is covered by a collective
bargaining agreement. Potential experience = max(0,min(age-14,age-years of schooling-6)).
Part-time indicates usually worked fewer than 35 hours.
        Includes all years of NLSY79 from 1979 to the present, except for 1994, when union
questions were not asked of everyone in the sample, and 2010, when the variable indicating class
of work was not available. To be included in the entire sample in any given year, individuals
must (1) be working for pay and have a wage greater than ½ the real value of the minimum wage
as of January 1, 1981 ($3.35 in 1981 dollars) and lower than $75 per hour (in 2010 dollars); (2)
not have been enrolled in school as of May of the survey year; (3) have valid state of residence
data and be a resident of one of the 50 states; and (4) have valid occupation data. For the full-
time only sample, individuals must also be usually working 35 or more hours per week.
        Weighted by NLSY longitudinal weights.



                                                36
                                            Table 2
                             Licensing Definitions and Assumptions

                         Partially
Licensing               Licensed        Groups Whose Occupations Are Assumed to Have Been
Definition Name         Included?       Licensed Prior to Start of NLSY79
I-Partial                  Yes          Always
II-Whole                   Noa          Always and Moderately
II-Partial                 Yes          Always and Moderately
III-Whole                  No           Always, Moderately,b and Rarelyb
III-Partial                Yes          Always, Moderately, and Rarely
       a
        The small number of partially licensed occupations in the Always category are included.
       b
        Indicates actual licensing start date used instead of the assumption that licensing
requirements for all occupations within groups in each state began before the start of the
NLSY79.




                                                37
                                            Table 3
                     Means of Characteristics of Samples By Licensing Status
                                        All Definitions

Entire Sample

Lic. Def.      III-Partial        II-Partial       II-Whole        I-Partial        III-Whole
              =0       =1       =0        =1     =0     =1       =0       =1      =0      =1
Union        0.177 0.160       0.167 0.191      0.168 0.195     0.170 0.188      0.169 0.196
Age (yrs.)    30.7    31.4      30.6     32.3    30.7   32.4     30.7     32.5    30.7    32.7
Female       0.477 0.475       0.468 0.512      0.467 0.541     0.463 0.585      0.464 0.589
Hispanic     0.062 0.061       0.062 0.061      0.063 0.053     0.063 0.050      0.063 0.046
African-     0.144 0.103       0.137 0.107      0.135 0.108     0.135 0.102      0.134 0.102
American
Schooling    12.7      13.6    12.8     14.1    12.8    14.4     12.8    14.7    12.8    14.8
(yrs.)
Potential    11.9      11.7    11.8     12.2    11.9    12.0     11.9    11.8    11.9    12.0
experience
(yrs.)
Govt.        0.103    0.135    0.096   0.192    0.098   0.219   0.100   0.225    0.101   0.229
Self-        0.057    0.075    0.062   0.063    0.062   0.065   0.062   0.064    0.062   0.065
employed
Part-time    0.151    0.146    0.151   0.140    0.149   0.150   0.148   0.160    0.148   0.154


Full-Time Only

Lic. Def.      III-Partial        II-Partial       II-Whole        I-Partial        III-Whole
              =0       =1       =0        =1     =0     =1       =0       =1      =0      =1
Union        0.191 0.170       0.180 0.204      0.181 0.209     0.182 0.200      0.182 0.208
Age (yrs.)    30.6    31.4      30.5     31.8    30.6   31.8     30.6     31.9    30.6    31.1
Female       0.430 0.422       0.422 0.456      0.419 0.485     0.416 0.531      0.416 0.533
Hispanic     0.063 0.064       0.062 0.064      0.064 0.056     0.064 0.053      0.065 0.048
African-     0.144 0.104       0.136 0.111      0.134 0.115     0.135 0.108      0.135 0.107
American
Schooling    12.8      13.7    12.8     14.1    12.8    14.4     12.8    14.7    12.9    14.8
(yrs.)
Potential    11.8      11.4    11.7     11.7    11.7    11.4     11.8    11.1    11.7    11.3
experience
(yrs.)
Govt.        0.107    0.140    0.099   0.199    0.101   0.229   0.103   0.236    0.103   0.243
Self-        0.039    0.054    0.044   0.040    0.044   0.039   0.044   0.039    0.044   0.038
employed




                                                38
Notes: Unless otherwise indicated, variables are 0-1, where 1 represents the presence of the
characteristic. See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for variable definitions
and sample criteria.
       Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.




                                                 39
                                                         Table 4
                                    Impact of Licensing and Union Coverage on Wages
                                             Licensing Definition: III-Whole
                                                 Cross-Sectional Estimates

                               Entire Sample                                            Full-Time Only
Licensed   0.281**   0.123**     0.078**     0.080**       0.001    0.247**   0.096**       0.059**    0.066**      0.009
           (0.019)   (0.013)      (0.012)    (0.011)      (0.011)   (0.019)   (0.013)       (0.012)    (0.011)     (0.012)
[upper     [0.416]   [0.182]      [0.115]    [0.119]      [0.002]   [0.370]   [0.144]       [0.088]    [0.099]     [0.013]
bound]

Union                0.155**     0.180**     0.193**     0.190**              0.146**      0.173**    0.185**     0.183**
                     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)              (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.007)

R2          0.026     0.443       0.473       0.487       0.528      0.021     0.450        0.484      0.496       0.536

# Obs      136,368   127,141     127,141     127,141     127,141    112,273   108,561     108,561     108,561     108,561
Std.         No        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        No        Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Controls
Occ.        None      None       One-digit   Two-digit   Detailed    None      None       One-digit   Two-digit   Detailed
Controls

Licensed             0.121**     0.079**     0.080**       0.003              0.097**      0.062**    0.067**       0.012
                     (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.011)      (0.011)             (0.012)      (0.011)    (0.011)      (0.012)

Union                0.160**     0.180**     0.192**     0.189**              0.151**      0.173**    0.183**     0.181**
                     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.007)              (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.008)

R2                    0.468       0.492       0.504       0.542                0.480        0.506      0.517       0.553

# Obs                121,873    121,873      121,873     121,873              104,027      104,027    104,027     104,027
Std.                   Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes                 Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes
Controls

                                                            40
ASVAB                       Yes        Yes          Yes         Yes                      Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
Controls
Occ.                       None      One-digit   Two-digit    Detailed                  None      One-digit   Two-digit    Detailed
Controls


Notes: See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for sample criteria. Standard controls include demographic and
human capital variables (indicators for female, Hispanic and African-American, as well as controls for years of schooling, potential
experience, and potential experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government employment, and self-employment, part-
time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry, state of residence, and year. There are 12 one-digit occupational
categories under the 1970 codes and 10 under the 2000 codes, 44 two-digit categories under the 1970 codes and 22 under the 2000
codes, and 450 detailed categories under the 1970 codes and 454 under the 2000 codes.
        Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
        Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group effects for detailed occupation by state
cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).

       *Significant at 5 percent.
      **Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                 41
                                         Table 5
   Changes in Log Wages Associated with Changes in Licensing Status and Union Coverage
                            Licensing Definition: III-Whole


                        Out of Licensed Job         Into Licensed Job           No Changes
Licensing Moves                 0.04                       0.05                    0.04

                          Out of Union Job           Into Union Job             No Changes
Union Moves                   –0.02**                    0.10**                    0.04


        Out of      Out of        Out of        Into          Into Union    Into
       Licensed     Licensed      Union Job,    Licensed      Job,          Licensed
       and          Job, Union    Licensing     Job, Union    Licensing     and
       Union        Status        Status        Status        Status        Union       No
       Job          Unchanged     Unchanged     Unchanged     Unchanged     Job         Changes
Both      0.01          0.04        –0.02**         0.05        0.10**         0.08       0.04

Notes: *, ** indicate whether change is significantly different from group that makes no switch
at 5 percent and 1 percent, respectively.
         Each observation represents an individual’s activity in a pair of adjacent survey years.
Includes all adjacent pairs of years of NLSY from 1979–1980 to 2008–2010, except for those
involving 1994, when union questions were not asked of everyone in the sample. To be included
in the sample, individuals must, for both years in the pair, (1) be working for pay and have a
wage greater than ½ the real value of the minimum wage as of January 1, 1981 ($3.35 in 1981
dollars) and lower than $75 per hour (in 2010 dollars); (2) not have been enrolled in school as of
May of the survey year; (3) have valid state of residence data and be a resident of one of the 50
states; (4) have valid occupation data; (5) have valid union coverage data; and (6) be usually
working more than 35 hours per week.
         Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
         Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group
effects for detailed occupation by state cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).
         Number of observations: 81,168. For observations by cell, see Appendix B.




                                               42
                                            Table 6
                       Impact of Licensing and Union Coverage on Wages
                                     Fixed-Effects Estimates
                                Licensing Definition: III-Whole

                          Entire Sample                            Full-Time Only
Licensed    0.038**    0.020** 0.026**        -0.005    0.017**    0.005    0.009       -0.001
            (0.008)    (0.008) (0.008)        (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.007) (0.007)       (0.009)
[upper      [0.057]    [0.030] [0.039]       [-0.007]   [0.025]   [0.007] [0.014]      [-0.001]
bound]a

Union       0.124**    0.127**    0.131**    0.128**    0.113**   0.116**   0.119**    0.116**
            (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.006)    (0.006)

R2           0.328      0.338      0.345      0.374      0.372     0.381     0.386      0.412

# Obs       126,665    126,665    126,665    126,665    107,901   107,901   107,901    107,901
Std.          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes
Controls
Occ.         None       One-       Two-      Detailed    None      One-       Two-     Detailed
Controls                digit      digit                           digit      digit

Notes: See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for sample criteria. Standard
controls include human capital variables (controls for years of schooling, potential experience,
and potential experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government employment, and
self-employment, part-time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry, state of
residence, and year. There are 12 one-digit occupational categories under the 1970 codes and 10
under the 2000 codes, 44 two-digit categories under the 1970 codes and 22 under the 2000 codes,
and 450 detailed categories under the 1970 codes and 454 under the 2000 codes.
        Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
        Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group
effects for detailed occupation by state cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).

         *Significant at 5 percent.
        **Significant at 1 percent.
        a
          When coefficient is negative, lower bound is given.




                                                43
                                                           Table 7
                                      Impact of Licensing and Union Coverage on Wages
                                                   Cross-Sectional Estimates
                                              Alternative Licensing Definitions

                                 Entire Sample                                            Full-Time Only
III-
Partial
Licensed     0.160**   0.069**     0.022**       0.023**    0.001    0.148**    0.062**      0.019**       0.022**    0.002
             (0.016)   (0.008)     (0.007)       (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.014)    (0.008)      (0.007)       (0.007)   (0.008)

Union                  0.157**     0.181**       0.194**   0.190**              0.148**      0.174**       0.185**   0.183**
                       (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.008)              (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.008)

R2            0.020     0.441       0.471         0.486     0.528     0.018      0.450        0.483         0.495     0.536

II-Partial
Licensed     0.234**   0.087**     0.048**       0.046**    0.004    0.199**    0.067**      0.035**       0.036**    0.005
             (0.016)   (0.010)     (0.009)       (0.009)   (0.008)   (0.015)    (0.010)      (0.009)       (0.009)   (0.009)

Union                  0.155**     0.180**       0.193**   0.190**              0.146**      0.173**       0.185**   0.183**
                       (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.007)   (0.007)              (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.008)

R2            0.029     0.442       0.472         0.486     0.528     0.023      0.450        0.483         0.496     0.536

II-Whole
Licensed     0.256**   0.101**     0.068**       0.075**    0.004    0.219**    0.076**      0.051**       0.060**    0.009
             (0.018)   (0.013)     (0.011)       (0.010)   (0.011)   (0.017)    (0.012)      (0.010)       (0.010)   (0.011)

Union                  0.155**     0.180**       0.193**   0.190**              0.146**      0.173**       0.185**   0.183**
                       (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.008)              (0.008)      (0.008)       (0.008)   (0.008)

R2            0.027     0.442       0.473         0.487     0.528     0.021      0.450        0.484         0.496     0.536

                                                             44
I-Partial
Licensed       0.285**     0.126**    0.089**     0.089**      0.008      0.248**     0.099**      0.068**     0.082**       0.016
               (0.019)     (0.014)    (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.013)     (0.019)     (0.014)      (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.013)

Union                      0.155**    0.180**     0.193**     0.190**                 0.146**      0.173**     0.185**     0.183**
                           (0.008)    (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)                 (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)

R2              0.029        0.443     0.473       0.487       0.528       0.023        0.456       0.484       0.497        0.536

# Obs          136,368     127,141    127,141     127,141     127,141     112,273     108,561     108,561     108,561     108,561
Std.             No          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         No          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
Controls
Occ.            None         None     One-digit   Two-digit   Detailed      None        None      One-digit   Two-digit    Detailed
Controls

Notes: See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for sample criteria. Standard controls include demographic and
human capital variables (indicators for female, Hispanic and African-American, as well as controls for years of schooling, potential
experience, and potential experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government employment, and self-employment, part-
time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry, state of residence, and year. There are 12 one-digit occupational
categories under the 1970 codes and 10 under the 2000 codes, 44 two-digit categories under the 1970 codes and 22 under the 2000
codes, and 450 detailed categories under the 1970 codes and 454 under the 2000 codes.
        Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
        Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group effects for detailed occupation by state
cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).

         *Significant at 5 percent.
        **Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                 45
                                                         Table 8
                                    Impact of Licensing and Union Coverage on Wages
                                                  Fixed-Effects Estimates
                                            Alternative Licensing Definitions

                         Entire Sample                               Full-Time Only
III-
Partial
Licensed     0.027**   0.011*    0.016**    0.011*     0.021**     0.009*     0.013**   0.013*
             (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.005)

Union        0.124**   0.127**   0.131**    0.128**    0.114**     0.116**    0.120**   0.116**
             (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)

R2            0.328     0.338     0.345      0.374      0.372       0.381      0.386     0.412

II-Partial
Licensed     0.035**   0.021**   0.026**    0.015*     0.022**     0.014**    0.017**   0.016*
             (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.007)

Union        0.124**   0.127**   0.131**    0.128**    0.113**     0.116**    0.119**   0.116**
             (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)

R2            0.328     0.338     0.345      0.374      0.372       0.381      0.386     0.412

II-Whole
Licensed     0.035**   0.022**   0.032**     0.006      0.015*      0.009     0.015*     0.008
             (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.007)     (0.006)    (0.007)    (0.007)   (0.009)

Union        0.124**   0.127**   0.131**    0.128**    0.113**     0.116**    0.119**   0.116**
             (0.006)   (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.006)   (0.006)

R2            0.328     0.338     0.345      0.374      0.372       0.381      0.386     0.412

                                                          46
I-Partial
Licensed      0.044**     0.030**     0.041**       0.002      0.020**      0.013*      0.020*        0.004
              (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.010)     (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.011)

Union          0.124      0.127**     0.131**      0.128**     0.113**      0.116**     0.119**      0.116**
              (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)

R2             0.328        0.338      0.345        0.374       0.372        0.381       0.386        0.412

# Obs         126,665     126,665     126,665      126,665     107,901      107,901     107,901      107,901
Std.            Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Controls
Occ.           None       One-digit   Two-digit   Detailed      None       One-digit   Two-digit    Detailed
Controls

Notes: See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for sample criteria. Standard controls include human capital variables
(controls for years of schooling, potential experience, and potential experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government
employment, and self-employment, part-time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry, state of residence, and year.
There are 12 one-digit occupational categories under the 1970 codes and 10 under the 2000 codes, 44 two-digit categories under the
1970 codes and 22 under the 2000 codes, and 450 detailed categories under the 1970 codes and 454 under the 2000 codes.
       Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
       Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group effects for detailed occupation by state
cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).

        *Significant at 5 percent.
        **Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                  47
                                                           Table 9
                                      Impact of Licensing and Union Coverage on Wages
                                                       2002–2008 only
                                               Licensing Definition: III-Whole
                                         Cross-Sectional and Fixed-Effects Estimates
                                Entire Sample                                             Full-Time Only
Cross-
Sectional
Licensed    0.210**   0.120**     0.083**     0.075**       0.001    0.184**    0.064**       0.031        0.049*      0.000
            (0.026)   (0.026)     (0.023)     (0.021)      (0.002)   (0.028)    (0.024)      (0.021)       (0.021)    (0.020)

Union                 0.103**     0.144**     0.169**     0.180**               0.091**      0.136**       0.160**   0.170**
                      (0.013)     (0.012)     (0.012)     (0.010)               (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.013)   (0.012)

R2           0.014     0.413       0.460       0.491        0.571     0.012      0.408        0.463         0.489     0.572

# Obs       22,945    20,069       20,069      20,069      20,069    18,580     17,510      17,510         17,510    17,510
Std.          No       Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes        No        Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes
Controls
Occ.         None      None       One-digit   Two-digit   Detailed    None       None       One-digit   Two-digit    Detailed
Controls

Fixed-
Effects
Licensed               0.000       -0.004       0.009      -0.031               -0.036       -0.036        -0.035     -0.080*
                      (0.027)      (0.028)     (0.029)     (0.034)              (0.027)      (0.027)       (0.030)    (0.037)

Union                 0.068**     0.068**     0.073**     0.070**               0.059**      0.059**       0.059**   0.057**
                      (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.013)               (0.014)      (0.014)       (0.014)   (0.013)

R2                     0.051       0.061       0.072        0.163                0.043        0.052         0.058     0.152

# Obs       18,936    18,936       18,936      18,936     18,936                16,279       16,279        16,279     16,279

                                                             48
Std.                        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes                      Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes
Controls
Occ.                       None      One-digit    Two-digit    Detailed                  None       One-digit   Two-digit    Detailed
Controls


Notes: See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for sample criteria. Standard controls for cross-sectional regressions
include demographic and human capital variables (indicators for female, Hispanic and African-American, as well as controls for years
of schooling, potential experience, and potential experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government employment, and
self-employment, part-time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry, state of residence, and year. There are 12 one-digit
occupational categories under the 1970 codes and 10 under the 2000 codes, 44 two-digit categories under the 1970 codes and 22 under
the 2000 codes, and 450 detailed categories under the 1970 codes and 454 under the 2000 codes.
       Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
       Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group effects for detailed occupation by state
cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).

       *Significant at 5 percent.
      **Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                  49
                                                           Table 10
                       Impact of Licensing and Union Coverage on Access to Health and Retirement Benefits
                                                Licensing Definition: III-Whole
                                                   Linear Probability Models

                                    Entire Sample                                             Full-Time Only
Health
Licensed     0.063**      -0.011       -0.010       -0.008    -0.000     0.059**    -0.018*      -0.014        -0.009      0.002
             (0.011)      (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.010)   (0.011)    (0.010)    (0.008)      (0.009)       (0.009)    (0.010)

Union                     0.115**     0.126**       0.125**   0.122**               0.096**      0.108**       0.107**   0.104**
                          (0.006)     (0.006)       (0.006)   (0.006)               (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.006)   (0.006)

R2            0.002        0.214       0.229         0.237     0.269      0.002      0.146        0.165         0.176     0.215

# Obs        114,840      108,553     108,553       108,553   108,553    100,752     97,502     97,502         97,502    97,502
Std.           No           Yes         Yes           Yes       Yes        No         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
Controls
Occ.          None         None       One-digit      Two-     Detailed    None       None       One-digit       Two-     Detailed
Controls                                             digit                                                      digit

Retirement
Licensed     0.101**      -0.010       -0.018       -0.020    -0.004     0.095**    -0.019       -0.024*       -0.023     -0.001
             (0.014)      (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.012)   (0.014)    (0.013)    (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.012)    (0.013)

Union                     0.170**     0.184**       0.185**   0.183**               0.159**      0.173**       0.174**   0.173**
                          (0.009)     (0.009)       (0.009)   (0.009)               (0.009)      (0.009)       (0.009)   (0.009)

R2            0.005        0.236       0.249         0.258     0.299      0.004      0.210        0.224         0.234     0.278

# Obs        76,034       71,112       71,112       71,112    71,112     66,607      64,415      64,415        64,415     64,415
Std.           No          Yes          Yes          Yes       Yes         No         Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes
Controls

                                                               50
Occ.                        None      One-digit     Two-       Detailed                  None      One-digit     Two-      Detailed
Controls                                            digit                                                        digit




Notes: See text for licensing definitions and notes from Table 1 for sample criteria. Standard controls include demographic and
human capital variables (indicators for female, Hispanic and African-American, as well as controls for years of schooling, potential
experience, and potential experience squared), indicators for union coverage, government employment, and self-employment, part-
time status, and sets of dummy variables for major industry, state of residence, and year. There are 12 one-digit occupational
categories under the 1970 codes and 10 under the 2000 codes, 44 two-digit categories under the 1970 codes and 22 under the 2000
codes, and 450 detailed categories under the 1970 codes and 454 under the 2000 codes.
        Weighted by NLSY79 longitudinal weights.
        Standard errors take account of complex survey design of NLSY79 and common group effects for detailed occupation by state
cell (Moulton 1990; Cameron, Gelbach, and Miller 2011).

       *Significant at 5 percent.
      **Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                 51
                                Appendix A
Screenshot of CareerOneStop Website (http://www.acinet.org/licensedoccupations/)




                                      52
                                       Appendix B
 Number of Observations Associated with Changes in Licensing Status and Union Coverage in
                                         Table 5

                       Out of Licensed Job        Into Licensed Job        No Changes
Licensing Moves               7,498                     7,421                66,249
                              4,522                     4,640                72,006
                              3,105                     3,053                75,010
                              2,484                     2,455                76,229
                              2,370                     2,288                76,510

Union Moves             Out of Union Job           Into Union Job          No Changes
                             4,650                      4,770                71,748


       Out of      Out of       Out of       Into          Into Union    Into
       Licensed    Licensed     Union Job,   Licensed      Job,         Licensed
       and         Job, Union   Licensing    Job, Union    Licensing    and
       Union       Status       Status       Status        Status       Union      No
       Job         Unchanged    Unchanged    Unchanged     Unchanged    Job        Changes
          451         6,559        3,699        6,458         3,819         463     58,731
          311         3,900        3,992        3,980         4,146         313     63,868
          215         2,693        4,229        2,639         4,365         208     66,416
Both      158         2,183        4,332        2,134         4,466         161     67,431
          163         2,068        4,343        1,986         4,473         158     67,694

Notes: Total number of observation 81,168. See notes on Table 5.




                                             53
  Appendix C: Estimates of the Impact of Occupational and Individual Licensing on Wage Determination

                                                  (1)            (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)
VARIABLES                                        lwage          lwage      lwage      lwage     lwage      lwage

Occupation Licensed                             0.28***      0.16***
                                                 (0.03)       (0.03)
Occupation Licensed & Person Not Licensed                                   0.03       -0.02
                                                                           (0.06)     (0.06)
Occupation Licensed & Person Licensed                                                           0.30***   0.18***
                                                                                                 (0.04)     (0.03)
Female                                                      -0.18***                 -0.18***             -0.18***
                                                              (0.03)                   (0.03)               (0.03)
Asian                                                          0.08                      0.08                0.09
                                                              (0.10)                   (0.10)               (0.10)
Hispanic                                                      -0.02                     -0.02               -0.02
                                                              (0.07)                   (0.07)               (0.07)
Black                                                         -0.07                     -0.07               -0.07
                                                              (0.05)                   (0.05)               (0.05)
Union                                                       0.19***                  0.21***              0.19***
                                                              (0.04)                   (0.04)               (0.04)
Education                                                   0.07***                  0.07***              0.06***
                                                              (0.01)                   (0.01)               (0.01)
Government                                                    -0.03                     -0.03               -0.04
                                                              (0.04)                   (0.04)               (0.04)
Service                                                        0.03                      0.04                0.03
                                                              (0.04)                   (0.04)               (0.04)
Self Employed                                               0.25***                  0.27***              0.25***
                                                              (0.08)                   (0.08)               (0.08)
Northeast                                                    -0.10**                  -0.10**              -0.10**
                                                              (0.04)                   (0.04)               (0.04)
Midwest                                                     -0.12***                 -0.13***             -0.12***
                                                              (0.04)                   (0.04)               (0.04)
South                                                        -0.09**                  -0.09**              -0.08**
                                                              (0.04)                   (0.04)               (0.04)
Age                                                         0.00***                  0.00***              0.00***
                                                              (0.00)                   (0.00)               (0.00)
Work Experience                                             0.01***                  0.01***              0.01***
                                                              (0.00)                   (0.00)               (0.00)
Math                                                          0.02*                    0.02**               0.02*
                                                              (0.01)                   (0.01)               (0.01)
Read                                                        0.04***                  0.04***              0.04***
                                                              (0.01)                   (0.01)               (0.01)

Observations                                     1875          1875         1875       1875      1875       1875
R-squared                                        0.30          0.43         0.28       0.42      0.30       0.43
Occ Controls                                    2-digit       2-digit      2-digit    2-digit   2-digit    2-digit
                                            Standard errors in parentheses
                                             * p<.1, ** p<.05, *** p<.01




                                                           54
