                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   EFFICIENCY WAGE THEORIES:
                     A PARTIAL EVALUATION




                       Lawrence F. Katz




                     Working Paper No. 1906




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1060 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 1986




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the NBER
Conference on Macroeconomics held in Cambridge, Massachusetts on
March 7 and 8, 1986. 1 am indebted to William Dickens for numerous
discussions and for comments on previous drafts of this paper; a
significant part of this paper grew out of our joint work. I thank
George Akerlof, Joe Altonji, Stan Fischer, Kevin Lang, Lawrence
Summers, Janet Yellen, and the conference participants for helpful
comments. I am grateful to Phil Bokovoy and Elizabeth Bishop for
expert research assistance. The Institute of Industrial Relations
at U.C. Berkeley provided research support. All remaining errors
are my own. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program -in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper #1906
                                                    April 1986




                 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation



                                    ABSTRACT



This paper surveys recent developments in the literature on efficiency wage

theories of unemployment.    Efficiency wage models have in common the property

that in equilibrium firms may find it profitable to pay wages in excess of

market clearing.    High wages can help reduce turnover, elicit worker effort,

prevent worker collective action, and attract higher quality employees. Simple

versions of efficiency wage models can explain normal involuntary unemployment,

segmented labor markets, and wage differentials across firms and industries for

workers with similar productive characteristics. Deferred payment schemes and

other labor market bonding mechanisms appear to be able to solve some efficiency

wage problems without resultant job rationing and involuntary unemployment.     A

wide variety of evidence on inter—industry wage differences is analyzed.       Ef-

ficiency wage models appear useful in explaining the observed pattern of wage

differentials.     The models also provide several potential mechanisms for cy-

clical fluctuations in response to aggregate demand shocks.



                                               Lawrence Katz
                                               School of Business Administration
                                               University of California
                                               Berkeley, Ca. 94720
                                               (415) 642—4732
1. Introduction



The question of why unemployed workers are unable to bid down the wages of seem-

ingly comparable employed workers and gain jobs has long perplexed economists.

A burgeoning literature, the efficiency wage literature, suggests that the answer

to this puzzle may lie in the negative incentive effects of low wages. The basic

efficiency wage hypothesis states that workers' productivities depend positively

on their wages. If this is the case, firms may find it profitable to pay wages

in excess of market clearing. This is possible because the wage that minimizes

a firm's labor costs per efficiency unit of labor may not be the wage that clears

the labor market.   Employers may be quite reluctant to cut wages, even in the

presence of an excess supply of labor, since reducing wages may actually lower

productivity more than proportionately and actually increase labor costs. Equi-

librium can therefore be consistent with persistent involuntary unemployment in

some versions of these models.1



A variety of conceptually distinct, although potentially complimentary, explana-

tions for the direct relationship between wages and productivity have been ana-

 lyzed in the literature.   These approaches are based on the potential benefits

to the firm of higher wages: increased effort level and reduced shirking by em-

 ployees; lower turnover costs; a higher quality labor force; and improved morale,

 more easily facilitated teamwork, and greater feelings of loyalty by workers to

 the firm.   These economic gains to an employer of high—wage policies have long

 been stressed by institutional labor economists (Dunlop (1985) and Reynolds (1978,

 chapter 9)).




 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                     2
Alternative rationales for the payment of non—competitive wage premiums relate

to the presence of unions or threat of collective action by workers. Firms may

find it profitable to pay greater than competitive wages to unionized workers to
                               2
maintain   industrial peace.
                                          .

                                   Industrial relations and human resource specialists

and institutional economists have long argued that nonunion firms often pay higher

wages than necessary to attract qualified labor for the purpose of avoiding

unionization.3 Dickens (1986) develops a model of the impact of the threat of

collective action by workers on wages and employment which closely resembles ef-

ficiency wage models.



Efficiency wage models have been advanced in recent literature as providing a

coherent explanation of normal unemployment. Some authors have even argued that

these theories provide solid microfoundatioms for Keynesian propositions con-

cerning the importance of wage rigidity and the existence of cyclically—varying

levels of involuntary unemployment.4 Efficiency wage considerations also provide

a potential explanation for large and persistent "non—competitive" wage differ-

entials across firms and industries for workers with similar productive charac-

teristics. Rulow and Summers (1986) argue that wage differentials arising from

efficiency wage reasons may provide a justification for trade arfd industrial

policies designed to protect and subsidize sectors with high wage jobs.



In this paper, I survey recent developments in the efficiency wage literature and

discuss theoretical and practical shortcomings of the models.5 I review a wide

variety of empirical evidence on wage patterns and cyclical properties of labor

markets. The consistency of the models with this evidence helps provide a partial

evaluation of the usefulness of the efficiency wage approach.




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                      3
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a rudimentary efficiency

wage model and discusses some of the basic implications of the efficiency wage

hypothesis. Alternative models with efficiency wage structures, their empirical

predictions, and theoretical shortcomings are analyzed in section 3. Efficiency

wage models in which firms are assumed to only be able to utilize simple wage

schemes as compensation mechanisms are shown to be capable of generating a number

of important labor market phenomena including involuntary unemployment, dual

(segmented) labor markets, and wage distributions for workers with identical

productive characteristics. The same problems, such as the inability of firms

to monitor worker performance costlessly and costly turnover, that give rise to

efficiency wage payments above the market clearing level create incentives for

the use of alternative incentive devices and the development of internal labor

markets and long—term contractual relationships in the labor market. Alternative

forms of labor contracts, typically involving the (implicit) posting of perform-

ance bonds, can eliminate the job rationing that arises in versions of the models

in which firms are limited to the use of simple wage policies. Practical problems

arising from capital market imperfections and moral hazard problems on the part

of firms may limit the potential for alternative compensation arrangements to

eliminate efficiency wage problems.



A wide variety of evidence on inter—industry wage differences is analyzed in

section 4. Efficiency wage models make strong predictions concerning the exist-

ence of wage differentials arising from differences across industries in the

wage—productivity relationship.   Important systematic wage differentials across

industries are present that do not appear to be easily explained by the standard

competitive rationales of differences in labor quality, compensating differen-

tials, or transitory disturbances. Although no single efficiency wage model seems



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 4
consistent with all the facts, efficiency wage models do appear useful in ex-

plaining the observed pattern of wage differentials. The consistency of effi-

ciency wage theories with evidence on the cyclical behavior of labor markets and

on labor market discrimination is also discussed in section 4.



Section 5 discusses the mechanisms through which efficiency wage models may help

explain wage rigidity and cyclical fluctuations. The models explain why firms

may not lose much if they fail to adjust wages to shocks. The addition of small

costs of changing prices and wages, as emphasized by Mankiw (1985) and Blanchard

and Kiyotaki (1985), or of near—rational inertial behavior, as analyzed by Akerlof

and Yellen (1985a,b), to efficiency wage models leads to a potential model of

cyclical fluctuations in response to aggregate demand movements.



Concluding remarks concerning the usefulness of the efficiency wage approach are

presented in section 6.




2. The Basic Efficiency Wage Hypothesis



Some of the primary implications of efficiency wage models can be illuminated in

a simple model in which a worker's physical health and therefore productivity is

assumed to depend positively on the real wage paid. This formulation was advanced

by Leibenstein (1957) to highlight the linkages among wages, nutrition, and health

in less developed countries.   Firms, in this context, get healthier, more pro-

ductive workers if they pay higher wages.    Solow (1979) formulates a formally

similar model for developed economies in which increased wages improve morale and

this directly affects productivity through an increase in worker effort.



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  5
Following Yellen (1984), I consider an economy with identical, perfectly compet-

itive firms, each possessing a short—run production function of the form Q =

aF(e(w)L) where e is the effort (or efficiency) level of a worker, L is the number
of employees, w is the real wage, a is a productivity shifter, and Q is output.

The price of output is taken to be the numeraire. All workers are assumed to have

identical wage—productivity relationships of the form e(w) with e'>O, e(O)O, and

the elasticity of e(w) with respect to w declining in



A profit—maximizing firm, able to hire all the labor it wants at the wage it

chooses to offer, solves the following problem



(1)           max aF(e(w)L)-wL
              w, L




The solution to the problem yields



(2)            eI(w*)w*/e(w*) =   1


and

 (3)           e(w*)aFI(e(w*)L) =     w.

 The optimal wage w* satisfies the condition that the elasticity of effort with

 respect to the wage is unity. The wage w* is known as the efficiency wage since

 it minimizes wage costs per efficiency unit of labor.    Each firm hires labor up

 to the point where its marginal product equals w*.




 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                    6
If the aggregate demand for labor falls short of the aggregate labor supply at

w*, equilibrium will entail involuntary unemployment.    Unemployed workers will

strictly prefer to work at w* rather than be unemployed, but firms will have no

incentive to hire them at that wage or to lower wages. This simple version of

the efficiency wage hypothesis can explain equilibrium involuntary unemployment.

Real wage rigidity also arises in this model.    Changes in relative price to the

firm or productivity shocks (shifts in a) do not affect the efficiency wage w*,

but lead to alterations in the level of employment.7



The simple efficiency wage model can be easily extended to provide potential ra-

tionales for wage differentials among workers with identical characteristics and

the existence of dual labor markets.   If the linkages between wages and effort

differ across firms, then the optimal wage will differ across firms and a dis-

tribution of wages for workers with identical characteristics can arise in equi-

librium.    These wage differentials are not compensating differences for

nonpecuniary aspects of work that directly affect workers' welfare.    Dual labor

markets of the type described by Doe.ringer and Piore (1971) can also arise if the

wage—productivity relationship is more important in some sectors than in others.

High wages and job rationing can arise in the sector where efficiency wage con-

siderations are salient, while the secondary sector, where efficiency wage con-

siderations are less important, acts as a competitive labor market.



The alternative efficiency wage models examined in the next section provide more

explicit microeconomic foundations for the wage—productivity relationship in de-

veloped economies. A direct derivation of the wage—productivity relationship from

assumptions concerning tastes, technology, and information structure is necessary




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  7
to analyze the welfare implications of unemployment and labor market segmentation

in these models.




3. Variations on the Efficiency Wage Theme



3.1. The Shirking Model



3.1.1. The Basic Approach and Implications



Employers typically have only imperfect information concerning the behavior of

workers on the job. The supervision and monitoring of worker actions is costly.

The punishments for substandard employee performance available to a firm are

typically limited by legal constraints and social custom.     Firms can suspend,

demote, or fire an employee for inadequate performance or misbehavior, but

imprisonment, physical torture, direct cash fines, or resort to tort or contract

law for redress are simply not available options for many forms of worker

malfeasance.



Under these conditions, employers must find mechanisms to elicit adequate effort

from their employees.     Piece rates and other direct pay—for—performance compen-

sation schemes are often expensive to operate or impracticable since it may be

difficult to observe an individual employee's contributions.8 Firms may find it

profitable in this situation to raise wages above the opportunity costs of work-

ers. By increasing wages, firms raise the cost of job loss and encourage workers

 to put forth adequate effort. When workers are paid wages above their opportunity

 costs, they value their jobs, and the threat of termination for detected loafing



 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 8
creates an incentive for workers not to shirk.. Models in which the need of firms

to elicit effort from their workers can lead to the payment of wages in excess

of market clearing and generate equilibrium involuntary unemployment have re-

cently been examined by Bowles (1985), Bulow and Summers (1986), Calvo

(1979,1985), Calvo and Wellisz (1978), Eaton and White (1982, 1983), Foster and

Wan (1984), Gintis and Ishikawa (1983), Jones (1985), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984),

and Stoft (1982).




In the Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) version of the model, firms can only

imperfectly monitor their workers' job performance, and workers make a discrete

choice of whether to work or shirk.       Workers and firms are assumed to be

homogenous.   If all firms pay the same market clearing wage, there is full em-

ployment and no cost to shirking since workers can immediately find another job

at the sane wage if fired.   This strong result of no costs of shirking requires

no job switching or search costs and no adverse reputational effects on workers

in the labor market if they develop a poor employment history. The homogenous

workers assumption eliminates reputational effects on workers because all workers

are assumed to act the same given the same incentives. If effort is costly, all

workers shirk under these full employment conditions     Thus, it pays each firm

to increase its wage to eliminate shirking. When all firms do this, the average

wage rises and employment is reduced. In equilibrium, all firms pay a wage above

the market clearing level creating unemployment. Since jobs are scarce and ra—

tioned, the loss of a job can involve a lengthy unemployment spell. The reserve

army of the unemployed acts as a worker discipline device making shirking costly.

Although some unemployment is optimal in this model since it plays a required role

in creating work incentives, Shapiro and Stiglitz show that the equilibrium un—

employment rate is not Pareto optimal.9 Equilibrium unemployment is involuntary



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  9
in this model since identical workers are treated differently and since the un-

employed strictly prefer to be be employed.



The shirking model postulates a variety of factors that affect the firm's ability

to extract effort from workers and consequently yields some potentially testable

predictions concerning the nature of wage differentials and unemployment. Firms

should pay higher wages to a given quality worker where monitoring is costly

and/or difficult so that the probability of detecting shirking is low.     Higher

wages may be required for positions in which poor employee performance can cause

a great deal of damage.   In fact, the job evaluation systems used in the design

and maintenance of wage structures in many industries rate positions on a re-

sponsibility factor that is directly related to the probable damage that can be

caused by improper job performance (Milkovich and Newman, 1984). Workers in po-

sitions of trust and responsibility should receive wage premiums (Eaton and white,

1982). The value of a worker maintaining a job is reduced if the likelihood of

a future separation is great.     This means firms with monitoring difficulties

should avoid hiring workers from observable groups believed to exhibit high

turnover and should attempt to maintain long—term employment relationships per-

haps through the use of worksharing or a layoff—recall process to deal with tem-

porary downturns. Increased variability in labor demand across sectors (greater

sectoral shift activity) directly increases unemployment through more separations

to facilitate labor reallocation and indirectly raises the structural unemploy-

ment rate by requiring firms to pay higher wages to prevent shirking since it

induces a greater likelihood of a future separation.1°



The expected income form unemployment affects the wage needed to induce proper

worker behavior. A higher unemployment insurance benefit raises the required wage



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  10
and reduces employment.    A higher unemployment rate and hence longer expected

duration of unemployment for a worker sacked for shirking reduces the needed wage.

Finally, the level of wages offered by other firms affect the prospects of a

discharged worker. The model suggests firms should be concerned with their po-

sition in the wage hierarchy (Bulow and Summers, 1986).



3.1.2. Segmented Labor Markets



The shirking model also provides a rationale for dual labor markets with a utility

differential for similar workers across the primary and secondary sectors and

rationing of primary sector jobs. The dual labor market hypothesis states that

the labor market can be roughly be divided into a primary sector that offers jobs

characterized by high wages and internal labor markets and a secondary sector that

offers low paying, menial jobs with little room for advancement (Doeringer and

Piore, 1971).



Dickens and Lang (1985a,b) find in two different micro data sets that the esti-

mation of a switching model of wage determination with unknown regimes yields two

distinct wage equations.   The two equations closely resemble the predictions of

dual market theory for the characteristics of earnings functions in the primary

and secondary sectors. The equation to which most workers are associated yields

significant returns to experience and education. The other equation indicates

little or no returns from human capital variables. The estimation technique al-

lows the simultaneous determination of the probability of each worker's attachment

to each sector and each sector's earnings equation. The procedure allows a hy-

pothesis test that can be interpreted as a test of the rationing of primary sector




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  11
jobs.   Their results indicate the presence of some job rationing (particularly

for minority workers).



The basic objection to the dual labor market approach is based on the argument

that if secondary workers envy primary workers and are as productive, then primary

sector wages should be bid down to clear the market. One possibility is that wage

differences across the sectors reflect unmeasured worker quality differences.

Alternatively, the shirking model provides a coherent explanation for dual markets

with job rationing of "good" primary jobs even in an economy populated by

homogenous workers.



Bulow and Summers (1986) and Jones (1985) analyze versions of the shirking model

in which the detection of shirkers is difficult in one sector of the economy (the

primary sector) and monitoring is costless in the other sector (the secondary

sector). This roughly fits the empirical observation that the typical primary

job entails a fair degree of responsibility and independent action on the part

of the employee, while most secondary jobs involve assignments that are more

easily supervised.    Efficiency wages above market clearing arise in the primary

sector creating a utility differential between primary and secondary jobs that

creates a cost to loss of a primary sector job."



Wait unemployment (such as in Hall, 1975) can be generated if it is easier to get

a primary sector job out of unemployment than out of the secondary sector and

workers queue up for primary sector jobs. This is likely if a history of secondary

sector employment is a bad signal to primary sector employers.       Workers with

values of leisure greater than the secondary sector wage but lower than the pri-

mary sector wage may also enter unemployment to line up for primary sector va—



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  12
cancies. Wage differentials arising from differences in monitoring difficulties

across firms create incentives for search unemployment.



Internal labor markets with internal promotion ladders are likely to arise in the

primary sector to maintain long—term employment relationships. The development

of internal labor markets and deferred payment schemes to induce effort in the

primary sector may obviate the need for the use of efficiency wages with

banishment to the secondary sector or unemployment as incentive devices. This

type of objection of alternative means to motivate workers is a basic difficulty

with the efficiency wage models.



3.1.3. Objections to the Shirking Model: The Bonding Critique



The predictions of the shirking model concerning job rationing and involuntary

unemployment arise from the dual economic functions performed by the wage. The

wage serves both to allocate labor and to provide incentives for adequate employee

performance (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1984). The primary objection to the shirking

model is that firms have other methods to enforce employee discipline in a more

efficient manner than the use of a high wage plus threat of dismissal policy.



A variety of labor market bonding mechanisms can potentially eliminate the need

for unemployment as a worker discipline device. One direct method is for workers

to post performance bonds at the time of hiring that would be forfeited if they

were caught shirking.   Alternatively, firms can pay efficiency wages but charge

workers an employment (or "entrance") fee (Becker and Stigler, 1974).    If firms

utilize high wages to reduce incentives for workers to shirk or steal, unemployed

workers should be willing to pay entrance fees or post bonds to gain employment



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  13
at these firms. The threat of forfeiting a bond or of paying a new employment

fee to gain employment can create work incentives and enable the market for jobs

to clear eliminating involuntary unemployment.



Instances of workers posting direct performance bonds or purchasing their jobs

are rare, although not entirely unknown.    Employment arrangements that may im-

plicitly perform bonding functions such as upward sloping age—earnings profiles,

pensions and other deferred compensation schemes, and internal promotion ladders

are observed in a large segment (the primary sector) of the labor market. These

mechanisms appear in large establishments where monitoring problems are likely

to be important. Lazear (1979,1981) demonstrates that seniority wage systems in

which workers post a bond against cheating by accepting wages below their marginal

product initially and have it returned in the form of wages above the value of

their marginal product later in their careers and/or in the form of a pension upon

retirement can solve the effort elicitation problem.



Practical objections arise to the use of complete bonding schemes in the labor

market.   In the first place, workers, particularly early in their working lives,

face capital market constraints and lack the liquidity required to post large

bonds. If the probability of detecting shirking is low, the required bond or em-

ployment fee may be substantial.    Carmichael (1985) argues that even if capital

markets are imperfect, firms can charge a fee sufficient to make the expected

utility of the job offer equal to the value of workers' reservation wages. Al-

though this may eliminate the directly involuntary nature of unemployment, it does

not lead to an efficient level of unemployment (Shapiro and Stiglitz, 1985).




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  14
Since outside party verification of detected shirking is difficult, firms have

an incentive to falsely claim that workers are shirking and claim the bonds. Firms

may collect employment fees and then dismiss workers. The firm's concern for its

reputation as an employer may be able to overcome this problem (Lazear; 1979,

1981). The difficulty of potential workers in verifying the honesty of a firm's

behavior means that the reputation mechanism is quite fragile and may be a far

from perfect enforcement mechanism (Kreps, 1984). The likelihood of firm default

on the bond can be reduced if the firm does not expect to gain from falsely

claiming that the worker is shirking.    For example, if the firm claims that a

worker has shirked and discharges the worker, it is possible for the bond to be

paid to a third party instead of the firm. The worker is disciplined and the firm

does not gain from cheating. We do not see the direct use of third party systems

like this in practice.   Carmichael (1983) argues that seniority promotion rules

with a fixed wage hierarchy can play this role. Additionally, tournament schemes

(Bhattacharya, 1983 and Malcoimson, 1984) may permit the firm to commit itself

to a wage plan that creates the proper incentives for workers.



Reputational considerations are likely to be important precisely for the large,

visible employers, such as IBM or General Motors, that provide high paying, pri-

mary sector jobs.    These large firms offer exactly the type of jobs that the

shirking model indicates should pay efficiency wages and be rationed.     Smaller,

less visible secondary firms which may not stay in business long are unlikely to

be able to get workers to trust that they will not renege on agreements concerning

deferred compensation.     Thus, the implication of considering possible bonding

mechanisms and where they may be effective is that the secondary sector needs to

pay efficiency wages while the primary sector can utilize deferred payments and

pay market wages. This unrealistic prediction of the model suggests that further



 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 15
work must be done on why full bonding schemes are not practicable for visible

employers quite likely to value their reputations for keeping (implicit) promises

to their employees.




If capital markets were perfect and third party verification of shirking always

possible, firms would spend next to nothing on raising the probability of de-

tecting shirking and demand large bonds since monitoring is costly and the posting

of bonds would be costless under these circumstances (Becker and Stigler, 1974;

Dickens, Katz, and Lang, 1986).       The empirical observation that firms devote

substantial resources to monitoring workers suggests that a full bonding solution

to the shirking problem is unattainable.' Thus, firms must be choosing one or

both of two second best alternatives to bonding: monitoring workers intensively

and/or paying efficiency wages.   The likely outcome is that firms utilize bonds

to the extent possible, and then pick the optimal combination of efficiency wages

and monitoring required to prevent shirking in the presence of limited bonding

ability.




Lazear (1979) argues that the existence and observed pattern of mandatory re-

tirement provisions indicates that some bonding must be utilized in the labor

market. Adverse selection problems provide an alternative rationale for the use

of mandatory retirement policies. If individual performance is hard to observe,

wage cuts for older workers may lead to the better workers moving to other jobs

and the "lemons" remaining. Additionally, Medoff and Abraham (1980) provide ev-

idence that experience—earnings and tenure—earnings profiles cannot be fully ac-

counted for by rising productivity.     The typical finding in cross—section wage

equation estimates of a positive effect of years of tenure at current job (sen-

iority) on earnings is often pointed to as evidence of these types of bonding



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 16
arrangements especially taken in conjunction with the Medoff and Abraham evidence;

These estimates merely show that workers who have been on a given job for a longer

period of time earn higher wages. This nay reflect returns to seniority beyond

those to general labor market experience as in the bonding stories, or it may

reflect that workers in good jobs or good matches earn higher wages throughout

their job tenure and are less likely to quit these valuable jobs. (Abraham and

Farber, 1986;   Altonji and Shakotko, 1985).     Alternatively, better workers may

earn more throughout their careers and have greater job tenure in any given

cross—section since they may tend to be more stable. Nevertheless, pensions may

be the primary labor force bonding mechanisms. Ippolito (1985) presents a variety

of evidence indicating the importance of bonding through pensions.



Practical limitations on the use of alternative incentive mechanisms suggest that

high wages and involuntary unemployment may be a profitable discipline device.

The limitations on bonding devices appear least important in exactly the type of

jobs the model predicts should pay efficiency wages (jobs in large, primary sector

firms).




3.2. The Labor Turnover Model



Workers are likely to be more reluctant to quit a job the higher the (relative)

wage paid by the current firm and the worse the prospects in the external labor

market (e.g. the higher the aggregate unemployment rate). If firms must bear part

of the costs of turnover and if quit rates are a decreasing function of wages paid,

firms have an incentive to pay high wages to reduce costly labor turnover. Salop

(1979) and Stiglitz (1974, 1985) formally analyze models based on these features.



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                   17
The formal structure of the labor turnover model is quite similar to that of the

shirking model. Firms' attempts to pay high relative wages to minimize turnover

costs can lead to an equilibrium with wages in excess of market clearing and in-

voluntary unemployment serving to reduce quit rates.



The market failure in this model arises, as in the shirking model, because of the

dual role played by the wage. The same wage is unable to simultaneously clear

the market for new hires and the market for trained workers (Salop,1979). A

seniority wage system in which new workers accept initial lower wages below their

marginal products to pay for their training and hiring costs can solve the problem

and eliminate involuntary unemployment.    If training and hiring costs are large

and are concentrated in a short initial period, employment or application fees

need to be levied on new workers. Firms do not have an incentive to induce workers

to quit if training must actually be provided or hiring costs entailed.     Thus,

the moral hazard problem on the firms side is not as serious as in the shirking

model     Capital market imperfections may make the payment of large fees imprac-

tical .   Salop (1979) and Stiglitz (1984) point out that risk averse workers are
unlikely to be willing to post bonds and bear the risk that they are unsuited to

a job. These considerations indicate that it is realistic to assume that firms

must bear part of the costs of turnover.



The model predicts that high wages will be found where hiring and training costs

are formidable.     These wage premiums should •be associated with lower turnover

rates.    Stiglitz (1985) shows that the model provides an explanation for wage

distributions within an industry for similar workers.      Equally profitable high

wage—low turnover and low wage—high turnover strategies can coexist for identical

firms and workers for certain types of quit functions.13



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  18
3.3. The Adverse Selection Model



Imperfect. information by firms about the abilities of workers may provide a se-

lection rationale for efficiency wage payments. If workers are heterogeneous in

ability and if ability and reservation wages are positively correlated, firms

which offer higher wages will attract higher quality job applicants.    If firms

cannot observe applicant quality and lack devices to induce workers to reveal

their true abilities, random hiring from the applicant pool must be utilized. A

higher wage increases the expected ability of a worker hired randomly from the

applicant pool. A wage above the market clearing level may minimize costs per

efficiency unit of labor under these circumstances (Stiglitz, 1976; and Weiss,

1980).   Institutional, legal, or sociological constraints preventing firms from

differentiating wages across workers with different productive characteristics

can lead to similar results.'4



A basic objection to the model is that firms are likely to eventually learn a

worker's ability. In this case, performance bonds can solve the adverse selection

problem. The same moral hazard problem on the part of firms and capital market

imperfections that limit the use of bonding for shirking problems apply in this

context as well. If firms can measure performance on the job, pay—for—performance

schemes eliminate the problem. Employment contracts with self—selection incen-

tives (nonlinear wage— employment contracts) can also potentially ease adverse

selection problems (Mookherjee, 1984a).



3.4. Sociological Models




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                19
Workers effort levels may significantly depend on the extent to which they feel

they are being treated fairly by their employers. The perceived justness of the

wage may affect worker productivity if effort leVels are linked to worker morale

and feelings of loyalty to the firm.'5 Akerlof (1982,1984) and Solow (1979) argue

that wage rigidity in the face of unemployment may be due to the importance of

social wage norms and other behaviors not well—captured by traditional

individualistic utility functions. Akerlof (1984) discusses a variety of evidence

from sociological studies indicating that a worker's effort level depends on the

norms of his or her work group (peer pressure) and posits a number of

sociologically based models with efficiency wage implications. Akerlof (1982)

develops a model in which firms can raise group work norms by offering wages above

the level necessary to attract a labor force. The firms "gift" of high wages is

rewarded by the "gift" of improved work norms and increased individual effort.

Wages in excess of market clearing may be the outcome when wages play a dual role

of both allocating labor across firms and of satisfying interpersonal and

intertemporal wage norms that matter for worker performance.



Most firms pay careful attention to the perceived fairness and consistency of

their internal wage structures. Doeringer and Piore (1971) find that firms devote

far more resources to and place more weight in their wage policies on job evalu-

ation programs designed to maintain and br justify their internal wage structures

than to market wage surveys utilized to keep wages in line with those of product

or labor market competitors. Richard Wing (1984, p. 9/18), a former compensation

director at Eastman Kodak, notes



There is always some degree of conflict between internal and external pay equity.
The position taken by most salary administrators is that internal relationships
should be given first priority, and external pay relationships for certain jobs
must be compromised on occasion.


Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  20
If certain wage relationships matter to a firms workforce, it is in the firm's

interest to take those considerations into account.




The sociological models indicate that efficiency wages are likely to arise where

work groups and teamwork are important. These models may also explain the direct

impact of product market factors and the firm's "ability—to—pay" on wages. Worker

morale and loyalty and consequently productivity may depend on the extent that

the firm shares its rents with its employees.



3.5. The Union Threat Model



Firms are likely to face important diseconornies of scale in the hiring and

training of workers.   If there are costs to job search and/or relocation, a firm

may have to increase its wage offer or reduce the quality of accepted applicants

to replace a large number of workers quickly.    If one or a few workers leaves a

firm, their co—workers are likely to have overlapping firm— and job—specific

knowledge and to be able to train replacements. When many workers quit in a short

time period, more valuable knowledge is lost per worker and no one may be left

capable of training replacement employees. Since the costs of turnover to the

firm rise rapidly as the number of workers needed to be replaced in a given in-

terval increases, collective action can provide workers with more bargaining power

than they have acting individually.    Social norms such as the willingness of

customers and suppliers to boycott a struck firm, may in many settings prevent

firms from doing business even if they can replace workers who attempt to act

collectively.   Collective action by workers may enable them to shut a business

down.   This bargaining power can potentially be used by workers to claim for



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 21
    themselves some part of the monopoly rents earned by an enterprise and (in the

    short run) a share of the returns on the fixed assets.



    Dickens (1986) analyzes the effect of the threat of collective action by workers

    on wages and employment on firms that attempt to avoid collective bargaining with

    their employees (i.e. attempt to keep out a union). A firm can avoid unionization

    in the model by choosing wages and employment so that no coalition greater than

    or equal to a fixed fraction of the workforce (a majority in U.S. labor law) can

    be formed around a feasible union contract. The organization of a union is as-

    sumed (realistically) to be costly to the workforce. A firm can prevent collec-

    tive action by paying its workers a wage as high as they would receive under a

    collective bargaining agreement minus the cost to the workers of organizing.

    Foulkes (1980) provides many examples of nonunion firms that try to keep wages

    close to the union wage level for comparable jobs. Dickens shows that the threat

    of collective action can explain why unemployed workers cannot bid down a firm's

    wages.'6 Unemployed workers who are hired and paid a lower wage will attempt to

    organize collectively. Firms may find it profitable to pay wages above the market

    clearing level to try to prevent unionization.   Thus, the model can lead to job

    rationing and unemployment in a manner similar to efficiency wage models. The

    evidence presented by Ruback and Zimmerman (1984) that union organization drives

    reduce a firm's stock price and by Freeman (1983) that unions are associated with

    lower profitability provides a strong rationale for firms to develop labor re-

    lations policies that help maintain a nonunion environment.



•   Firms may be able to avoid unionization in other manners rather than paying high

    wages. One possibility is the posting of bonds that are forfeited if a worker is

    involved in union activity.     Jacoby (1983) notes that some firms in the late



    Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 22
nineteenth century withheld some of workers earnings. These withheld earnings were

forfeited if workers went out on strike. If a union is formed, it might be able

to extract the return of the bonds.     Firms could also require workers to sign

contracts barring them from engaging in collective action as a condition of em-

ployment. 'Yellow dog" contracts of this type are not enforceable in the con-

temporary United States.




The union threat model predicts that wage premiums should arise where the costs

of organization are low for workers and where the potential gains from

unionization are high.     Product market power (large monopoly rents per worker)

and high capital/labor ratios increase the potential gains from collective action

and should be associated with higher union wages and higher wages of nonunion

workers with a credible threat to organize. Dickens (1986) provides a number of

arguments within the framework of the model for the stability of real and/or

nominal wages over the business cycle.     International differences in labor law

and the potential threat of unionization provide important identifying informa-

tion for the possible importance of collective action threats as a cause of un-

employment and wage rigidity,



3.6. Brief Summary



There are a variety of plausible explanations why firms may find it in their in-

terest to pay wages in excess of narket clearing. The mechanisms underlying these

alternative efficiency wage theories are summarized in Table 1.     These models

appear capable of explaining persistent involuntary unemployment, segmented labor

markets, and wage differentials for similar workers that are not equalizing dif-

ferences.   The use of deferred payment schemes and internal promotion ladders



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 23
                    Table 1: A Synapsis of Alternative
                         Efficiency Wage Theories



                    Problems Leading to               Benefits to Firm
Theory              Efficiency Wage Payments          of High Wages


Shirking            Imperfect observability of           Raise cost of job loss
                    worker effort level and              encouraging good
                    performance; monitoring              performance; economize
                    is costly                            on monitoring costs


Turnover            Firms must bear part of              High wages reduce
                    turnover costs                       turnover costs if
                    (hiring and training costs)          quit rate is
                                                         decreasing
                                                         function of wages


Adverse Selection   Imperfect observability of           Attract   higher quality
                    worker quality and                   pool of   applicants
                    performance                          if more   productive
                                                         workers   have better
                                                         outside   opportunities


Sociological        Morale and worker feelings           Improved work norms,
                    of loyalty to firm depend            morale, feelings of
                    on perceived fairness of             loyalty to firms which
                    wages                                raise productivity


Union Threat        Costs of replacing                   Maintain industrial
                    existing workforce                   peace and/or prevent
                    gives employees                      unionization
                    bargaining power
within long—term employment relationships may be able to solve some efficiency

wage problems without the resort to job rationing.     The empirical relevance of

efficiency wage theories is examined in more detail in the next section.




4. Some Empirical Evidence Relating to Usefulness f the Approach



4.1. Inter—industry Wage Differences



4.1.1. Some Implications of Efficiency Wage Models for Wage Differentials



It has long been noted that there are large differences in wages across industries

for apparently similar work. Substantial industry wage differentials remain even

after controlling for union status and observed worker and Job characteristics

(Bloch and Kuskin, 1978; Dickens and Katz, 1986 ; Krueger and Summers, 1986; and

many others).   In fact, large wage differences for essentially the same type of

work in the same locality have invariably been uncovered by area wage surveys.

Slichter (1950) observes that hiring rates paid for common labor by 85 plants in

Cleveland in February 1947 ranged from $.50 to $1.09 an hour. Re notes that this

spread persisted despite the fact that rates had been compiled and distributed

to firms throughout the city by the Cleveland Chamber of Commerce for over twenty

years. John Dunlop (1985; p. 18) summarizes the typical finding of studies of

local wage variation:



It is a well established fact that wage rates or average hourly earnings for a
defined job classification, such as maintenance electrician or key punch operator,
show very wide variation in a locality, particularly in a community with a variety
of industries. The top wage rates for the same job classification are often two
or three times the low ones. Differences in fringe benefit programs enlarge these
differences.


Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 24
These wage differentials provide an empirical challenge to alternative labor

market models. The ability of competitive and efficiency wage models of the labor

market to meet this challenge is the focus, of this section which draws heavily

upon the review and analysis presented in Dickens and Katz (1986).



A standard competitive labor market model implies that persistent industry wage

premiums require industry—related differences in labor quality (skill) and/or

non—wage dimensions of work requiring equalizing differences. Reder (1962, p.

276) summarizes these predictions:



In the long run, under competitive conditions, any industry will pay the same
price for a given grade of labor as any other industry hiring in the same location.
This remark must be qualified for differences in nonpecuniary attractions of
different industries and locations . . . Therefore, in the long run, the real wage
differentials among industries will reflect differences in the skill mix.



Alternatively, industry wage differences at any given point of time for similar

work may reflect transitory differentials related to shifts in labor demand across

sectors and imperfect short—run labor mobility.



On the other hand, a basic implication of efficiency wage models is that if the

conditions necessitating efficiency wage payments differ across industries, then

the optimal wage will differ among industries.      This means that workers with

identical productive characteristics are paid differently depending on their in-

dustry affiliation. These wage differences for similar workers reflect industry

characteristics that do not directly affect the utility of workers and thus do

not require compensating differentials.     Intra—industry wage distributions for




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                   25
similar workers may arise from differences in the wage—productivity relationship

across firms in an industry.




Each variant of the efficiency wage hypothesis potentially predicts that partic-

ular industry and firm characteristics should be associated with industry wage

premiums. The shirking model leads to the prediction that wages should be high
                                                                                     ft.




where   monitoring costs are large. High wages are likely to be substituted for

intensive monitoring activities in these circumstances. Wage differentials may

also be required where the costs of worker malfeasance are high. Oi (1983) sug-

gests that higher wages are required in large establishments since monitoring is

typically more difficult. The cost of foul ups is likely to be large in industries

with expensive equipment (possibly proxied by high capital/labor ratios) and for

workers in positions where poor performance may affect many other workers per-

formances (e.g. workers in coordinating positions and workers involved integrated

production processes.)



The turnover model implies that wage premiums should arise where turnover and

training costs are large and that wage premiums should yield the benefit of lower

quit rates. The adverse selection model predicts higher wages, after controlling

for observables, where it is difficult to evaluate labor quality. The sociolog-

ical (or normative) models are less specific but suggest that the importance of

teamwork and ability—to—pay may be relevant.     The importance of relative wage

comparisoms in some sociological models provides a rationale for long—term sta-

bility of wage differentials and and for linkages in the wage differentials across

occupations within a firm or industry. Finally, the union threat model suggests

that wage premiums arise where the costs of unionization are low to workers and

where the firm has rents derived from market power or has large fixed capital



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                .

                                                                               26
investments. This means that product market power should directly be reflected

in wages. Differences in industry wage premiums across occupations with important

union threats (blue collar occupations) and those with smaller threats or no

possibility of unionization (managers and professional workers) provides further

information on the importance of union—based models.



The primary point is that efficiency wage models predict that there should be

important wage differentials not explained by compensating differentials, labor

quality differences, or shifts in labor demand across sectors. An important ap-

proach to the assessment of the empirical relevance of wage models involves the

determination of the importance of non—competitive wage differences.      Further

relevant information can be gained by examining the nature of these wage premiums

for consistency with the predictions of individual efficiency wage alternatives.



Some initial evidence on the nature and importance of industry wage differentials

is provided through cross—section estimates of industry effects utilizing indi-

vidual level data.    Table 2 presents estimated wage differentials for broadly

defined industries based on the results of a regression of log hourly earnings

on industry dummies with human capital, demographic and locational controls for

a large sample of private sector workers from the combined 1983 Current Population

Survey(CPS).17 The employment—weighted average of the coefficients of the indus-

try dummy variables from the regression was calculated with the omitted industry

dummy treated as having a zero effect on wages.18 The estimated differentials

presented in Table 2 are the differences between the actual industry coefficients

and the weighted average. These differentials indicate the proportional differ-

ence in wages between an employee in a given industry and the average employee

in the sample after controlling for individual characteristics, SMSA status, and



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 27
TABLES



                    Table 2: Estimated OLS Log Wage Differentials for
                          One—Digit Industries and Union Status
                    1983 CPS — Nonagricultural Private Sector Workers


         Variable                               Coefficient
                                             (Standard Errors)

    Mining                                          .289
                                                   (.009)
    Construction                                    .127
                                                   (.005)
    Nondurables                                     .050
                                                   (.004)
    Durables                                        .098
                                                   (.004)
    Transportation & Public Utilities               .154
                                                   (.005)
    Wholesale Trade                                    .042
                                                   (.005)
    Retail Trade                                   —.161
                                                   (.004)
    FIRE                                               .052
                                                   (.005)
    Servtces                                       —   .064
                                                   (.003)
    Union                                              .192
                                                   (.003)

    Sample Size                                        134928

                                                        .546




Controls included are education (years of schooling) and its square; experience
(age—education—5) and its square; married; sex; race; part—time work; SMSA;
interaction terms for both experience and its square with married, race, sex,
education, part—time work and SMSA; 11 occupation dummies; and 50 state dummies.




Tables
state of residence. The industry variables have a sizeable impact on wages. For

example, workers in mining and transportation and public utilities earn approxi-

mately 45 and 32 percent more than observationally equivalent workers in retail

trade.   The industry wage effects are comparable in magnitude to the effect of

union status.




Krueger and Summers (1986) provide evidence on industry wage differentials for a

more disaggregated industry breakdown. They report industry wage premiums that

range from 38 percent above the average industry for the petroleum industry to

37 percent below the average for private household workers in estimates from the

1984 May Current Population Survey that include a wide variety of controls for

individual characteristics, union status, and occupation.   Kreuger and Summers

find the employment—weighted standard deviation of industry wage premiums for two

digit industries to range from 10 to 15 percent for different years of the CPS

from 1974 to 1984.




Dickens and Katz (1986) find that the industry wage differentials persist when

union and nonunion workers are analyzed separately. The patterns of industry wage

premiums are extremely similar for union and nonunion employees. The raw corre-

lation of three digit industry wage premiums for union and nonunion workers in

the combined 1983 CPS sample is .65.19



4.1.2. Competitive Explanations for Wage Differentials



A number of explanations consistent with standard competitive labor market models

are possible for the large impact of industry affiliation on wages even after

controlling for measured human capital variables. The first posits that differ—



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                28
ences in technology across industries make it profitable to hire higher quality

workers (and hence pay higher wages) in some industries. Estimated industry wage

premiums in a cross—section may primarily reflect individual—specific components

of earnings capacity that are unobservable (to the econometrician) and correlated

with industry status.   If unmeasured ability is highly correlated with observed

labor quality variables, such as years of schooling and labor market experience,

then unmeasured labor quality cannot provide an explanation for the large esti-

mated industry wage effects,   Dickens and Katz (1986) show that the size of in-

dustry wage effects is not much altered if wage equations are first estimated

without industry variables and then the residuals are used to determine the in-

dustry impacts. This approach credits observed quality variables with the impacts

of unobserved variables correlated with both measured quality variables and in-

dustry status.



Longitudinal data provides a potential vehicle to control for time invariant,

unmeasured labor quality.   If high wage industries simply have workers of high

unobserved ability and if workers of a given quality are paid equally in different

industries, wage changes should not systematically be limked to changes in in-

dustry status. Longitudinal data allow one to examine the wages of a given in-

dividual as he or she switches industries.    First difference (or fixed—effects)

estimation allows one to eliminate the impacts of unchanging unobserved ability

components (that are rewarded equally in all industries) on the industry wage

effects estimates. Krueger and Summers (1986) estimate large effects of industry

switches (for broadly defined industries) on wages in first differenced re-

gressions utilizing a pooled sample of matched May CPS data for 1974—75, 1977—78,

and 1979—80. The estimated industry effects from the first differenced regression

are similar in direction and magnitude to pooled regression estimates.      Thus,




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 29
workers moving from high to low wage industries appear to experience wage declines

and workers moving from low to high wage industries appear to experience wage

gains.20 Vroman (1978) reports similar results for industry switchers in the

1964—1971 period utilizing social security continuous wage history data on indi-

viduals' annual earnings. Murphy and Topel (1986) find in matched CPS data for

the 1977 to 1984 period that industry switchers receive only 30 percent of the

wage gains that would have been predicted from the industry differentials observed

in cross—sectional data. The Murphy and Topel results are likely to be downward

biased estimates of the industry premiums since their measure of the wage in the

post—switch job is derived form annual earnings data that combines earnings from

both the pre— and post—switch jobs. The existing longitudinal evidence suggests

that at least a moderate portion of the industry differentials found in cross—

sectional analyses reflect "true" differentials rather than just unmeasured

ability.




A second possible competitive explanation is that the industry wage differentials

are compensating differentials for nonwage job attributes that directly affect

the utility of workers.21 In fact, this is often the justification for the

inclusion of industry dummies in estimated wage equations with individual cross—

section data. Krueger and Summers (1986) find that the inclusion of 10 working

conditions variables in a standard wage equation barely affects the estimated

industry wage premiums.22 Many important nonpecuniary job attributes are unlikely

to be captured by their control variables. Freeman (1981) and Krueger and Summers

find that the fringe benefit differentials tend to expand wage differences.

Murphy and Topel (1986) find that differences in unemployment risk across indus-

tries can account for only a quite small fraction of industry wage differentials.




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 30
If industry wage premiums reflect equalizing differences, then they do not reflect

rents that make jobs especially valuable to workers. The implication is that the

wage premiums should not be systematically related to quit rates. Industry and

individual level studies both indicate that wage premiums are strongly associated

with lower quit rates (Pencavel , 1970;   Freeman, 1980; and Krueger and Summers,

1986).   This suggests that industry wage premiums reflect rents to good jobs or

good matches and are not merely compensating differences.23



An additional competitive explanation for industry wage premiums observed at any

point of time is that they largely reflect transitory differentials created by

shifts in labor demand across sectors and maintained by incomplete labor mobility

in the short run.   The strong stability of industry differentials over time ap-

pears to rule out transitory factors as a major component of the explanation.

Cullen (1956) presents data showing remarkable stability in the industry wage

structure in the United States from 1899 to 1950. He finds the rank correlation

of average annual earnings for 76 manufacturing industries for the years 1899 and

1950 to be .66. Cullen finds for a group of 84 manufacturing industries that 14

of the 21 industries in the highest—wage quarter in 1899 were still in the

highest—wage quarter in 1947. Also, 15 of the 21 lowest wage industries in 1899

remained in the lowest—wage quarter in 1947. Cullen furthermore provides evidence

of stability in the extent of wage dispersion over the long—term. The degree of

dispersion across industries is approximately the same in 1950 as in 1899.



This long—term stability in industry average wages may reflect stability in skill

mix differences. Industry differentials for any given grade of labor could reflect

responses to sectoral labor demand and/or supply shifts.         Limited evidence

available from this time period suggest that industry wage differences for par—



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  31
ticular grades of labor were fairly stable. Slichter (1950) finds the rank cor-

relation of males unskilled average hourly earnings for 20 manufacturing

industries between 1923 and 1946 to be •7324



Strong stability in inter—industry wage rankings is also evident for the postwar

United States.   Montgomery and Stockton (1985) report that the rank correlation

of mean hourly wages for 20 2—digit manufacturing industries between 1951 and 1981

was .675. Bell and Freeman (1985) find strong stability in the rankings for a

group of 53 industries (both manufacturing and non—manufacturing) from 1948 to

1982. Both Bell and Freeman and Montgomery and Stockton note that the dispersion

(log standard deviation) of industry mean wages increased substantially during

the 1970's. On the other hand, Krueger and Summers (1986) find that the estimated

two digit wage premiums using individual data from the CPS and controlling for

individual characteristics did not appear to have grown from 1974 to 1984.

Krueger and Summers find the correlation of the estimated industry wage premiums

between 1974 and 1984 to be .970.        These results indicate that the rising

dispersion in average industry wages since the early 1970's may largely reflect

changes in the composition of labor forces across industries and possibly also

changes in union wage impacts.



A further possibility is that industry wage differences arise from differences

 in patterns of human capital accumulation across industries. Krueger and Summers

 (1986) find that industry wage differentials are approximately equal in magnitude

 and highly correlated for young (20 to 35 years old) and older (50 to 65 years

 old) workers. Furthermore, the 1979 Current Population Survey contains informa-

 tion on job tenure (years with current employer). I utilized this data set to

 determine if industry wage differences vary with job tenure. Estimates of log



 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  32
 earnings equations for separate tenure groups for nonunion, private sector workers

 indicated that the industry differentials are quite similar for different tenure

groups. For example, the standard deviation of one-digit industry wage differen-

tials for workers with less than one year of tenure and for workers with greater

than 10 years of tenure are .11 and .12 respectively.25 The correlation
                                                                          (corrected

for sampling error) for the differentials of the two tenure groups is .74. Large

industry wage effects are apparent for entry level workers that are close in size

and highly correlated with those of long—term employees.    One exception is that

the differentials of all other industries versus retail trade appear to be sub-

stantially larger for workers with long job tenure than for entry level workers.



4.1.3. The Occupational Structure of Industry Wage Premiums



Although most explanations for wage differentials provide reasons why one would

expect particular occupational groups to be high paid in some industries relative

to other industries, they do not lead one to expect the pattern of wage premiuns

to be the sane across industries for diverse occupational groups. For example,

a standard competitive model suggests that an industry with dangerous production

jobs may pay its blue collar workers high wages to compensate them for the risks

their jobs entail, but it does not also suggest that secretaries in this industry

should earn a pay premium. Working conditions, skill requirements, and monitoring

problems are quite likely to differ across occupations in a firm or industry.



Dickens and Katz (1986) estimate industry wage differentials by occupation (for

a 12 occupation and three digit Census of Population industry breakdown) for

nonunion, private sector workers from the combined 1983 CPS sample. The effects

of human capital variables, demographic characteristics, and locational variables



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                   33
were constrained to be the same across occupational groups. Industry wage effects

were allowed to vary by occupation. This involves the estimation of an earnings

function of the following form:




(4)              Wj =      X..   +   a. +


where        is log(hourly wage) of individual i in industry—occupation cell j,

isa vector of individual and locational variables for individual i,                   is a vector


of parameters, a      is   a fixed effect (or differential) for industry—occupation cell

j, and a.. is an error term. This equation is equivalent to a wage equation with

industry dummies, occupation dummies, and a full set of interaction terms between

the industry and occupation dummies. The large number of industry—occupational

cells implies that the feasible approach to estirnatin the industry differentials

for each occupation is to first run a de—meaned regression in which the

industry—occupation cell means are subtracted off for the dependent variable and

all the independent variables:




(5)
                            =
                                (X-X) +        u.



where W is the mean of the log of hourly earnings for workers in cell 3,                       is

 the the vector of the means of the individual and locational variables for workers

 in cell 3, and u3 is a regression error. This regression, assuming that the

       in equation (4) are uncorrelated with the                     yields a consistent estimate

      of .   The mean residual for each cell 3 is then a consistent estimate of the

 industry—occupation 3 fixed effect:




 (6)
                  j =ij

 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                                 34
The estimated fixed effects were then grouped by occupation to analyze the re-

 lationships among industry impacts on wages in different occupations



Correlations of these estinated industry wage differentials across occupations

are presented in Table 3. The correlations are corrected for sampling error26

Table 3 indicates that even after controlling for a wide variety of individual

and geographic variables there are quite large correlations (most in the range

 .7 to 1) between average wages for workers in any two occupations within an in-

dustry. If one occupational group in an industry is high paid, all categories of

workers tend to be high paid. This finding is tough to reconcile with views that

the industry wage differences reflect unobserved ability or compensating differ-

entials since skill requirements and working conditions are unlikely to be common

to all occupations in an industry.



The results seem supportive of the union threat model since product market power

or profitability is likely to raise worker bargaining power across occupations

in an industry. Furthermore, the occupational structure of industry wage effects

is quite similar for union and nonunion workers (Dickens and Katz, 1986). The

union threat model does not explain why groups of workers that do not pose a threat

of collective action (e.g. managers) also share in the industry pay premiums.



The high correlation in industry differentials among different occupations is

consistent with sociological models in which wage norms are linked in a firm or

industry. The great efforts taken by firms to maintain their internal         wage
structure is quite consistent with these findings.




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  35
                                                       TABLE   3.

                      CORRELATIONS or INDUSTRY WACE DIFFERENTIALS ACROSS OCCUPATIONAL GROUPS
                                                  FIXED EFFECTS
                                     1983 CPS PRIVATE SECTOR NONUNION WORKERS

                                                                                                            Semi—      Trans
                                    Tech.            Sales     Cleric   Service Crafts             Operate Ski lied    Oper.   Labor
                   Manage   Pror.           Super.

                                            .85      .814      .99      .84        .90             .70     .67        .80      .81
Managers           1.00     .99     .60
                                                               .90      .73        .86             .82     .77        .74      .77
Proressionals               1.00    .72     .94      •7I

                                                     .61       .76      .10        .80             .63     .37        .45      .56
Technicians                         1.00    .18

                                                               .91       .97       .99             .78     ,914       .79      .90
Supervisors                                 1.00     .88

                                                     1.00      .79      .73        .78             .41     .146       .53      .69
Sales
                                                               1.00     .86        .90             .76      .70       .78      .88
Clerical
                                                                        1.00       1.00*           .98     .75        •71j     .89
service
                                                                                   1.00            .93      .95       .79      .78
Crafts
                                                                                                   1.00    1.00*      .76      1.00
Operatives
                                                                                                           1.00       .91      .90
Semi-Skilled
                                                                                                                      1.00     .91
Trans.    Equip.
   Ope r.                                                                                                                      1.00
Laborers
                                                                     causes some correlations to be
*The correction ror sampling error in industry—occupation cell means
greater than 1.00.

The regression from which the fixed effects were calculated     contained education (years or schooling) and its
                      (age—education—5) and  its square;  50  state dummy variables; dummy variables for marital
square;   experience                                    an individual lives in an SMSA; and    interaction terms
status, race, sex, part-time work and whether or not                                 the state dummies and educa-
                      and            squared  with all  the  other  variables except
ror both experience       experience                                           I   I
                                                                                samp       I
                                                                                     ng error. i A deta led di s—        I
                                                         ted for within ce
tion squa red. The correlation coefficients are correc
                                     is available   in Dickens  and  Katz (1986).
clission or the correction procedure
 4.1.4. Industry Characteristics and Industry Wage Patterns



An understanding of the empirical relevance of alternative theories of wage de-

termination requires knowledge of the industry characteristics associated with

high wages amd with low wages after controlling for worker characteristics. A

considerable amount of empirical research has focused on the relationship between

wages and industry structure. These studies (partially surveyed by Long and Link

(1983) and Kwoka (1983)) have focused on the influences of product market power,

firm (or plant) size, and extent of unionization on wages. The industry charac-

teristics that affect wage levels and the extent to which these variables matter

appear to be quite sensitive to the specification (e.g. other control variables

included) and to the particular sample analyzed (e.g. time period and use of only

manufacturing vs. wider variety of industries). This suggests the effects are

not uniform across industries and that multicollineari-ty is important for many

industry variables.    Nevertheless, some patterns emerge from these previous
studies.




Industry wage levels are strongly positively correlated with industry concen-

tration when no labor quality variables are utilized (Weiss, 1966).      The re-

lationship is far more ambiguous when detailed labor quality controls are

included. Pugel (1980) and Hodson and England (1985) find strong positive effects

of industry profitability measures on average industry wages even with controls

for average worker characteristics, extent of unionization, and other industry

variables including the rate of employment growth. Dickens and Katz (1986) find

that prpfits as a percentage of sales are strongly positively related to industry

wage premiums for nonumion workers. Kwoka (1983), Long and Link (1983) and Mellow


Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                36
(1982) find a positive and significant effect of industry concentration on wages

utilizing individual level data on earnings and worker characteristics combined

with other industry level variables. This contrasts with Weiss's (1966) finding

that concentration does not matter once individual worker controls are taken into

account.    Overall, industry wage differences appear to be related to product

market power (ability—to—pay) although measurement problems in variables such as

concentration and accounting profits mean these conclusions should be be viewed

as somewhat tentative.



Proportion of workers in an industry in large plants or average establishment size

have typically been found to be positively related to industry wage levels even

in the presence of detailed control variables (Kwoka, 1983; Long and Link, 1983;

Pugel ,   1980 and many others). Although establishment size and firm size appear

to have quite important effects on wages within industries, they cannot explain

much of inter—industry wage differentials. The May 1979 CPS contains a special

survey including questions on establishment and firms size. Krueger and Summers

(1986) find in analyzing this data set that the inclusion of plant size and firm

size controls barely affects the estimates of industry wage differentials. They

find the employment weighted standard deviation of two—digit industry log wage

differentials falls only from .104 to .99 when plant and firm size controls are

added to a log earnings equation with controls for occupation, region, union

status and individual characteristics. The raw correlation of the estimated in-

dustry differentials with and without employer size controls is .96.       In re-

gressions (not reported here but available upon request) utilizing the 1979 CPS,

I find that estimated industry differentials are on slightly affected by the

inclusion of plant size and firms size dummies when nonunion workers are analyzed

in isolation.     These results correspond to the conclusion of Brown and Medoff



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  37
(1985) that most of the employer size effect on wages occurs within detailed in-

dustries.




Percentage of workers covered by collective bargaining in an industry has a strong

positive effect on average industry wages.27 Dickens and Katz (1986) find that

extent of industry unionization has a strong positive effect on both union and

nonunion wages. They also find that regional union density has a strong positive

effect on nonunion wages and a much weaker impact on union wages. Dickens (1986)

argues that this is the pattern of union density impacts that arises from an im-

portant role of a union threat in wage determination.



The impacts of industry variables on wages remain a bit of puzzle. The findings

of most studies are fairly consistent with some role for union threat effects

since product market power and extent of unionization seem to explain a fair

portion of inter—industry wage differentials for nonunion workers. Sociological

models of the Akcerlof (1984) variety also seem to have some support. The findings

of Hodson and England (1985) and Lawrence and Lawrence (1985) that capital in-

tensity (capital to labor ratio) has a positive effect on industry wages provides

some support for the shirking model since the cost of worker malfeasance is likely

to be greater     in   capital   intensive   industries.   Capital—skilled   labor

complementarity suggests that the capital—labor ratio finding may simply proxy

for unmeasured labor quality. The strong linkages of wages to product market

variables even after controlling for a large nunber of individual and locational

variables appear difficult to reconcile with a strict unobserved ability inter-

pretation of industry wage differentials.



4.1.5. Direct Evidence on the Benefits to Firms of High Wages



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 38
Efficiency wage models postulate that firms pay wages above the market clearing

level because there are cost reducing or productivity enhancing reasons to do so.

Some limited empirical evidence exists on the benefits to firms of higher wages.

As I noted previously, wage premiums are associated with lower quit rates. Thus,

high wages help to economize on turnover costs.     The direct cost savings from

lower turnover do not appear to be large enough to justify the magnitude of ob-

served wage differentials. For example, Freeman and Medoff (1984, p. 109) estimate

that the cost savings associated with lower quit rates from the presence of a

union is 1 to 2 percent of labor costs. They also find that the impact of unionism

on quit rates to be equivalent to the impact of a 40 percent wage differential

The indirect gains of enhanced teamwork from continuity in work relationships may

be the more important element of the benefits of lower turnover.




Hammermesh (1977) finds that the deviation of a worker's wage from the wage pre-

dicted by the worker's personal and job characteristics is positively correlated

with various measures of job satisfaction. High wages appear to raise morale as

suggested by the sociological models and many personnel professionals. A further

unanswered question is whether job satisfaction measures have much to do with

productivity.   Freeman and Medoff (1984) conclude from surveying a large number

of studies on worker attitudes and unionization drives that worker dissatisfaction

is strongly correlated with increased desire for unionization as expressed by

greater union organizing activity and a higher likelihood of votes in favor of

unionization in representation elections.    High wages by raising worker satis-

faction reduce the likelihood of union organization as predicted by the union

threat model


Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 39
Krueger and Summers (1985) provide some further evidence linking wage premiums

to worker behaviors consistent with some of the supposed benefits to a firm of

efficiency wage payments. Industry wage premiums are found to be negatively re-

lated to absenteeism (due to weather) and positively related to employee self—

evaluations of work effort. The positive correlation of wage differentials and

employee views of work effort may simply indicate that high wages are acting as

a compensating differential for greater effort required on the job or a fast pace

of work. Allen (1984) finds consistently in an analysis of several data sets that

positive wage differentials are associated with reduced absenteeism. Although

absenteeism is something that can easily be observed by a firm, the reasons for

absenteeism are not easily monitored. High wages combined with the threat of job

loss for too much absenteeism might be am effective personnel policy.



Bulow and Summers (1986) discuss the introduction of the five dollar a day pay

system at Ford in 1914. They note that historical observers found that the higher

wages led to large increases in productivity and reductions in absenteeism and

turnover. This case provides some support for the implications of the shirking

and turnover model



Industry wage differences not captured by observed worker characteristics, work-

ing conditions variables, and locational variables are large and persistent.

These differentials are not well explained by compensating differentials or

transitory rents arising from shifts in labor demand across sectors. More work

utilizing longitudinal data is required to determine the extent to which unmeas-

ured ability may account for the estimated differentials. The union threat model

appears quite consistent with industry differentials for nonunion production


Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                40
workers.   The long—term stability of industry wage differences through periods

with substantial differences in the extent of union organization indicate only a

more limited role for union threats and direct union impacts.     Large wage dif-

ferentials across industries for occupations with little threat of collective

action suggests other factors must also be important. Industry differentials are

strongly correlated across occupational groups.     Sociological models in which

industry wage contours or wage norms gain normative significance appear consistent

with these similarities in the industry wage patterns across occupations.    Eco-

nomic efficiency wage rationales arising from monitoring, selection, and/or

turnover problems can provide reasons why certain jobs in an industry require wage

premiums. The concerns of firms with the perceived fairness of their internal

wage structure may mean that these differentials come to permeate the entire wage

structure in the industry. A combination of the economic efficiency wage models

with the sociological (normative) efficiency wage models provides a fairly con-

sistent though far from elegant account of the observed pattern of wage differ-

entials. Much more empirical work is needed trying to uncover direct evidence

of the gains to firms of high wage policies. Better measures of the factors that

economic efficiency wage models indicate should be important for wage differences

(e.g. monitoring costs) are required to better determine the relevance of these

models for understanding the apparent large impact of industry and firm affil-

iation on earnings.




4.2 Labor Market Discrimination28




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 41
Efficiency wage models provide several reasons for persistent discrimination by

race and sex in a competitive labor market. Group differences unrelated to pro-

ductivity can potentiaJly generate wage differences and occupational segregation.



If two identifiable labor market groups differ in their rates of turnover or labor

force withdrawal, the group with the higher turnover propensity will have a

shorter horizon on a job and is likely to require greater inducement not to shirk.

Bulow and Summers (1986) show that in the dual labor market version of the

shirking model that the higher turnover group must be overrepresented in the

secondary sector since if the wage is the same for both groups in the primary

sector, the shorter horizon group is more likely to shirk unless the chances of

being able to get a primary job in the future are lower than for the long horizon

group.   Since Poterba and Summers (1984) estimate a much higher rate of labor

force withdrawal for women aged 25 to 59 than for men in the same age group, this

yields a prediction of occupational and industrial segregation by sex with women

tending to be found in lower paying jobs that are easier to monitor. Bulow and

Summers (1986) demonstrate that if labor market discrimination arises from a re-

sult of differences in separation probabilities by groups, that anti—
discrimination policies such as affirmative action can raise welfare under a

utilitarian welfare criterion.



Johnson and Solon (1984) estimate that the earnings of both males and females are

negatively related to the proportion of females in their occupation even when a

wide variety of individual control variables are included. Additionally, Johnson

and Solon that most of the difference in male and female earnings after control-

 ling for differences in individual characteristics is related to differences in

 the industrial distribution of employment by sex. If industry wage differentials



 Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 42
arise form efficiency wage considerations, then this is strong evidence that these

factors play a major role in differences in earnings by sex.



Goldin (1986) presents evidence on widespread sex segregation across jobs within

manufacturing requiring similar training and ability in 1890. She also finds that

50 percent of female operatives were paid by piece rates as opposed to 13 percent

of male operatives. Monitoring costs are found to be cheaper for piece rates than

for time rates in female dominated industries, while the opposite for male domi-

nated industries. Goldin argues that deferred payment systems, such as discussed

in Lazear (1979, 1981), conserved on monitoring costs and were feasible for males

but not for females because of their shorter work horizons. Females were confined

to jobs utilizing more expensive piece rates and thereby received lower wages than

males. The same argument would apply to the use of efficiency wages rather than

deferred payments for male dominated jobs if full bonding were not feasible.

Goldin also presents evidence showing that the feminization of the clerical oc-

cupations occurred only with standardization and division of tasks that made

monitoring easier.                                                 -




Occupational and industrial segregation arises in the shirking model because of
the inability of high turnover groups to post performance bonds. This suggests

that groups facing capital market imperfections are more likely to be affected.

Furthermore, even if groups don't differ in turnover propensities, if dtsadvan—

taged groups are liquidity constrained and unable to post bonds (accept deferred

payment schemes), they will be less able to get primary sector jobs. Dickens and

Lang (1985a,b) find that nonwhites are overrepresented relative to their observed

characteristics in secondary sector jobs.




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 43
use of layoffs rather than wage cuts or worksharing in response to declines in

demand. If workers differ in unobservables and more productive workers have better

outside opportunities, wage cuts and worksharing reducing the value of the job

mean that the better workers are the one's most likely to leave for alternative

jobs or self—employment.




5. Cyclical Fluctuations and Efficiency Wages



Efficiency wage models provide several mechanisms through which cyclical fluctu-

ations in output can he generated by aggregate demand shocks. In the first place,

a basic property of these models is that wages are set by firms to maximize profits

as the interior solution to a maximization problem.30 In this case, the failure

of firms to adjust wages to small shocks leads to only second—order losses. This

differs sharply from a competitive labor market model where firms face large

losses fron failing to pay the competitive wage.      Akerlof and Yellen (1985b)

demonstrate that if firms are efficiency—wage setters in the labor market and

monopolistic competitors in the product market then inertial wage and price be-

havior in response to small nominal shocks leads to only second—order losses to

the firms which follow such behavior even though this behavior generates a

macroeconomic response with first—order welfare consequences.3' Imperfect compe-

tition in the product market combined with efficiency wages in the labor market

potentially can yield a model of cylclical fluctuations in response to aggregate

demand disturbances.

                                                                                      a.




Strong incentives for the creation of of long—term firm—worker relationships arise
from efficiency wage considerations. The emergence of long—term employment re—



Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                  46
lationships means that wage payments may reflect installment payments on long—term

obligations (Hall, 1980). In this case, employment decisions are not completely

guided by current wages.   This may reduce the importance of sticky wages from

near—rationality and menu costs as a potential rationale for real impacts of

nominal shocks.




The importance of relative wage concerns in efficiency wage settings provides a

further rationale for inertial wage policies in response to real and nominal

shocks. This point has been illustrated for the turnover model by Stiglitz (1984,

1985).   A drop in the money supply requiring a reduction in nominal wages to

maintain the existing level of unemployment may lead to unchanged nominal wages

with decentralized wage setting. Any individual firm reducing its wage will tend

to experience a higher quit rate and lower profits. Frictions in wage setting,

such as staggered contracts, can exacerbate the difficulties in adjusting to

nominal shocks when relative wages matter to firms and workers (Taylor, 1982).

If wages at all firms could be adjusted to shocks in a coordinated manner,! these

difficulties would not arise.




Monetary policy can also affect real output and the unemployment rate in the

shirking model if it can affect real interest rates (Bulow and Summers, 1986).

An increase in the real interest rate reduces the discounted value of keeping a

primary sector job and thereby increases the incentive of workers to shirk. This

can reduce employment by requiring higher wages to prevent shirking. The quan-

titative importance of this mechanism for monetary policy is likely to be quite

circumscribed.



6. Conclusions




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 47
Efficiency wage theories suggest that firms may find it profitable to pay workers

wages above the market clearing level since such wage premiums can help reduce

turnover, prevent worker malfeasance and collective action, attract higher qual-

ity employees, and facilitate the elicitation of effort by creating feelings of

equitable treatment among employees.   Simple versions of efficiency wage models

can explain involuntary unemployment, segmented labor markets with queues for

primary sector jobs, and large differences among firms in the wages paid for what

appear to be similar workers. Suitably modified these models can parsimoniously

explain many of the major stylized facts concerning the behavior of labor markets

over the business cycle.




The primary criticism of efficiency wage models is that bonding mechanisms can

solve effort elicitation, turnover, and adverse selection problems in an efficient

manner. Additionally, the primary rationales for the use of efficiency wages also

are all arguments for the emergence of long—term contracts and long—term

employer—employee attachments. Such long—term relationships appear quite inipor—

tant in the primary sector of the labor market where efficiency wage consider-

ations are typically viewed as most important. These long—term attachments help

facilitate bonding through the use of deferred payment mechanisms. It is an open

empirical question whether seniority wage systems and pensions provide full

bonding or whether they are only partial solutions leaving room for efficiency

wages. Future theoretical work is required attempting to analyze efficiency wage

problems in an explicitly contractual setting.32 The reasons why the contract

market fails to clear need to be more fully explicated. The presence of more than

one efficiency wage consideration may mean that bonding mechanisms solving one


Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 48
efficiency wage problem exacerbate others. For example, Shapiro and Stiglitz

(1985) argue that employment fees to clear the market in presence of the shirking

problem may exacerbate adverse selection problems.      Complicated contracts re-

quired to perform implicit bonding functions may create misunderstandings and lead

to feelings of inequity which harm morale and productivity.



Evidence on industry wage differences indicates that large differentials remain

that are quite difficult to explain in terms of differences in labor quality or

differences in important nonpecuniary aspects of work requiring compensating

differentials. The persistence of industry wage premiums for long time periods

implies that they are not just transitory differentials arising to facilitate the

sectoral reallocation of labor in a dynamic market economy.     Large, persistent

wage differentials for similar workers and types of jobs provide strong evidence

in favor of the importance of some type of efficiency wage behavior by many firms.

The complex pattern of differentials is difficult to reconcile with individual

variants of the efficiency wage argument. Further empirical research is required

to isolate the primary benefits to firms of high wages, the determinants of the

uses of alternative compensation systems (piece—rate vs. time rate etc.), and the

industry characteristics associated with large wage premiums.




Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation                                 49
FOOTNOTES



1. If efficiency wage considerations are equally important in all sectors of the
economy, involuntary unemployment, in the sense that similar workers are treated
differently with some being employed and others being unemployed and the unem-
ployed preferring to be employed, can arise. If efficiency wage problems are not
important in some sectors, jobs may always be available in these sectors. Jobs
in the efficiency wage sector will still be rationed and offer a positive utility
differential. Equivalent workers are treated differently even if there are always
some (typically lousy) jobs available. Unemployment may occur from workers
searching and waiting for the better rationed jobs. See Mookherjee (1984b) for
an interesting discussion of alternative concepts of involuntary unemployment.

2. Freeman and Medoff (1981) and Lewis (1982) provide detailed surveys of empir-
ical studies of union relative wage impacts

3. Foulkes (1980) presents numerous examples of large nonunion firms which main—
tam high wages at least partially as part of explicit union avoidance strategie.
Freeman and Medoff (1984, chapter 10) provide a detailed discussion of the effects
on unionization on nonorganized labor in the United States.

4. See, for example, Akerlof and Yellen (1984), Rulow and Summers (1986), Jones
(1985), Stiglitz (1984), and Yellen (1984).

5. Stiglitz (1984) compares and contrasts the inplicit contract and the efficiency
wage theoretical literatures. Akerlof and Yellen (1984), Calvo (1979), and Yellen
(1984) present excellent surveys of work on efficiency wage models. This paper
differs from these earlier surveys in that it discusses new developments in the
literature, analyzes the similarities Of efficiency wage and union threat effect
models, and focuses more explicitly on empirical evidence that can help in de-
termining the consistency of the predictions of efficiency wage models with actual
labor market behavior.

6. Akerlof and Yellen (1984) provide economic interpretations of these conditions
required on the e(w) function for a sensible solution to the firm's maximization
problem

7. Solow (1979) shows that wage rigidi ty of this type only arises when the real
wage enters the production function in a labor—augmenting way. A general short—
run production function of the form Q = F(w,L) need not generate real wage ri—
gidity with respect to these types of shocks
8. Lazear (1983) and Penacavel (1977) analyze the major issues arising in the
choice of a piece—rate as opposed to a salary or time—rate compensation system.

9.  The market equilibrium is generally not efficient since firms fail to ade—
qua tely take into account the impacts of their wage and monitoring levels on the
pol icies other firms must utilize to prevent shirking by employees (Shapiro and
Sti glitz; 1984, 1985).




Footnotes                                                                       50
10. Bulow and Summers (1986) analyze the impact of sectoral declines on wages and
employment in a standard shirking model. Lilien (1982) presents, evidence which
he interprets as indicating that sectoral shifts are the main contributor to cy-
clical unemployment fluctuations in the postwar United States. Abraham and Katz
(1986) show that his evidence is consistent with standard single factor (or
aggregate—demand— driven) business cycle models.   Topel and Weiss (1985) argue
that increased sectoral uncertainty can explain the increase in the average (or
natural) rate of of unemployment in the United States since the mid—1970's.
Altonji and Ham (1985) survey recent empirical work on sectoral shifts and unem—
p1 oyment.

11. Bulow and Summers (1986) discuss the implications for industrial policy, trade
policy, and anti—discrimination policy of the non—competitive wage differentials
arising in this shirking model.

U. Dickens, Katz and Lang (1986) analyze these issues in far more detail. A
caveat to this argument is that firms may monitor workers for reasons other than
preventing shirking. Monitoring and supervision may be a way for firms to prevent
costly, but honest, mistakes by workers. Monitoring may also help firms sort
heterogeneous workers into tasks for which they are best suited. If firms some-
times make mistakes and fire workers who were not actually cheating (make type
II errors) and if workers are risk averse, the firm may find it optimal to expend
resources on monitoring to reduce the required bond and the compensating wage
differential needed to compensate workers for mistaken appropriations of their
bonds. This is really a variation on the theme that third party verification of
detected shirking is not possible.
B. Sect      ;i#t (I'jRi')
14. The standard rate wage policies favored by many unions provides an example.
Brown (1985) presents evidence on the prevalence and analyzes the implications
of such policies.

15. Pencavel (1977b) presents an interesting analysis of the causes and effects
of worker morale with an empirical application to British coal mining.

16. The "insider—outsider" theories of unemployment developed by Lindbeck and
Snower (1984) and Solow (1985) also generate job rationing outcomes from the
bargaining power of "insiders" (incumbent employees).

17. The data set utilized is described in detail in Dickens and Katz (1986). The
sample consists of private sector, nonagricultural employees, 16 years of age and
older. The sample combines information on the outgoing rotation groups from all
12 months of the 1983 CPS. Workers with wages less than $1 an hour and grater
than $250 an hour were treated as outliers and eliminated form the sample. The
results do not change qualitatively when these observations are left in the data
set.


18. In other words, the weights are the number of workers (observations) in an
industry in the sample.

19. This raw correlation is a downward biased estimate of the true correlation
since it is not corrected for the fact that the wage differentials are estimated
rather than known.




Footnotes                                                                      51
20. These longitudinal results (industry switch effects) are potentially con-
sistent with models in which worker quality is heterogeneous (multidimensional)
and match quality varies. If match quality is not fully revealed at the start of
a match, one could generate systematic relations of industry switches and wage
changes of the type found by Krueger and Summers (1986). A matching model with
costly renegotiation and uncertain match quality, such as the model analyzed in
Antel (1985), also may be consistent with these results if the switches from high
to low wage industries are primarily layoffs or discharges and the moves from low
to high are primarily quits.

21. Rosen (1985a) provides a comprehensive treatment of the theory of equalizing
differences in the labor market and a review of empirical studies of compensating
differentials.

22. Krueger and Summers utilize a sample derived from the 1977 Quality of Em-
ployment Survey. The working conditions variables included are weekly hours,
variables indicating dangerous or unhealthy conditions on the job, commute time,
workshift dummies, dummies indicating extent of choice of overtime, and variables
indicating whether working conditions are pleasant.

23. This interpretation is clean if workers have homogenous tastes concerning
nonpecuniary aspects of work.  If workers have heterogeneous preferences, then
it is possible to imagine distributions of worker preferences with respect to
nonwage aspects of work in which wage differentials that reflect compensating wage
differentials for marginal workers may be negatively correlated with average quit
rates in an industry. This means that quit rates do not depend on wage differences
for marginal workers but do for infra—marginal workers. A particular contrived
example is the case of one disamenity that some workers mind and others do not
mind. If enough workers care about the disamenity, a compensating differential
may arise to compensate the marginal worker for this disamenity. Workers who
don't care about the disamenity take jobs at the high wage firms with the disa—
menity and earn rents. These workers have lower quit rates and reduce the average
quit rate in high wage firms. Low wage firms without the disamenity have no
workers earning rents.  In this example, more infra—marginal workers are at the
high wage firm and average quit rates are negatively correlated with wages. One
could also construct examples going in the other direction. Thus, if workers have
heterogeneous preferences, the relationship among quit rate and wage differen-
tials may be difficult to relate to the importance of equalizing differences in
the labor market.

24. Slichter utilizes data from the National Industrial Conference Board surveys
of establishments. The unskilled wage rate applies to jobs for which no previous
job training is required. Similar stability is apparent in the industry rankings
of the male skilled and semiskilled wage rate for this period. This may reflect
stability in skill differences given the heterogeneity of the category. Katz
(1986) provides a more detailed analysis of the stability and determinants of
inter—industry wage structure in the the pre—1950 period.

25. These are standard deviations of the estimated industry differentials from
separate regressions for each tenure group of log earnings on the same set of
control variables as those listed in Table 2 and one—digit industry dummy vari-
ables. The standard deviations listed are unbiased standard deviations corrected
for sampling error in the estimates of the industry dummy variable coefficients.
The sample is private sector, nonagricultural, nonunion workers, 16 and older from


Footnotes                                                                      52
the May 1979 CPS. Workers without tenure data and with earnings less than $1 an
hour and greater than $250 an hour were deleted from the sample. The sample size
for the less than one year of tenure group is 2770 and for the 10 years or more
of tenure group it is 1912.

26. Dickens and Katz (1986) provide further details on the estimation technique
and describe the procedure for correcting the correlation coefficients for sam-
pling error. Since the industry differentials are estimated and since some of
the industry—occupation cells are small, sampling error can be an important
problem leading to an upward bias in the standard deviations of industry wage
effects within an occupation and a downward bias in the correlations of industry
premiums across occupations. The raw correlations (uncorrected for sampling er-
ror) of the industry wage differentials across occupations lead to similar results
with all of them quite positive.

27. Lewis (1983) provides a comprehensive survey of estimates of extent of
unionization on wages in industry level studies.

28. This section is intended as a brief discussion of some of the implications
of efficiency wage models for the analysis of labor market discrimination. I make
no attempt to survey the vast empirical and theoretical literature on discrimi-
nation in the labor market. See Cain (1984) for an excellent survey of the dis-
crimination literature.

29. Okun (1973) discusses in detail empirical regularities observed in the cy-
clical behavior of labor markets. Bernanke and Powell (1984) empirically analyze
the differences in similarities in the cyclical behavior of industrial labor
markets in the pre—war and post—war United States.

30. This follows directly from the structure of the model presented in Section
II. Stiglitz (1984) and Akerlof and Yellen (1985a, 1985b) develop this point in
detail.

31. Adjustment costs may be greater for output and employment than for prices and
wages. The menu costs or "near—rationality" argument appears equally consistent
with inertial output and employment policies with fluctuating wages and prices
in response to small shocks.

32. Mookherjee (19Mb) and Bester (1985) provide some interesting initial attempts
at linking efficiency wage and implicit contract theories. Stiglitz (1984) dis-
cusses future directions for research in this area.




Footnotes                                                                      53
REFERENCES



Abraham, K.G. and H.S. Farber. "Job Duration, Seniority, and Earnings." MIT De-
partment of Economics Working Paper No. 407, January 1986.

Abraham, K.G. and L.F. Katz. "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate
Disturbances ?" Journal of Political Economy; forthcoming 1986.

Akerlof, G.A. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange." Quarterly Journal of
Economics 87 (November 1982): 543—69.

               "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wages: Four Views." American
                 .


nomic Review 74 (May 1984): 79—83.

Akerlof, G.A. and '(ellen, J. "Efficiency Wage Models of the Labor Market: Intro-
duction." Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley, 1984.

                                  Near Rational Model of the Business Cycle, with
Wage and Price Inertia." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (August 1985a).
                              'Can Small Deviations from Rationality Make a Sig-
                               .


nificant Difference to Economic Equilibria?" American Economic Review 75 (Sep-
tember 1985b)

Allen, S. "Trade Unions, Absenteeism and Exit—Voice." Industrial and Labor
lations Review 37 (April 1984): 331—345.

Altonji, J. and J. Ham. "The Collective Impact of Sectoral Shocks on Aggregate
Employment Fluctuations." Mimeo, September 1985.

Altonji, J. and R. Shakotko. "Do Wages Rise With Job Seniority?." NBER Working
Paper #1616, May 1985.

Antel ,   J.J.   "Costly Labor Contract Negotiation and the Labor Mobility of Young
Men. " American Economic Review 75 (December 1985): 976—991.

Becker, G.S. and G.J. Stigler. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and the Compensation
of Enforcers." Journal of Legal Studies 3 (January 1974): 1—18.

Bell, L. and R.B. Freeman. "Does a Flexible Industry Wage Structure Increase Em-
ployment? The U.S. Experience." NBER Working Paper #1604, April 1985.

Bernanke, B. and J. Powell. "The Cyclical Behavior of Industrial Labor Markets:
A Comparison of Pre—War and Post—War Eras." Mimeo, February 1984.

Bester, H. "Long—term Wage Contracts and Dual Labor Markets." Mimeo, University
of Bonn, February 1985.

Bhattacharya, S. "Tournaments and Incentives: Heterogeneity and Essentiality."
Mimeo, March 1983.



References                                                                      54
Bus, M. 3., "Real Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data."
Journal of Political Economy 93 (August 1985): 666—89.

Blanchard, 0.J. And N. Kiyotaki. "Monopolistic Competition, Aggregate Demand
Externalities, and the Real Effects of Nominal Money." NBER Working Paper #1770,
December 1985.

Bloch, F. and M. Kuskin. "Wage Determination in the Union and Nonunion Sectors."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 31 (January 1978): 183—92.

Bowles, S."The Production Process in a Competitive Economy: Walrasian, Neo—
Hobbesjan and Marxian Models." American Economic Review 75 (March 1985): 16—36.

Brown, C. and 3. Medoff. "The Employer Size Wage Effect." Mimeo, November 1985.

Brown, C. "Standard—Rate Wage Setting, Labor Quality, and Unions." NBER Working
Paper #1717, October 1985.

Bulow, J. I. and Summers, L. H. "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets with Application
to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemployment." Journal of
bor Economics, forthcoming 1986.

Cain, C. "The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey" In-
stitute for Research on Poverty Special Report No. 37, 1984.

Calvo, C. "Quasi—Walrasian Theories of Unemployment." American Economic Review
(May 1979): 102—7.

          .   "The    Inefficiency of Unemployment: The Supervision Perspective."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (May 1985): 373—87.

Calvo, C. and S. Wellisz. "Supervision, Loss of Control, and the Optimum Size of
the Firm." Journal of Political Economy 86 (October 1978): 943—52.

Carmichael, L. "Firm—specific Human Capital and Promotion Ladders." Bell Journal
of Economics 14 (Spring 1983): 251—58.

               "Can Unemployment Be Involuntary?: Comment." American Economic
                .



Review 75 (December 1985): 1213—14.

Cullen, D. "The Interindustry Wage Structure, 1899—1950." AER 46 (June 1956):
353—69.

Dickens, W.T. "Wages, Employment and the Threat of Collective Action by Workers."
Mimeo, January 1986.

Dickens, W.T. and L.F. Katz. "Industry Wage Patterns and Theories of Wage Deter-
mination." Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley, March 1986.

Dickens, W.T. ,     L.F.   Katz, and K. Lang. "Are Efficiency Wages Efficient?." Mirneo,
January 1986.

Dickens, W.T. and K. Lang. "A Test of Dual Labor Market Theory." American
nomic Review 75 (September 1985a): 792—805.


References                                                                            55
                           "Testing Dual Labor Market Theory: A Reconsideration
of the Evidence." NBER Working Paper #1670, 1985b.

Doeringer P. B. and M. 3. Piore, Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis,
Lexington, Mass.: D.C. Heath, 1971.

Dunlop, J. "Industrial Relations and Economics: The Common Frontier of Wage De-
termination." IRRA Proceedings 1984, 1985.

Eaton, C. and W.D. White. "Agent Compensation and the Limits of Bonding." Eco-
nomic Inquiry (July 1982): 330—343.

                            .   "The Economy of High Wages: An Agency Problem."
Economica (April 1983): 175—81.

Foster, J. and H. Wan. "Involuntary Unemployment as a Principal—Agent Equilib-
rium." American Economic Review 74 (June 1984): 476—84.

Foulkes, F. Personnel Policies in Large Nonunion Companies Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice—Hall, 1980.

Freeman, R.B. "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market, Unionism, Job Tenure,
Quits, and Separations." Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (June 1980): 643—73.

              .    "The Effect of Trade Unionism on Fringe Benefits." Industrial and
Labor Relations      Review 34 (July 1981): 489—509.

               .   "Unioni sm, Price—Cost Margins and the Return to Capital ." Mimeo,
Harvard University, January 1983.
Freeman, RB. and J. Medoff. "The Impact of Collective Bargaining: Illusion or
Reality?" in U.S. Industrial Relations 1950—1980:     A Critical Assessment, U.
Stieber, R.B. McKersie and D.Q. Mills eds. Madison Wisconsin: IRRA, 1981.

                                .   What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic Books, 1984.

Gintis, H. and T. Ishikawa. "Wages, Work Discipline and Macroeconomic Equilib-
rium." Mimeo, 1983.

Goldin, C. "Monitoring Costs and Occupational Segregation by Sex: A Historical
Analysis." Journal of Labor Economics 4 (January 1986): 1—27.

Hall, R.E. "The Rigidity of Wages and the Persistence of Unemployment." Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (1975:2): 301—335.

          .
              "Employment Fluctuations and Wage Rigidity." Brookings Papers on
nomic Activity (1980:1): 91—132.

Hammermesh, D. "Economic Aspects of Job Satisfaction." in 0. Ashenfelter and W.
Oates, eds. , Essays in Labor Market Analysis. New York: Halstead Press, 1977.

Hodson, R. and P. England. "Industrial Structure and Sex Differences in Earnings."
Mimeo, April 1985.


References                                                                            56
 Ippolito, R.A. "The Labor Contract and True Economic Pension Liabilities)'
American Economic Review 75 (December 1985): 1031—1043.

Jacoby, S. "Industrial Mobility in Historical Perspective." Industrial Relations
22 (Spring 1983): 261—282.

Johnson, C. and C. Solon. "Pay Differences Between Women's and Men's Jobs: The
Empirical Foundations of Comparable Worth Legislation." NBER Working Paper No.
1472, September 1984.

Jones, S.R.G. "Dual Labor Markets, Productivity and Unemployment." Mimeo, Uni-
versity of British Columbia, April 1985.

Katz, L.F. "Inter—industry Wage Structure in Historical Perspective." U.C.
Berkeley, Mimeo, January 1986.

Kreps, 0. "Corporate Culture and Economic Theory." Mimeo, Stanford Graduate School
•of Business, May 1984.

Krueger, A. and L.H. Summmers. "Efficiency Wages and the Inter—Industry Wage
Structure." Mimeo, Harvard University, February 1986.

Kwoka, 3. "Monopoly, Plant, and Union Effects on Worker Wages." Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 36 (January 1983): 251—57.

Lawrence, C. and R. Lawrence. "Relative Wages in U.S. Manufacturing: An Endgame
Interpretation." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1985:1): 47—106.

Lazear, E. "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions."
American Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 606—620.

            "Why is there Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political Economy 87
             .



(December 1979): 261—84.

             .   "Salaries   and Piece Rates." NORC Working Paper No. 83—15, June 1983.

Leibenstein, H. "The Theory of Underdevelopment in Densely Populated Backward
Areas." in Leibenstein, Economic Backwardness and Economic Growth. New York:
Wiley, 1957.

Lewis, H.G. "Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey." Mimeo, Duke University, April
1982.

         . "Union Relative Wage Effects: A Survey of Macro Estimates." Journal
of Labor Economics 1 (January 1983).

Lilien, 0. "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment." Journal of Political
Economy 90 (August 1982): 777—93.

Lindbeck, A. and D.J. Snower. "Involuntary Unemployment as an Insider—Outsider
Dilemma." Seminar Paper No. 282, Institute for International Economic Studies,
Stockton, 1984.



References                                                                          57
Long, J.E. and Link, A.N. "The Impact of Market Structure on Wages, Fringe Bene-
fits, and Turnover." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36 (January 1983):
239—50

Malcolrnson, J. "Work Incentives, Hierarchy, and Internal Labor Markets." Journal
of Political Economy 92 (June 1984): 486—507.

Mankiw, N.G. "Small Menu Costs and Large Business Cycles: A Macroeconomic Model
of Monopoly." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (May 1985).

Medoff, J. and KG. Abraham. "Experience, Performance and Earnings." Quarterly
Journal of Economics 95 (December 1980): 703—36.

Mellow, W.        "Emp 1 aye r   Size and Wages." RESTAT 64 (August 1982): 495—501.

Milkovich, 0. and J. Newman. çpjggpsation Plano, Texas: Business Publications
Inc., 1984.

Montgomery, E. and D. Stockton. "Evidence on Causes of the Rising Dispersion of
Relative Wages." Mimeo, April 1985.

Mookherjee, D. "Involuntary Unemployment and Worker Self—Selection." Research
Paper #741, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, April 1984a.

                     .   "Invol untary Unempl oyment and Worker Moral Hazard." Research Paper
#745, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, June 1984b.

Murphy, K.M. and R. Topel . "Unemployment, Risk, and Earnings: Testing for Equal-
izing Wage Differences in the Labor Market." Mimeo, UCLA, March 1986.

Oi ,   'Heterogeneous Firms and the Organization of Production." Economic Inquiry
       W.
21 (April 1983): 147—71.

Okun, A. "Upward Mobility in a High—Pressure Economy." Brookings Papers on
nomic Activity (1973:1): 207—52.

Pencavel J. An Analysis of the Quit Rate in American Manufacturing Industry.
Princeton, N.J.: IR Section Princeton, 1970.

              .      "Work Effort, On—the—Job Screening and Alternative Methods of
Remuneration." in R. Ehrenberg, ed. , Research in Labor Economics. Greenwich, Ct.
JAI Press, 1977a.

           "Industrial Morale." in 0. Ashenfel ter and W. Uates , eds. , Essays in
              .


Labor Market Analysis. New York: Halstead Press, 1977.

Poterba, J. and L.H. Summers. "Adjusting the Gross Changes Data: Implications for
Labor Market Dynamics." NBER Working Paper No. 1436, August 1984.

Pugel, T. "Profitability, Concentration and the Interindustry Variation in
Wages." RESTAT 62 (May 1980): 248—53.

 Reder, M. "Wage Differentials: Theory and Measurement" in Aspects of Labor
 nomics. Princeton, N.J.: Universities—NBER, Princeton U. Press, 1962.


 References                                                                                58
 Reynolds, L. Labor Economics and Labor Relations, 7th edition.
                                                                    Englewood Cliffs,
 N.J.: Prentice—Hall, 1978.

 Rosen, S. "The Theory of Equalizing Differences.' NORC Discussion
                                                                   Paper No. 85—3,
 January 1985.

 Ruback, R. and M. Zimmerman. "Unionization and
                                                 Profitability: Evidence from the
 Capital Market." Journal of Political Economy 92 (December 1984): 1134—57.

Salop, S. "A Model of the Natural Rate of Unemployment." American Economic Review
69 (March 1979): 117—25.

Shapiro, C. and J.E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker Discipline
Device." American Economic Review 74 (June 1984): 433—44.

                                .
                                    "Can Unemployment Be Involuntary?: Reply."
ican Economic Review 75 (December 1985): 1215—17.

Slichter, S. "Notes on the Structure of Wages." RESTAT 32 (February 195D): 80-91.
Solow, R. "Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness," Journal of Macroeconomics
1 (1979): 79—82.

         . 'Insiders and Outsiders in Wage Determination." Scandanavian Journal
of Economics 87, no.2 : 411—28.

Stoft, S.,   "Cheat Threat Theory: An Explanation of Involuntary Unemployment,"
Mimeo, Boston University, May 1982.

Stiglitz, J.E. "Wage Determination and Unemployment in L.D.C. 's: The Labor Turn-
over Model." Quarterly Journal of Economics 88 (May 1974): 194—227.

               "Prices and Queues as Screening Devices in Competitive Markets."
IMSS Technical Report No. 212, Stanford University, August 1976.

                  "Theories of Wage Rigidity." NBER Working Paper #1442, September
1984.


                  "Equilibrium Wage Distributions." Economic Journal 95 (September
1985): 595—618.

Strand, J. "Unemployment As a Discipline Device Under Business Fluctuations."
Mimeo, University of Oslo, 1985.

Taylor, J. "The Role of Expectations in the Choice of Monetary Policy." NBER
Working Paper #1044, December 1982.

Topel, R. and Laurence Weiss. "Sectoral Uncertainty and Unemployment." UCLA De-
partment of Economics Working Paper #384, September 1985.

Vroman, W. "Cyclical Earnings Changes of Low Wage Workers." in R. Ehrenberg, ed.
Research in Labor Economics, vol. 2. Greenwich, Ct.: JAI Press, 1978.



References
                                                                                  59
Weiss, Andrew, "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with Flexible Wages."
Journal of Politica' Economy 88 (June 1980): 526—38.

Weiss, Leonard. "Concentration and Labor Earnings." American Economic Review 56
(March 1966): 96—117.

Wing, R. "Achieving Internal Equity Through Job Measurement." in M. Rock, ed.,
Handbook of Wage and Salary Administration. New York: McGraw—Hill, 1984.

Yellen, J. "Efficiency Wage Models of Unemp'oyment." American Economic Review
Proceedings 74 (May 1984): 200—205.




 References                                                                   60
