                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  THE GREAT RECESSION:
                             A SELF-FULFILLING GLOBAL PANIC

                                         Philippe Bacchetta
                                         Eric van Wincoop

                                        Working Paper 19062
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19062


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation (grant SES-0649442),
the Bankard Fund for Political Economy, the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, the National
Centre of Competence in Research "Financial Valuation and Risk Management" (NCCR FINRISK),
and the ERC Advanced Grant #269573. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Great Recession: A Self-Fulfilling Global Panic
Philippe Bacchetta and Eric van Wincoop
NBER Working Paper No. 19062
May 2013
JEL No. E32,F40,F41,F44

                                              ABSTRACT

While the 2008-2009 financial crisis originated in the United States, we witnessed steep declines in
output, consumption and investment of similar magnitudes around the globe. This raises two questions.
First, given the observed strong home bias in goods and financial markets, what can account for the
remarkable global business cycle synchronicity during this period? Second, what can explain the difference
relative to previous recessions, where we witnessed far weaker co-movement? To address these questions,
we develop a two-country model that allows for self-fulfilling business cycle panics. We show that
a business cycle panic will necessarily be synchronized across countries as long as there is a minimum
level of economic integration. Moreover, we show that several factors generated particular vulnerability
to such a global panic in 2008: tight credit, the zero lower bound, unresponsive fiscal policy and increased
economic integration.


Philippe Bacchetta
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Lausanne
Extranef
CH-1015 Lausanne
Switzerland
philippe.bacchetta@unil.ch

Eric van Wincoop
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
and NBER
vanwincoop@virginia.edu
1       Introduction
The 2008-2009 Great Recession clearly had its origins in the United States, where
an historic drop in house prices had a deep impact on …nancial institutions and
markets. It is remarkable then, as illustrated in Figure 1, that the steep decline
in output, consumption and investment during the second half of 2008 and begin-
ning of 2009 was about the same in the rest of the world as in the United States.1
This is surprising both in the context of existing theory and historical experience.
Transmission channels in existing models depend critically on trade and …nancial
linkages and on the type of shocks. A recent literature has shown that it is pos-
sible to have one-to-one transmission of shocks if goods and …nancial markets are
perfectly integrated and there are credit rather than technology shocks.2 But in
reality goods and …nancial markets are far from perfectly integrated and there is
signi…cant home bias in both goods and asset trade. As illustrated in van Win-
coop (2013), a model with credit shocks that captures the observed …nancial home
bias will have partial transmission at best. Consistent with this, Rose and Spiegel
(2010) and Kamin and Pounder (2012) …nd that there is little relation between
…nancial linkages that countries have with the U.S. and the decline in their GDP
growth and asset prices during 2008-2009.3
    The close co-movement of business cycles illustrated in Figure 1 is also unusual
from an historical perspective. Figure 2 shows that during the Great Depression
the decline in output in the rest of the world was much smaller then in the United
States. Perri and Quadrini (2012) show that business cycle co-movement during
the 2008-2009 recession stands out signi…cantly relative to previous recessions since
1965. Hirata, Kose and Otrok (2013) …nd that over the past 25 years the global
component of business cycles has actually declined relative to local components
    1
     Even outside of Europe, which had by far the largest foreign exposure to U.S. asset backed
securities, the business cycle decline was of similar magnitude.
   2
     Examples are Devereux and Sutherland (2011), Kollmann, Enders and Muller (2011) and
Perri and Quadrini (2012). It is well known that with technology shocks output tends to be
negatively correlated across countries even in models with perfect goods and …nancial market
integration.
   3
     Kalemli-Ozcan et al. (2013) …nd that …nancial integration has a negative e¤ect on business
cycle synchronization outside of crisis times and a zero e¤ect during crisis times. They also …nd
that the bulk of the increase in synchronization during the 2008-2009 crisis is associated with an
undetermined common shock.



                                                1
(region and country-speci…c). This then leads to two questions that we aim to
address in this paper. First, given the limited extent of goods and …nancial inte-
gration, how can we explain that the sharp decline in business cycles was similar in
the rest of the world as in the United States during the Great Recession? Second,
what can explain the di¤erence relative to previous recessions?
    To answer these questions we develop a two-country, two-period New Keyne-
sian model that explains the recession as resulting from a self-ful…lling shock to
expectations as opposed to an exogenous shock to fundamentals. The self-ful…lling
beliefs are a result of several inter-linkages between the present (period 1) and the
future (period 2). The future a¤ects the present as beliefs of lower and riskier
second-period income lead to higher …rst period saving. As consumption falls,
output and …rm pro…ts decline.4 But the present also a¤ects the future as lower
pro…ts lead to an expectation of lower future economic activity and greater sensi-
tivity of …rms to future shocks. This lowers expected future output and increases
uncertainty about future output. Figure 3, which is based on survey data, shows
that there was indeed a large drop in expected GDP growth and an increase in its
perceived variance. Moreover, these changes in beliefs were of similar magnitude
in the rest of the world as in the United States.5
    A key result of the model is that a business cycle panic is necessarily synchro-
nized across the two countries as long as they have some minimum level of trade
and …nancial integration. The drop in output, consumption and investment will
then be of equal magnitude in the two countries. When trade and …nancial link-
ages are very weak, it is possible to have a business cycle panic that is limited
to just one country. This is no longer possible when there is su¢ cient economic
integration. Intuitively, either the country that panics drags the other country
into a panic or the country that does not panic pulls the other country out of the
panic. Their interconnectedness makes it impossible for one country to have self-
   4
     This relates to the classic Paradox of Thrift, where higher saving implies lower demand,
which reduces output and may actually end up lowering saving. We will discuss the Paradox of
Thrift in the context of our model in Section 5. For recent contributions, see Eggertsson and
Krugman (2012), Eggertsson (2010) and Christiano (2004).
   5
     The data comes from Consensus Economics, who survey about 250 “prominent …nancial and
economic”forecasters. Each January, forecasters are asked to give probabilities for GDP growth
rate intervals for the current year. We compute the average and the variance for each country,
as explained in more detail in Appendix A. For the non-US data line, we use the average across
the 17 other countries in the sample.


                                              2
ful…lling negative beliefs about the future while the other country has favorable
beliefs about the future. Limited interconnectedness then implies that their fate
will be common. A panic, if it happens, will necessarily be global. The threshold
level of economic integration does not need to be high. It is therefore possible to
still have signi…cant home bias in trade and asset holdings as seen in the data.
     The model also provides an explanation for the di¤erence relative to previous
recessions. Limited co-movement of business cycles in open economy models is
usually the result of partial transmission (through trade and …nancial linkages)
of exogenous country-speci…c shocks. That may well be a good description for
most business cycles. However, in our model the co-movement is not a result of
transmission but rather of a coordinated panic. A combination of distinct factors,
all featured in the model, made the 2008 period particularly vulnerable to such
a global self-ful…lling panic. First, credit was tight. We show that when credit
conditions are easier, self-ful…lling panics are not feasible in equilibrium. Tight
credit makes …rms more susceptible to default when hit by a drop in demand
that lowers pro…ts. This is a critical element in our model of self-ful…lling beliefs.
Second, interest rates were low, close to the zero-lower bound. This reduces the
potential stabilizing role of monetary policy since it is easier to fall in a liquidity
trap. Third, there were constraints on countercyclical …scal policy, especially due
to historically high debt levels. Fourth, the world has experienced a signi…cant
increase in both trade and …nancial integration over the past two decades. The
model then implies that panics are more likely to be common across countries.
     The crisis in U.S. …nancial markets plays a role in our theory of a global reces-
sion, but only as a trigger event for the self-ful…lling shift in beliefs. This stands
in contrast to models in which the linkage between …nancial markets and the real
economy operates through a credit shock or a decline in wealth. While credit was
tight, it is hard to argue that there was a large global credit shock. Figure 4
shows BIS data on total credit to the private sector for the U.S. and non-U.S. G-7
countries. Two points stand out. First, the experience of the non-U.S. G7 was
quite di¤erent from that in the U.S., with a continued increase in private credit
during and after the crisis. Second, while in the U.S. there was a decline in private
credit since 2008, this decline was gradual and continued through 2012. The main
source of credit decline was the gradual deleveraging of U.S. households, which
was not concentrated during the period of the sharp output decline in late 2008



                                          3
and early 2009.6 It is also hard to argue that a decline in wealth was responsible
for the global recession. With the exception of some smaller European countries
(Ireland and Spain) the sharp decline in housing wealth was a U.S. phenomenon
rather than a global phenomenon.7
    The paper is related to some other recent work on self-ful…lling business cycle
panics.8 The most important di¤erence is that these are closed economy models
and therefore do not address the co-movement question. Farmer (2012a, b) ana-
lyzes models where self-ful…lling beliefs are associated with wealth. A belief of a
lower value of …nancial wealth leads to lower consumption, which leads to lower
…rm pro…ts, which justi…es the drop in wealth. But as just pointed out, the decline
in wealth was much smaller in the rest of the world than in the United States.
    Heathcote and Perri (2012) also have a model where the decline in wealth is
critical to self-ful…lling beliefs, although through a di¤erent mechanism. In their
model lower housing wealth makes it possible to have self-ful…lling beliefs of higher
unemployment. If households …nd it less likely that they have a job tomorrow,
and it is hard to borrow when their housing collateral is low, they will reduce
consumption. This reduces output, which indeed leads to more unemployment.
Both this paper and the Farmer papers rely on labor market rigidities rather than
nominal rigidities to generate a link from demand to production.
    Benhabib, Wang, and Wen (2012) develop a model where business cycles are af-
fected by market sentiments when production decisions need to be made in advance
of knowing demand and agents receive imperfect information about aggregate de-
mand. It has in common with the Farmer papers that the business cycle then
depends on a market sentiment variable that can take on a continuum of values,
as opposed to models such as ours where there is either a panic or not.9
   6
     Chari, Christiano and Kehoe (2008) document that bank credit actually increased in the U.S.
during the second half of 2008 (both consumer and industrial bank credit). Adrian, Colla and
Shin (2011) …nd that a decline in bank credit to …rms in 2009 was replaced by an equal increase
in bond …nancing. Also consistent with the absence of a large credit shock, Kahle and Stulz
(2013) use …rm level data to show that there was no relationship between the drop in investment
by …rms and their bank dependence. Helbling, Huidrom, Kose and Otrok (2011) estimate a
global VAR to …nd that a global credit shock accounts for only 10% of the global drop in GDP
in 2008-2009.
   7
     While stock markets declined signi…cantly everywhere, they tend to be less important in
most countries than in the United States.
   8
     See Schmitt-Grohé (1997) for a review of earlier models.
   9
     Also related is Bacchetta, Tille and van Wincoop (2012), who focus on the stock market


                                               4
    Finally, Perri and Quadrini (2012) introduce a mechanism leading to self-
ful…lling credit shocks. If the resale value of …rms is expected to be low, credit
will be tight. But tight credit makes it di¢ cult for constrained …rms to purchase
assets from defaulting …rms, which indeed makes the resale value low. While they
have a two-country model with perfect business cycle co-movement, this is a result
of perfect …nancial and goods market integration.10
    To present the basic mechanism, we analyze a benchmark model without in-
vestment, …nancial asset trade or uncertainty. In that context, it is possible to
derive theoretically the conditions under which global panics occur. Our main
result, stated in Proposition 2, is that partial integration is su¢ cient to guarantee
that business cycles are perfectly synchronized during a panic. We show numeri-
cally that the extent of integration required is relatively small. A panic limited to
one country is not possible with su¢ cient integration. When we extend the model
to include investment, …nancial asset trade and uncertainty, the results are similar
but can only be derived numerically.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the
benchmark model. Section 3 analyzes the equilibria and determines when business
cycle panics are global. Section 4 shows that countries are more vulnerable to
global panics with tight credit, low interest rates or rigid …scal policies. Section 5
considers various extensions and Section 6 concludes.


2      The Model
In this section we describe the benchmark model. There are two countries, Home
and Foreign, and two periods, 1 and 2. The basic two-period New Keynesian
structure is similar to closed economy models found in the literature, starting with
rather than business cycles. Their model features self-ful…lling spikes in stock price risk and an
associated sharp decline in stock prices. Bacchetta and van Wincoop (2013) extend this to an
open economy framework.
   10
      Dedola and Lombardo (2012) …nd that that perfect co-movement is possible even with port-
folio home bias. But this relies on a setup that precludes arbitrage between risky and riskfree
assets as only leveraged agents hold risky assets and face borrowing constraints. As shown in
van Wincoop (2013), allowing for non-leveraged agents that can conduct such arbitrage, and
calibrating the relative size of leveraged institutions in …nancial markets, transmission is limited.
The 2008 crisis saw very large arbitrage between risky and low risk assets, with a large ‡ight to
quality that increased prices of low risk Treasuries.


                                                 5
Krugman (1998).11 Prices are pre-set, while wages are ‡exible. There is partial
integration of goods markets through trade. Countries are in …nancial autarky,
with …nancial assets (claims on …rms, a bond, and money) only held domestically.
Goods are only used for consumption, abstracting from investment. There are
households, …rms, a government and a central bank. There is no uncertainty, but
in period 1 there may be di¤erent expectations in case of multiple equilibria.
    In Section 5, we examine several extensions to this benchmark model. In par-
ticular, we examine the role of investment, uncertainty and …nancial integration.


2.1     Households
Households make consumption and leisure decisions in both periods. Households
in the Home country maximize

                            1                                  1
                                c11   + l1 +                         c12          + l2      (1)
                        1                                 1

where lt is the fraction of time devoted to leisure in period t and ct is the period-t
consumption index of Home and Foreign goods:
                                                                             1
                                         cH;t                 cF;t
                                 ct =                                                       (2)
                                                          1

where
                                          Z     nH;t                                    1
                                                                         1
                                cH;t =                 cH;t (j)              dj             (3)
                                          0
                                         Z nF;t                                     1
                                                                     1
                                cF;t =                 cF;t (j)          dj                 (4)
                                           0

    Here cH;t is the consumption index of Home goods and cF;t the consumption
index of Foreign goods. Consumption of respectively the Home and Foreign good
j is cH;t (j) and cF;t (j). The number of Home and Foreign goods in period t is nH;t
and nF;t , which are equal to the number of Home and Foreign …rms. The elasticity
of substitution among goods of the same country is > 1, while the elasticity
of substitution between Home and Foreign goods is 1 (we examine non-unitary
elasticities in Section 5). There is a preference home bias towards domestic goods
  11
    See Mankiw and Weinzierl (2011) or Fernandez-Villaverde et al. (2012) for recent contribu-
tions. Aghion, Bacchetta and Banerjee (2000) analyze a small open economy.

                                                   6
as we assume      > 0:5. The speci…cation is symmetric for the Foreign country,
with the overall consumption index denoted as ct and cH;t (j), cF;t (j) denoting
the consumption of individual Home and Foreign goods consumption by Foreign
households.
   The parameter       captures the degree of goods market integration, with the
limit of = 0:5 re‡ecting perfect goods market integration. As we will see, = 0:5
implies that in equilibrium ct = ct , so that …nancial markets are complete even
though there is no asset trade.12 This is a feature that results speci…cally from the
Cobb-Douglas speci…cation and is familiar from Cole and Obstfeld (1991). We can
then think of = 0:5 as perfect economic integration across the two countries.
   In period 1 Home households earn labor income W1 (1 l1 ), where W1 is the
nominal wage rate. They also earn a dividend C          1 and receive a transfer of M1
in money balances from the central bank. They use these resources to consume,
pay a tax T1 to the government, buy Home nominal bonds with interest rate i and
hold money balances:
         Z nH;1                      Z nF;1
                PH;1 (j)cH;1 (j)dj +        S1 PF;1 (j)cF;1 (j)dj + T1 + B + M1 =
            0                                  0
                                 C
          W1 (1         l1 ) +   1   + M1                                                 (5)

where PH;t (j) and PF;t (j) are the price of respectively Home and Foreign good j
in the Home and Foreign currency. St is the nominal exchange rate in period t
(Home currency per unit of Foreign currency).
     In period 2 Home households earn labor income W2 (1 l2 ), earn a dividend
  C
  2 , receive (1 + i)B from bond holdings, carry over M1 in money balances from
period 1, and receive an additional money transfer of M2 M1 from the central
bank. These resources are then used to consume, pay a tax T2 to the government
and hold money balances M2 :13
             Z nH;2                      Z nF;2
                    PH;2 (j)cH;2 (j)dj +        S2 PF;2 (j)cF;2 (j)dj + T2 + M2 =
                 0                                 0
                                     C
                W2 (1     l2 ) +     2   + (1 + i)B + M1 + (M2   M1 )                     (6)
  12
     Financial market completeness implies that the ratio of marginal utilities of consumption
across the two countries is equal to the real exchange rate, which is 1 when = 0:5.
  13
     As usual in …nite-time models, there is an implicit assumption on the …nal use of money,
e.g., agents need to return the money stock to the central bank.




                                                       7
    We assume a cash-in-advance constraint, with the buyer’s currency being used
for payment:
             Z nH;t                      Z nF;t
                    PH;t (j)cH;t (j)dj +        St PF;t (j)cF;t (j)dj Mt     (7)
               0                              0

The constraint will always bind in period 2. It will bind in period 1 when the
nominal interest rate i is positive. When i = 0, the constraint will generally not
bind in period 1.
   Households choose consumption and leisure to maximize (1). The …rst-order
conditions are
                                                      P1
                             c1 = (1 + i)                 c                            (8)
                                                      P2 2
                                                   PH;t (j)
                             cH;t (j) =                               cH;t             (9)
                                                    PH;t
                                                 PF;t (j)
                             cF;t (j) =                              cF;t             (10)
                                                  PF;t
                                             Pt
                             cH;t =              ct                                   (11)
                                            PH;t
                                                          Pt
                             cF;t = (1              )           ct                    (12)
                                                        St PF;t
                             Wt
                                = ct                                                  (13)
                             Pt
where
                                    Z       nH;t                              1
                                                                                  1

                          PH;t =                   PH;t (j)1         dj
                                        0
                                    Z     nF;t                            1
                                                                              1

                                                             1
                          PF;t =                   PF;t (j)      dj
                                      0
                          Pt = PH;t [St PF;t ]1

PH;t and PF;t are price indices of Home and Foreign goods that are denominated
in respectively Home and Foreign currencies. Pt is the overall price index, denom-
inated in the Home currency.
    Equation (8) is a standard intertemporal consumption Euler equation. (9)-(10)
represent the optimal consumption allocation across goods within each country.
(11)-(12) represent the optimal consumption allocation across the two countries.

                                               8
(13) represents the consumption-leisure trade-o¤. As usual, the inverse of mea-
sures the intertemporal rate of substitution. However, in equation (13) also
measures the wage elasticity to consumption.
    There is an analogous set of …rst-order conditions for Foreign households. Other
than for Home and Foreign prices and price indices, we only need to add * super-
scripts to the variables and exchange       and 1      . The Foreign price index is
Pt = (PH;t =St )1 PF;t .


2.2    The Government and the Central Bank
The government and central bank policies are analogous in the two countries. We
therefore again only describe the Home country. The Home government only buys
Home goods. The total government consumption index is analogous to the CES
index for private Home consumption:
                                  Z nH;t            1
                                                1
                            gt =         gt (j) dj                          (14)
                                    0

In the benchmark case we will simply set gt = 0. But we will also consider a positive
constant level of government spending, where gt = g. Moreover, in Section 4 we
consider the role of countercyclical …scal policy, where g1 = g      (c1 c), with c
consumption in the non-panic equilibrium of the model and           0:
    Optimal allocation of government spending across the di¤erent goods implies
                                         PH;t (j)
                              gt (j) =              gt                          (15)
                                          PH;t
         Rn
We have 0 H;t PH;t (j)gt (j)dj = PH;t gt . Since the timing of taxation across the
two periods does not matter due to Ricardian equivalence, we simply impose the
balanced budget condition
                                   Tt = PH;t gt                               (16)
   The central bank’s behavior is modeled as in other two-period models (e.g.,
Krugman, 1998, or Mankiw and Weinzierl, 2001). The central bank credibly sets
second-period money supply to stabilize second-period prices. We assume that the
central bank has a zero in‡ation target from period 1 to period 2 so that P2 = P1 .
Since the cash-in-advance constraint is binding in period 2, we have M2 = P2 c2 ,
and the second-period price level can be controlled through the second period
money supply.

                                          9
    In the …rst period the central bank sets the nominal interest rate i. For now
we will assume that the central bank sets the interest rate such that (1 + i) = 1.
This corresponds to the interest rate in the ‡exible price equilibrium of the model.
We will see that the non-panic equilibrium of the model then corresponds to the
‡exible price equilibrium. In Section 4 we consider what happens when during a
panic the central bank lowers the interest rate to stimulate demand. Such a policy
will not avert a panic when we are close to the zero-lower bound. The central bank
then has limited ability to counter a business cycle decline and the equilibrium will
be similar to that without any countercyclical central bank action.


2.3     Firms
The number of …rms operating in period 1 is based on prior decisions and therefore
taken as given. We normalize it at 1 for both countries, so nH;1 = nF;1 = 1. At
the end of period 1 …rms decide whether to continue to operate in period 2. We
denote the number of period-2 …rms by nH;2 = n and nF;2 = n . We do not allow
new …rms to enter.14
   We focus our description mainly on Home …rms. Results are analogous for
Foreign …rms. Output of Home …rm j in period t is

                                      yt (j) = (ALt (j))                                    (17)

where Lt (j) is labor input, A a constant labor productivity parameter and is
between 0 and 1.
    Firms set prices at the start of each period. This Keynesian assumption only
bites for period 1 as no unexpected shocks happen after …rms set prices at the start
of period 2. For period 1 a drop in consumption during a panic lowers demand
for goods and therefore production. Labor demand is then adjusted to satisfy the
demand for goods. This Keynesian aspect is critical to the self-ful…lling business
cycle panic in the model.
    Since prices in period 1 are preset, and their level does not matter for what
follows, we simply assume that all …rms set the same price of PH1 , so that PH1 (j) =
PH1 . Similarly, for the Foreign …rms PF 1 (j) = PH1 . In period 2 Home …rm j sets
  14
    We could allow for entry under a …xed cost. If the …xed cost is large enough we revert to
our current setup. Lower …xed costs that leads to limited entry, only partially replacing exiting
…rms, will only a¤ect results quantitatively, not qualitatively.


                                               10
its price PH;2 (j) to maximize pro…ts

                                                             W2
                                2 (j)   = PH;2 (j)y2 (j)        y2 (j)1=                          (18)
                                                             A
subject to

                                                 PH;2 (j)             P2                     S 2 P2
y2 (j) = cH;2 (j) + g2 (j) + cH;2 (j) =                                   c2 + g2 + (1   )          c
                                                  PH;2               PH;2                    PH;2 2
                                                                                                   (19)
The optimal price is a markup =(                     1) over the marginal cost:

                                                        W2        1
                                  PH;2 (j) =               y2 (j)                                 (20)
                                                       1 A
Second-period pro…ts are then
                                                     1
                                         2 (j)   =     W2 y2 (j)1=                                (21)
                                                     A
where = [ (1        ) + ]=[(    1) ]. Since all …rms face the same demand and the
same wage, they set the same price. From the de…nition of the Home price index
we have PH;2 = PH;2 (j)n1=(1 ) .
    Bankruptcy can occur at the end of period 1. The only di¤erence across …rms
in period 1 is a …xed cost. A fraction 1 n of …rms face an additional real cost z
in period 1. This cost captures business costs other than wages.15 Total pro…ts of
Home …rm j in period 1, e 1 (j), are equal to

                    e 1 (j) =     1      P1 z(j) = PH;1 y1      W 1 L1      P1 z(j)               (22)

where z(j) = 0 for a fraction n of …rms and z(j) = z for a fraction 1 n of …rms.
It is also useful to de…ne 1 as period-1 pro…ts before paying this cost. When …rm
j is unable to fully pay the …xed cost, it is declared bankrupt and cannot produce
in period 2. We assume that z(j) does not a¤ect aggregate resources and is paid
to an agency. In case of bankruptcy, the agency seizes 1 . The agency operates
at no cost and transfers its income to households.
  15
     We introduce …rm heterogeneity to avoid the extreme case where either all or no …rms go
bankrupt. We choose to do so through an additive term in pro…ts only because it simpli…es the
algebra. Results would not change fundamentally if instead we introduced di¤erences in …rm
productivity, which interacts multiplicatively with W1 L1 . The binomial distribution of the cost
is also assumed for analytical convenience.


                                                     11
    Since 1 > 0, the n …rms for which z(j) is zero always have positive pro…ts
in period 1 and therefore do not need to borrow to continue their operation into
period 2. The other 1 n …rms may need to borrow when their …rst-period pro…ts
are negative. But they face a maximum limit on their borrowing capacity. Let
D(j) be borrowing by …rm j at the end of period 1. The …rm then owes (1+i)D(j)
in period 2. It is assumed that this can be no larger than a fraction of second
period pro…ts:
                              (1 + i)D(j)      2 (j)                        (23)
This standard borrowing constraint re‡ects that lenders can seize at most a frac-
tion of second period pro…ts in case of non-payment. Second-period pro…ts are
positive and known at the end of period 1.
    The 1 n …rms facing the cost z are fragile in that they will go bankrupt if
their debt limit is insu¢ cient to cover negative pro…ts in period 1. This is the case
when
                                            2
                                    1+         < P1 z                             (24)
                                         1+i
Another way to look at the bankruptcy condition is to de…ne the real quantity of
funds available to pay for the …xed cost:
                                                               2
                                                     1   +                               (25)
                                                              1+i
where 1 = 1 =P1 and        2   =       2 =P2 .       From (24), the 1   n fragile …rms will go
bankrupt when
                                                         <z                              (26)
Therefore the number of …rms in period 2 is either 1 or n, depending on whether
     z or < z.
    Let D denote aggregate borrowing by …rms. The total dividends received by
households include dividends from …rms and from the service agency. Dividends
received in periods 1 and 2 are

                                   C
                                   1   =    1    +D                                      (27)
                                   C
                                   2   =n        2        (1 + i)D                       (28)




                                                         12
2.4    Market Clearing
For the Home country the market clearing conditions are

                        yt (j) = cH;t (j) + gt (j) + cH;t (j) t = 1; 2         (29)
                        nH;t Lt = 1     lt t = 1; 2                            (30)
                        Mt = M t t = 1; 2                                      (31)
                        B=D                                                    (32)

These represent respectively the goods markets clearing conditions, the labor mar-
ket clearing condition, the money market clearing condition and the bond market
clearing condition. There is an analogous set of market clearing conditions for the
Foreign country.
    If we substitute into the household budget constraints (5)-(6) the bond, money
and labor market clearing conditions, along with the dividend expressions (27)-
(28), we get
                                                      Z nH;t
                 PH;t cH;t + PH;t gt + St PF;t cF;t =        PH;t (j)yt (j)dj  (33)
                                                         0

This says that national consumption is equal to GDP. The trade balance is there-
fore zero. Indeed, multiplying the goods market clearing condition (29) by PH;t (j)
and aggregating and substituting into the right hand side of (33), gives the bal-
anced trade condition
                                St PF;t cF;t = PH;t cH;t                     (34)
Using the expressions for cF;t and cH;t , this can also be written as

                                      Pt ct = St Pt ct                         (35)

The nominal value of consumption is equal across the two countries. This does
not imply that real consumption is equal as the real exchange rate St Pt =Pt is not
necessarily equal to 1 when > 0:5. Only when markets are perfectly integrated
( = 0:5) is the real exchange rate equal to 1 and ct = ct .
    Together with the de…nitions of the price indices, (35) also gives an expression
for relative prices that we will use below:
                                                    1
                                  PH;t         ct   2    1
                                       =                                       (36)
                                   Pt          ct
The Foreign relative prices are the reciprocal: PF;t =Pt = Pt =PH;t .

                                            13
2.5     Equilibrium
Appendix B provides a description of the main equilibrium conditions. Assuming
(1 + i) = 1 and gt = 0, the equilibrium can be reduced to a set of 6 equations in
c1 , c1 , , , n and n :
            1
        c1 = n(1       )
                            (n )                                                                                           (37)
            1
        c1 = n (n )(1              )
                                                                                                                           (38)
                                                  1=                                           1=
                            +1=             P1                             +1=           P1
         = c1          c1                              +          (c1 )                             n    (   1)            (39)
                   A                       PH;1               A                         PH;1
                                                       1=                                           1=
                                   +1=        P1                                  +1=      P1
          = c1             (c1 )                            +             (c1 )                          (n )     (   1)   (40)
                   A                          PF;1                A                        PF;1
             n     if         <z
        n=                                                                                                                 (41)
             1     if          z

              n        if          <z
        n =                                                                                                                (42)
              1        if           z
where
                                                            =(1   +   )
                             =
                                       (       1) A
                                             + (1    )
                             =
                               (             1)(1   + )
                             = (1             )=[(1  + )(2                        1) + 2(1          )]

and the relative prices depend on c1 =c1 as in (36).
     Appendix B provides algebraic details behind these equations. Equations (37)-
(38) are derived by combining the Home and Foreign counterpart of the optimal
second period price setting equation (20), the labor supply schedule W2 =P2 = c2 ,
PH;2 (j)=PH;2 = n1=( 1) and the consumption Euler equations (and the assumed
monetary policy). Equation (39) is the expression for available funds = 1 +
    2 =(1 + i), using Wt =Pt = ct , (35) and the fact c2 = c1 from the consumption
Euler equations. Equation (40) is the Foreign counterpart for available funds. After
substituting the expression (36) for the relative price, available funds depend on
c1 , c1 , n and n . Finally, (41)-(42) follow from the description of default in Section
2.3.


                                                            14
    Before turning to the solution of the model, some brief comments are in order
about the ‡exible price equilibrium, where …rst-period prices are perfectly ‡exible.
We show in Appendix B that the equilibrium is then unique. This results from
the absence of a Keynesian demand e¤ect. Independent of parameters, …rst-period
consumption is c1 = c1 = 1= , while …rst-period pro…ts are 1 = 1 = [ (1         )+
 ]=( ). We will assume that in the ‡exible price equilibrium …rst-period pro…ts
of all …rms are positive:

Assumption 1 z < [ (1         ) + ]=(    )

    The right hand side of the expression in Assumption 1 is equal to 1 = 1 in the
‡exible price equilibrium. We then also have z < since 2 > 0, so that no …rms
go bankrupt (n = n = 1). Finally, we …nd that the equilibrium interest rates are
given by (1 + i) = (1 + i ) = 1. As mentioned above, this corresponds to the
policy we assume in our benchmark model. The global non-panic equilibrium in
the benchmark Keynesian model will then correspond exactly to the ‡exible price
equilibrium.


3    Multiple Equilibria and Global Panics
The model can generate multiple equilibria with either n = 1 (no bankruptcies)
or n = n (with bankruptcies). When both equilibria exist, we call the equilibrium
with bankruptcies the panic equilibrium as it is simply generated by low expecta-
tions. There are potentially four equilibria, characterized by the values of n and
n . We refer to equilibria where n = n as symmetric equilibria. The case where
n = n = 1 is a global non-panic equilibrium. If in addition there is an equilibrium
where n = n = n we refer to it as a global panic. But there may also be asym-
metric equilibria, where only one country panics and the other does not. There
are potentially two asymmetric equilibria, with either n = n and n = 1 or n = 1
and n = n.
    In this section we …rst focus on symmetric equilibria in which n = n . In that
case …rst-period consumption, output and pro…ts are also equal across the two
countries. Then we look at equilibria when countries are in autarky, where = 1.
Finally, we consider all equilibria for any value of between 0.5 and 1. We will
show that when economies are in autarky ( = 1), asymmetric equilibria always


                                        15
exist. However, when countries are somewhat integrated, i.e.,       is below some
cuto¤, there are only symmetric equilibria and a panic is necessarily global.


3.1     Symmetric Equilibria
Considering symmetric equilibria allows us to clearly illustrate the mechanism
behind a global panic. Moreover, considering global panics …rst is natural as we
will see that without a global panic equilibrium the model does not feature any
type of panic equilibrium, including asymmetric panics.
    The monetary policy rules 1 + i = 1 + i = 1= imply that c1 = c2 and c1 = c2
from the consumption Euler equations. Using this, it is immediate from the other
equations that n = n implies c1 = c1 and = . From (37)-(42), the equilibria
are characterized by (c1 ; ; n) that satisfy

                                n
                       c1 =                                                               (43)
                                               +1=        (1   )+        1
                           = c1           c1          +              n                    (44)
                                      A

                                n      if       <z
                        n =                                                               (45)
                                1      if        z
   Substituting (43) into (44) we can write available funds as a function of only
n. Let (1) and (n) represent available funds without and with bankruptcies in
the symmetric equilibrium. We will assume that parameters are such that available
funds are higher without bankruptcies:

Assumption 2         (1) > (n)

    This can be written in terms of a condition on the various parameters in the
model.16 A su¢ cient, but not necessary, condition for this to hold is that     1,
which implies    (     1) 1.
    Together with Assumption 1, which implies that z < (1), the equilibria follow
directly from (43)-(45) and are summarized in the following proposition.
  16
     The condition is n       1 + 1 (n   1) +     n      1
                                                         n > 0. The condition is not satis…ed
for a high as real wages then decline signi…cantly during a panic, which raises pro…ts. We will
return to this issue in Section 3.5.




                                                     16
Proposition 1 When Assumptions 1 and 2 hold, there are one or two symmetric
equilibria. They are characterized by:

  1. (n; c1 ) = (1; 1= )   if   (n)    z

  2. (n; c1 ) = (1; 1= )   or   (n; c1 ) = (n; n = )   if   (n) < z < (1)

    For the case where = 0, so that = 1 , Figure 5 illustrates the multiple
equilibria in Proposition 1. The hump-shaped curve represents the …rst-period
pro…ts function (44). The vertical lines represent (43) for the two levels of n and
the cut-o¤ point is determined by the level of z. When > 1, both vertical lines
cross the pro…t schedule when it is upward sloping. When z is in the intermediate
range ( (n) < z < (1)), there are two equilibria, A and B. Equilibrium A is a good
one, which we refer to as the non-panic equilibrium. First-period consumption and
pro…ts are high and no …rms go bankrupt (n = 1). Equilibrium B is the bad one,
which we refer to as the panic equilibrium. First-period consumption and pro…ts
are low and 1 n …rms go bankrupt.
    The presence of two equilibria is a result of the possibility of self-ful…lling
business cycle panics. This occurs due to reinforcing linkages between periods 1
and 2. The link from period 2 to period 1 is standard as low expected period 2
income leads to low period 1 consumption. The link from period 1 to period 2
operates through pro…ts and bankruptcies. Low period 1 consumption leads to
low period 1 …rm pro…ts, which leads to bankruptcies and therefore a low number
of …rms in period 2. This implies low period 2 income, making the belief of low
period 2 income self-ful…lling.
    We should be clear that this is by no means the only possible way to model the
link from the present to the future. One can think of many alternatives that should
deliver similar results. Low current demand may a¤ect future output through in-
ventory buildup, lower current investment or production chains. In addition, rather
than through bankruptcy low current pro…ts may lower future output through
cost-cutting measures such as reduced R&D, less training of labor, closing some
departments or branches or less investment. Finally, lower output today may re-
duce future output when a reduction in productive capacity is combined with sunk
costs. Together with the standard link from the future to the present through ex-
pected income, these alternative mechanisms for linking the present to the future
may also generate self-ful…lling beliefs.

                                           17
3.2    Autarky
When      = 1 the two economies are in autarky. They only consume their own
goods, so that the relative prices Pt =PH;t and Pt =PF;t are equal to 1 in both peri-
ods. It then follows from (37)-(42) that for each country the equilibria correspond
exactly to the symmetric equilibria described above. But in autarky the equilib-
rium in one country has no impact on the equilibrium of another country. When
  (n) < z < (1) there are then four possible outcomes. Either country may be
in the panic equilibrium B or the non-panic equilibrium A, independent of the
other country. Therefore it is possible for both countries to experience a panic
together, but it is also possible for just one of the two countries to experience a
panic (asymmetric equilibria).
    There is no a priori reason why the two countries would panic simultaneously.
There may be arguments outside of the model why a panic would be global. For
example, if the trigger that sets o¤ the panic is particularly frightening, the two
countries may react together. But if this trigger event takes place in the Home
country,17 it would seem odd that the Foreign country would react to it in the
absence of any integration between the two countries.


3.3    When Are Panics Global?
In this section we examine all equilibria for values of between 0.5 and 1. We
have already described the symmetric equilibria, where (n; n ) = (1; 1) or (n; n ) =
(n; n). We now need to consider asymmetric equilibria as well, where either
(n; n ) = (n; 1) or (n; n ) = (1; n). We are particularly interested in circum-
stances where only the two symmetric equilibria exist. When a panic occurs, it
will then necessarily be global.
    We will assume that symmetric multiple equilibria exist, i.e., (n) < z < (1)
from Proposition 1. As discussed in Section 3.2, this implies that multiple equilibria
also exist in individual countries in autarky. This means that asymmetric equilibria
exist when = 1. However, as we move away from autarky, i.e., as we lower ,
the asymmetric equilibria will no longer exist, so that panics can only be global.
This is stated in the following proposition.
  17
    An example is the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers or more generally events surrounding
U.S. …nancial markets in the Fall of 2008.



                                          18
Proposition 2 Assume (n) < z < (1), so that there are multiple equilibria.
There is a threshold (z) > 0:5 such that only the symmetric equilibria exist when
  < (z).

Proof. See Appendix C.
    Using (37), Figure 6 illustrates Proposition 2 by plotting all equilibrium Home
consumption levels as a function of . Symmetric equilibria give perfectly hor-
izontal schedules as consumption is c1 = n = , which is una¤ected by the level
of integration. This is not the case in the asymmetric equilibria. For example, a
Foreign panic a¤ects Home consumption more the greater the extent of integration
(the lower ).
    When is below the threshold (z), only the two symmetric equilibria exist.
In that case panics are necessarily global. In other words, when the level of trade is
su¢ ciently high, or home bias su¢ ciently low, a panic will be perfectly coordinated
across the two countries. However, the two countries do not need to be perfectly
integrated. A panic will be necessarily global for all values of larger than 0.5
and less than (z). A su¢ cient degree of integration, not perfect integration, is
needed to guarantee that panics will be global. As we show in Section 3.5, the
cuto¤ for will generally be far above 0.5, so that we do not need to be anywhere
close to full integration to assure that panics will be perfectly coordinated across
countries.
    Before we turn to the intuition behind this key result, it is useful to …rst
draw out some of the implications. First, Proposition 2 implies that when the
two countries are su¢ ciently integrated ( > (z)) a panic leads to a drop in
consumption that is common across countries. Consumption in both countries
drops from 1= to n = . Second, output drops equally in both countries and the
same as consumption.18 Third, future output is expected to drop in both countries
by the same amount as well. All these pieces of evidence are consistent with the
business cycle and survey data reported in Figures 1 and 3. Also consistent with the
model, we can observe a worldwide decline in pro…ts. Figure 7 shows substantial
declines in pro…ts both for the U.S. and other G7 countries.19
  18
      The real value of Home output in period 1 is P1 c1 =PH;1 from (33), while P1 =PH;1 depends
on c1 =c1 from (36) and therefore stays equal to 1. The drop in Home real GDP in period 1
is therefore the same as the drop in Home consumption. The same is the case for the Foreign
country.
   19
      There is no cross-country database on aggregate corporate pro…ts that we are aware of. The

                                              19
3.4     Intuition Behind Global Panics
Unless countries are perfectly integrated, business cycles shocks are only partially
transmitted across countries in standard models. As we will see, this is the case
in our model as well in the sense that an asymmetric panic in one country is only
partially transmitted to the other country. But the key to perfect business cycle
co-movement here is that under su¢ cient integration we can rule out asymmetric
equilibria, so that a panic is necessarily global.
    While we will discuss the reason for this in the context of the speci…cs of our
model, the key point is more general. Expectation shocks in our model are self-
ful…lling. When countries are su¢ ciently integrated it is hard to see how one
country can have very negative self-ful…lling expectations about future output and
income while the other country has very favorable expectations. If agents act on
those beliefs, the weak country would negatively impact the strong country and the
other way around, and more so the more integrated they are. Such beliefs will then
not be self-ful…lling as for example income in the weak country will be favorably
impacted by strong demand from the other country (with trade integration) or
strong portfolio returns in the other country (with …nancial integration).
    Returning to the speci…cs of our particular model, we will consider the fea-
sibility of an asymmetric equilibrium where n = n and n = 1. Before we can
determine whether such an equilibrium may exist, we …rst consider the impact of
the Home panic on …rst-period consumption, output and pro…ts in both countries.
              R1
    Let y1 = 0 y1 (j)dj be aggregate Home output in period 1 (real GDP) and y1
aggregate Foreign output. We then have
                                             1
                                         c1 = n(1          )
                                                                                         (46)
                                             1
                                         c1 = n                                          (47)

and
                                          1
                                      y1 = n(1+        (       1))
                                                                                         (48)
                                          1        (       1))
                                      y1 = n                                             (49)

numbers in Figure 7 have been derived by aggregating pro…ts from …rms listed in the Worldscope
database. We selected continuing …rms over the interval and windsorized the top and bottom
tails at 1 percent. The resulting pro…t series are divided by the GDP de‡ator.


                                             20
    First consider output. Under autarky, where = 0, only Home output is lower
in case of Home defaults. When countries are integrated Home output is always
lower than Foreign output. When > 1 it is even the case that Foreign output
rises. So the transmission of the Home shock (lower n) to the Foreign country
is either positive and partial or negative. Two factors play a role here. First,
lower Home second-period income due to a lower n decreases Home consumption,
which decreases demand for Foreign goods. This leads to positive but partial
transmission. Second, lower Home output leads to an increase in the relative price
of Home goods.20 This leads to an expenditure switch to Foreign goods, which
may actually raise Foreign output in period 1.
    Consumption is equal to c1 = PH;1 y1 =P1 and c1 = PF;1 y1 =P1 . Two factors im-
pact consumption: the change in output discussed above and the terms of trade.
Similar to output, under autarky only Home consumption declines. When coun-
tries are integrated there is an additional positive transmission channel through
the terms of trade, which improves for the Home country and deteriorates for the
Foreign country. This raises Home consumption and lowers Foreign consumption.
The overall impact is that both Home and Foreign consumption decline. But
Foreign consumption declines less ( < 0:5), so that transmission is positive but
partial.
    We …nally need to consider pro…ts, which are critical to understanding whether
asymmetric equilibria exist. We can write Home and Foreign …rst period pro…ts
as
                                                                     1=
                                                   +1=        P1
                               1   = c1       c1                                          (50)
                                          A                  PH;1
                                                                          1=
                                                      +1=          P1
                               1   = c1       (c1 )                                       (51)
                                          A                       PH;1

with c1 and c1 as in (46)-(47) and
                                      P1
                                          = n(1          +    )
                                                                                          (52)
                                     PH;1

   Under autarky ( = 0) we have P1 =PH;1 = 1 and only Home pro…ts are lower
due to the decline in Home consumption.21 Trade integration impacts pro…ts in
  20
     This is the case for period 1 as well as P1 = P2 and P1 = P2 together imply that the terms
of trade is the same in both periods.
  21
     This requires Assumption 2.

                                               21
several ways. There are three channels through which it raises Home pro…ts and
lowers Foreign pro…ts. First, Home faces strong export demand from Foreign and
Foreign faces weak export demand from Home. Second, for a given quantity of
sales the increase in the relative price of Home goods raises Home real revenues
and lowers Foreign real revenues. Finally, we have already seen that increased
integration raises Home consumption and lowers Foreign consumption, which in-
creases demand for Home goods and lowers demand for Foreign goods. There is
one transmission channel that operates the other way. The higher relative price of
Home goods leads to an expenditure switch to Foreign goods, which lowers Home
pro…ts and raises Foreign pro…ts.
    We show in Appendix C that the …rst three transmission channels dominate
and therefore increased integration raises Home pro…ts and lowers Foreign pro…ts.
We also show that for su¢ cient integration Home pro…ts actually become larger
than Foreign pro…ts. To see why this is the case, consider ! 0:5. When we get
close to perfect integration, it follows from (46)-(47) that c1 and c1 become equal.
This result is familiar from Cole and Obstfeld (1991), who show that with Cobb-
Douglas utility a relative change in output does not a¤ect relative consumption
due to the endogenous terms-of-trade adjustment. It then follows from (50)-(51)
that Home pro…ts only di¤ers from Foreign pro…ts as a result of the terms of trade,
which is captured by P1 =PH;1 . We can see from (52) that P1 =PH;1 < 1, re‡ecting
the drop in the relative price of Foreign goods. This implies from (50)-(51) that
Home pro…ts are higher than Foreign pro…ts. More generally we show in Appendix
C that Home pro…ts is larger than Foreign pro…ts under su¢ cient integration as
measured by < for some cuto¤ > 0:5.
    Based on these results, formalized in Appendix C, Figure 8 graphs Home and
Foreign pro…ts as a function of . The graph captures three key points discussed
above. First, under autarky ( = 1) Home pro…ts are weaker than Foreign pro…ts
as only the Home country is a¤ected by the Home defaults. Second, increased
integration (lower ) raises Home pro…ts and lowers Foreign pro…ts. Finally, Home
pro…ts are higher than Foreign pro…ts when is below a cuto¤ .
    We can only have an asymmetric panic equilibrium where n = n and n = 1
when
                                       1 < z     1                              (53)
In that case the fragile Home …rms will indeed default (n = n), while the fragile


                                        22
Foreign …rms will not default (n = 1). Assumptions 1 and 2 imply that this is
satis…ed when      = 1. But it is no longer satis…ed when the two countries are
su¢ ciently integrated. It is clearly not the case when < as in that case Home
pro…ts are higher than Foreign pro…ts.
    More generally (53) is not satis…ed for less than a cuto¤ (z) that lies some-
where between and 1. This is illustrated in Figure 8. When z = z1 , the cuto¤
for is 1 . When < 1 , Foreign pro…ts are below z, so that fragile Foreign
…rms will default and (n; n ) = (n; 1) cannot be an equilibrium. Similarly, when
z = z3 , the cuto¤ for is 3 . When < 3 , Home pro…ts are above z, so that
fragile Home …rms will not default and (n; n ) = (n; 1) cannot be an equilibrium.
The lowest possible cuto¤ value for occurs when z = z2 , in which case the cuto¤
is = , where Home and Foreign pro…ts are equal. It follows that for < (z)
the asymmetric equilibria do not exist.
    What is critical to Proposition 2 is not the …nding that Home pro…ts become
larger than Foreign pro…ts when < . Rather, what is key is that Home pro…ts
rise and Foreign pro…ts decline when countries become more integrated, which is
natural with positive transmission across countries. Even if were 0.5, so that
Home pro…ts is always lower than Foreign pro…ts with limited integration, (z)
will still be above 0.5.22 If countries are su¢ ciently integrated, and therefore the
di¤erence between Home and Foreign pro…ts becomes su¢ ciently small, there will
generally not be an equilibrium where only Home …rms go bankrupt.
    Therefore only a limited amount of trade is su¢ cient to assure that a panic will
be global in nature and therefore consumption and output move perfectly together
across countries. A limited amount of trade is su¢ cient to either provide enough
stability to the Home country, avoiding a panic altogether, or to drag the Foreign
country down into a panic as well. A self-ful…lling shock to expectations cannot
just occur in one country if the countries are su¢ ciently integrated. The countries
necessarily su¤er a common fate.


3.5       Numerical Illustration
While the model is obviously highly stylized, it is still useful to provide a numer-
ical illustration for reasonable levels of parameters. We will set the elasticity
equal to 3. Broda and Weinstein (2006) estimate this elasticity using 8-digit, 5-
 22
      The only exception is the knife-edge case where z = z2 .


                                                23
digit and 3-digit industry levels. In all cases they …nd that the median elasticity
across industries is just below 3. We set = 0:75. This delivers a labor share
of (       1)= = 0:5, which is consistent with 2010 data for the U.S., Japan and
the Euro zone on the ratio of employee compensation to GDP. We normalize pri-
vate consumption in the non-panic state to be 1 by setting =A such that = 1.
We re-introduce government spending, which was only suppressed in the previous
subsections for analytic tractability. We set gt = g = 0:3 in both periods, imply-
ing that government consumption as a fraction of GDP is 0.3/1.3=0.23. This is
consistent with recent data from industrialized countries for government spending
(consumption plus investment) relative to GDP. For now we set = 0, so that the
borrowing constraint is very tight: …rms cannot borrow at all. We will investigate
the role of borrowing constraints further in the next section.
    The only parameter left is . It is hard to calibrate as it plays three roles in the
model: rate of risk aversion, inverse of intertemporal elasticity of substitution and
real wage cyclicality. The real wage is c . Based on estimates of risk-aversion
and the intertemporal elasticity of substitution should be larger than 1. But
this is inconsistent with the evidence that the average real wage rate is not very
cyclical. Moreover, given realistic choices for the other parameters the model
implies counterintuitively that (1) < (n) when is set at 1 or larger. The reason
is that in the panic state the real wage is much lower, which raises …rm pro…ts. In
order to avoid this strong cyclicality of the wage rate, we consider results both for
the case where is well below 1 and the extension where nominal or real wages
are rigid (preset at the start of each period). This extension is straightforward and
described in Appendix D.
    When we set = 0:2, so that the real wage rate is not very cyclical, we …nd
   = 0:9, independent of the level of n. The actual cuto¤ (z) then lies somewhere
between 0.9 and 1. Only limited trade is then su¢ cient to guarantee a global panic.
When 10% of private consumption goods are imported a panic is necessarily global
and therefore business cycles will be perfectly synchronized during the panic.
will be only slightly lower, at 0.88, when we set in…nitesimally close to 0, so that
the real wage rate is not cyclical at all.
    As discussed further in Appendix D, under both nominal and real wage rigidity
wages are set at the start of each period under the assumption that there will be
no panic.23 Results will be very similar when setting the probability of a panic
 23
      Even though …rms preset their prices, there is a di¤erence between nominal and real wage

                                              24
at a small positive number. This does not a¤ect period 2 as there are no further
unexpected shocks during period 2. When the real wage is negotiated at the start
of period 1, it will then be set at its equilibrium non-panic level. When instead
the nominal wage rate is agreed to in advance, the real wage will be equal to the
non-panic real wage rate times P1 =P1 , where P1 is the price index without a panic.
We now set at 3, which is a standard value when measuring risk aversion or the
inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
    Under real wage rigidity we …nd that         is 0.89. Note that this is not the
same model as under ‡exible real wages with very small since the second period
equilibrium does depend on . Nonetheless the result is virtually identical and
it again does not depend on n. Under nominal wage rigidity is a bit lower at
0.77, so that (z) is in the range of 0.77 to 1. But it is still the case that limited
trade is needed to guarantee perfect synchronization of panics across countries. It
is su¢ cient that 23% of private consumption goods are imported. This number
may be even less depending on the precise value of z.24
    We can also numerically evaluate the extent of traditional business cycle trans-
mission associated with asymmetric shocks. Since there are no exogenous asym-
metric shocks in the model, we consider transmission associated with an asymmet-
ric panic. Take the example of real wage rigidity where = 0:89. Assume that
  (z) = and that = 0:9 > . We are then in the region where asymmetric
panics are possible. Using the parameter values discussed above, the drop in log
Foreign consumption is then only a fraction 0.05 of the drop in log Home consump-
tion. Transmission is positive but small. Since > 1, (49) implies that Foreign
output rises in this case, so that transmission to Foreign output is negative. But
only slightly more trade integration ( equal to 0.89 or less) guarantees that panics
are global, allowing us to explain the perfect business cycle synchronization while
retaining signi…cant home bias as seen in the data.
rigidity due to the exchange rate impact on the price level.
   24
      The slightly lower cuto¤ under nominal wage rigidity can be explained as follows. We have
seen that when a panic is limited to the Home country, Home pro…ts rise and Foreign pro…ts
decline as we lower , until they are equal at = . But the decrease in the relative price of
Foreign goods will lower the Home price index and more so the higher the level of trade (the lower
  ). When the nominal wage rate is …xed, this by itself raises the real wage rate and lowers Home
pro…ts as we lower . It will remain the case, as a result of the other channels that we discussed,
that Home and Foreign pro…ts are equal for a value larger than 0.5, but this counterweigting
force reduces somewhat the value of .


                                               25
4     Vulnerabilities
We can now consider factors that make countries vulnerable to self-ful…lling panics.
We focus on symmetric equilibria. If symmetric panics do not exist, no type of
panic, including asymmetric ones, exist in the model. We consider a version of the
model that is general enough to focus on the role of credit, monetary policy and
…scal policy. These are captured by respectively , i and gt . At the same time
we will simplify by setting = = 1. This leads to a cleaner set of equilibrium
equations, but is not critical to the results. As shown in Appendix B, the schedules
that determine the symmetric equilibrium are then

                                      1=   n
               c1 = [ (1 + i)]                                                     (54)
                                                                          g2
                   = c1 + g1             c1 (c1 + g1 ) +             1+            (55)
                                     A                     (1 + i)         n

                        n       if    <z
                n =                                                                (56)
                        1       if     z
We consider di¤erent versions of this set of equilibrium equations, dependent on
the vulnerability of interest. We can think of = 0, gt = 0 and (1 + i) = 1 as a
benchmark that we deviate from one parameter at a time.


4.1    Credit
In order to consider the role of credit we focus on the impact of the parameter ,
while setting (1 + i) = 1 and gt = 0. Equilibrium is then characterized by two
schedules:
                            n
                 c1 =           with n = n if        < z and n = 1 if          z   (57)

                     = c1            c1+
                                      1  +                                         (58)
                                A
These schedules are shown in Figure 9 for two values of . The vertical lines
represent the consumption schedule while the humped shaped line re‡ects the
available fund schedule. A higher raises the available fund schedule. Figure 9
shows that when is low, so that credit is tight, there may be two equilibria, so that
self-ful…lling panics are possible. But when credit is loose, so that is high, only
the non-panic equilibrium exists. The more …rms are able to borrow, the less fragile

                                               26
they are. They are then better able to withstand a drop in demand that lowers
…rst-period pro…ts. This in turn can make a self-ful…lling panic impossible. While
it remains the case that conditions in period 2 a¤ect consumption in period 1, the
linkage in the other direction is broken under loose credit conditions. Even with
low consumption in period 1, leading to low pro…ts, …rms can avoid bankruptcy
by borrowing.


4.2    Monetary Policy
So far we have assumed that monetary policy is a zero in‡ation policy and (1+i) =
1, so that the non-panic equilibrium corresponds to the ‡exible price equilibrium.
But it is sensible for the central bank to lower the interest rate when faced with
a panic that reduces output and consumption. However, the central bank may be
constrained by the zero lower bound. We will now assume that = 0 and gt = 0,
but we no longer restrict monetary policy to be (1 + i) = 1. The symmetric
equilibrium is then determined by
                                 n
           c1 = [ (1 + i)] 1=        with n = n if < z and n = 1 if        z   (59)

              = c1       c1+
                          1                                                    (60)
                       A
The interest rate only enters the consumption schedule. Lowering the interest rate
shifts the consumption schedule to the right.
    Now consider the following policy. In the absence of a panic the central bank
keeps (1 + i) = 1, so that we achieve the ‡exible price equilibrium. But when a
panic occurs the central bank lowers the interest rate. The chart on the left-hand
side of Figure 10 considers the case where the central bank lowers the interest
rate all the way to zero during a panic. When is only slightly below 1, so that
the non-panic interest rate i = { = 1 1= is already close to zero, this involves
only a small rightward shift of the left vertical line of the consumption schedule.
We see that in that case the central bank cannot avoid a panic due to the zero
lower bound. There is a panic equilibrium at B 0 that is quite close to the panic
equilibrium B under the passive policy (1 + i) = 1. The reason for this is that
the central bank does not have much room to maneuver when the interest rate is
already close to 0.
    When instead is well below 1, so that we are far from the zero lower bound
without a panic, the interest rate can be lowered much more during a panic. This

                                        27
leads to a larger rightward shift of the left vertical line of the consumption schedule.
When the central bank follows this policy, it is clear from Figure 10 that a panic
can be avoided altogether. A large drop in the interest rate leads to a signi…cant
rise in …rst period consumption, which dampens the decline in …rm pro…ts and
thus avoids defaults.
    The chart on the right hand side of Figure 10 illustrates this point as well. We
can think of (59) as a downward sloping IS curve in the space of (i; c1 ). A panic
lowers n, which shifts the IS curve to the left. When policy is passive, so that
i = 1 1= , the panic leads to a signi…cant drop in …rst-period consumption. We
shift from point A to point B, corresponding to the same points in the chart on the
left. If instead the central bank lowers the interest rate to zero during the panic,
we move to point B 0 . The chart is drawn for the case where is only slightly below
zero, so that the interest is already close to zero without a panic. Lowering the
interest further, all the way to zero, will then not raise consumption very much.
Pro…ts will then remain very weak and we are unable to escape bankruptcies and
therefore the panic.
    There is another policy option that theoretically exists and allows the central
bank to avoid a panic even when close to the zero lower bound. Instead of a
zero in‡ation policy it could adopt a high in‡ation policy during a panic. The
consumption schedule is then
                          P1     1=   n
         c1 = [ (1 + i)      ]            with n = n if   < z and n = 1 if     z      (61)
                          P2
High in‡ation expectations would then lead to a large rightward shift of the left
vertical line of the consumption schedule in the left chart of Figure 10. The panic
equilibrium would then no longer exist. This policy has been widely discussed but
su¤ers from a credibility problem as ex-post the central bank has little incentive
to generate the promised in‡ation.25
  25
    Such credibility issues cannot be properly analyzed in our model as there is no cost of
in‡ation.




                                              28
4.3     Fiscal Policy
Figure 11 illustrates the role of …scal policy. In this case we set         = 0 and (1+i) =
1, so that the two schedules become
                             n
                    c1 =           with n = n if       < z and n = 1 if        z             (62)

                        = c1 + g 1           c1 (c1 + g1 )                                   (63)
                                         A
    First consider the case where …scal policy takes the form g1 = g, which is il-
lustrated in the left chart of Figure 11. A higher level of g then shifts upward the
available funds schedule.26 The chart illustrates that when government consump-
tion is su¢ ciently high, the panic equilibrium is ruled out. Only the non-panic
equilibrium without bankruptcies exists. With a very high level of government
consumption, it is impossible to have a self-ful…lling business cycle panic because
government spending is not a¤ected by expectations. Even if private consump-
tion were to decline substantially, period-1 pro…ts would remain relatively strong
because of the stable government spending. This precludes the fragile …rms from
going bankrupt, thus avoiding a self-ful…lling panic.
    The chart on the right hand side considers the role of countercyclical …scal
policy. The broken humped shaped schedule assumes that …scal policy takes the
form g1 = g       (c1 1= ). In that case government consumption is the same as
under the g1 = g policy in the absence of a panic. But when a panic occurs, which
lowers …rst period consumption, government spending is higher. When …scal policy
is su¢ ciently countercyclical, as measured by the parameter , the chart shows
that the panic equilibrium no longer exists. When the drop in private consumption
during a panic is su¢ ciently o¤set by an increase in government consumption, …rm
pro…ts remain relatively strong and bankruptcies are avoided.


4.4     Vulnerabilities during the 2008 Crisis
There are three ways in which the world economy was particularly vulnerable to a
self-ful…lling panic in 2008. First, credit was known to be tight due to large losses
  26
    The derivative of with respect to g is 1 ( =A)c1 . When c1 = 1= , as in the non-panic
equilibrium, this derivative is 1= , which is positive. Only for …rst-period consumption values
well above that can the derivative be negative, but those are not of interest to us as …rst period
consumption can be no larger than 1= .


                                                 29
experienced by banks and other …nancial institutions since early 2007, leading
to deleveraging in the …nancial system. Second, interest rates around the world
were close to zero even prior to the Fall of 2008, leaving central banks little room
to maneuver. Third, the Great Recession took place against the backdrop of
high levels of government debt, which limited the ability of …scal authorities to
respond with strong countercyclical policies.27 Moreover, several countries had
adopted …scal rules, also limiting the ‡exibility of …scal policy. These three factors
were combined with increased global economic integration in recent decades, which
made the world particularly vulnerable to a globally synchronized rather than a
local panic.


5      Extensions
In this section we consider four extensions to the benchmark model. While these
extensions make the model more realistic, they do not alter the main results derived
in the benchmark case. The …rst extension introduces international risk sharing,
which leads to further integration across the two countries. The second extension
allows for a non-unitary elasticity of substitution between Home and Foreign goods.
The third extension adds investment and is able to explain a synchronized drop
in investment as observed during the Great Recession. The last extension adds
uncertainty about z. A panic then also leads to an increase in uncertainty about
future output that is common across countries, consistent with what we saw during
the Great Recession as documented in Figure 3.


5.1     Financial Integration
In the model so far the two countries trade goods but are in …nancial autarky.
We have seen that a limited degree of goods market integration is su¢ cient to
guarantee that a business cycle panic is global. We now add to this …nancial
integration. We only consider the extreme case of full risk sharing.28
  27
     Even before …scal debt around the globe rose signi…cantly as a result of the recession itself,
gross public debt as a percent of GDP stood close to 80% among advanced economies (see for
example the World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund, October 2012). With the
exception of the end of World War II, this is the highest level in over a century.
  28
     Intermediate cases with partial …nancial integration can be accomplished in many ways and
this is not necessarily captured well through one parameter in a way that is analogous to for

                                                30
   There is room for risk sharing as business cycle panics are shocks that may be
limited to one country. Under complete markets the ratio of marginal utilities of
consumption is equal to the real exchange rate:

                                         ct           Pt
                                                =                                            (64)
                                        (ct )        St Pt

This replaces the condition Pt ct = St Pt ct under …nancial autarky. As long as is
di¤erent from 1 these two conditions will di¤er.29 The expression (36) for relative
prices no longer holds and is replaced by (64). This is the only change to the
model. The equations (68)-(75) in Appendix B that summarize the equilibrium
all remain the same, but the relative prices PH;t =Pt and PF;t =Pt that enter these
equations are now based on (64).30
    We …nd numerically that risk sharing tends to further increase the cuto¤ level
of below which a panic is necessarily global. With …nancial integration, less trade
integration is then needed to assure a global panic. For example, in the numerical
exercise in Section 3.5 we found that was 0.89 under real wage rigidities and
0.77 under nominal wage rigidities.31 With risk sharing these numbers increase to
respectively 0.95 and 0.84.
    To understand the role of risk sharing, consider again the case where only the
Home country panics, so that (n; n ) = (n; 1). Under risk sharing, and assuming
that > 1, there will be a net transfer to Home when it is hit by a panic. This
leads to an increase in relative demand for Home goods, which further raises the
relative price of Home goods. The Home terms-of-trade improvement will then be
even larger than without risk sharing. The favorable impact of this terms-of-trade
improvement on Home pro…ts was discussed in Section 3.4. This implies that as
   decreases below one, Home pro…ts increase and Foreign pro…ts decrease more
than before. Therefore, the two pro…t schedules meet each other at a higher level
of in Figure 8. A panic limited to only one country is therefore less likely in
equilibrium.
goods market integration.
  29
     We assume that only households share risk. Firms do not have access to risksharing because
of standard principal agents problems that also lead to borrowing constraints.
  30
     We have Pt =PH;t = (ct =ct ) (1 )=(2 1) and Pt =PF;t = PH;t =Pt .
  31
     As explained, without wage rigidities we needed to set close to zero to avoid excessive wage
cyclicality, which is particularly unrealistic in the present context of risksharing where plays a
role as the rate of relative risk-aversion. With wage rigidities we set = 3.


                                                31
5.2     Elasticity of Substitution
Throughout the paper so far we have assumed a unitary elasticity of substitution
between Home and Foreign goods. We now relax this assumption by adopting a
CES speci…cation with an elasticity of substitution of between Home and Foreign
goods:
                           h         1                   1i 1
                      ct = 1= cH;t + (1         )1= cF;t                    (65)
The speci…cation for ct is analogous, with the weights and 1           switched.
    As was the case for risk sharing, equations (68)-(75) in Appendix B that de-
scribe the equilibrium of the model remain unchanged. The only change again
applies to the expression for relative prices that enter these equations. Relative
prices are derived from the balanced trade condition St PF;t cF;t = PH;t cH;t . With a
unitary elasticity this implies Pt ct = St Pt ct . With an elasticity this generalizes
to
                                         1
                              St PF;t         St Pt      ct
                                                       =                          (66)
                               PH;t            Pt        ct
The left hand side is a function of the relative price St PF;t =PH;t , so this gives an
implicit solution of the relative price as a function of ct =ct .32
    We …nd numerically that the cuto¤ (z) rises when we lower below 1 and
falls when we raise above 1. There is evidence that is in fact lower than 1. For
example, Hooper, Johnson and Marquez (2000) estimate import price elasticities
to be well below 1 for the G-7 countries. Using the parameter assumptions from
Section 2.5 we …nd that lowering from 1 to 0.7 raises from 0.91 to 0.95 for
the ‡exible wage case, from 0.9 to 0.95 for the rigid real wage case and from 0.77
to 0.89 for the case of rigid nominal wages. These results imply that with trade
elasticities less than 1 even less trade is needed to guarantee that panics will be
global in nature.
    As discussed in Section 3.4, when only the Home country panics the only neg-
ative impact of trade on Home pro…ts operates through the expenditure switching
e¤ect. The higher relative price of Home goods leads to a substitution from Home
to Foreign goods. But this e¤ect is weakened when the price elasticity is less than
1. The result is that Home pro…ts rises even more with higher trade integration
  32
     It is well known that for su¢ ciently low elasticities of substitution (in our case below 0.5),
this balanced trade condition has more than one solution for the relative price. This is an entirely
separate form of multiplicity, discussed for example by Bodenstein (2010).


                                                32
(lower ) and Foreign pro…ts drops more. This raises in Figure 8 and raises the
cuto¤ (z) below which panics are necessarily global events.


5.3    Investment
As shown in Figure 1, investment also declined sharply during the Great Recession.
And the decline was again of similar magnitude in the rest of the world as in the
United States. To capture this, we now consider a simple extension that allows for
investment.
    We assume that …rms that do not go bankrupt need to invest in period 1 in
order to operate in period 2. To simplify, we assume a given level of required
investment per …rm of k. This investment is measured as the same index of Home
and Foreign goods as for consumption. Investment demand for individual goods
therefore takes the same form as for consumption, with c1 replaced by I1 and c1
by I1 . Aggregate investment is I1 = nk and I1 = n k.
    The equilibrium conditions (68)-(75) listed in Appendix B remain the same
with two exceptions that a¤ect the available funds schedule. First, investment k
needs to be subtracted from …rst period pro…ts. Second, c1 and c1 need to be
replaced by c1 + I1 and c1 + I1 (with the exception of wages, which only depend
on consumption as in (13)). The only other change is to the expression for the
relative price in period 1. It is derived from the balanced trade condition. Without
investment we showed that it can be written as P1 c1 = S1 P1 c1 . With investment
it becomes P1 (c1 + I1 ) = S1 P1 (c1 + I1 ). Correspondingly, in the expression (36)
for the period-1 relative price we again need to replace c1 and c1 with c1 + I1 and
c1 + I1 .
    The change in the expression for the relative price makes it more di¢ cult to
derive analytical results, but the numerical results are consistent with Propositions
1 and 2. If we set k such that the ratio of investment to GDP is 0.15 without a
panic (the average for the U.S. since 1990), and set the other parameters the same
as in Section 3.5, the values of remain virtually the same. Therefore it is again
the case that limited integration is su¢ cient to assure that a panic is global. The
only di¤erence is that now during a global panic there is also a synchronized drop
in investment in both countries.
    Another interesting point relates to the Paradox of Thrift. All agents in the
economy attempt to save more because of an anticipated drop in future income.


                                         33
But in the end equilibrium saving will be lower around the world. This occurs
because the increase in desired saving leads to a drop in demand in period 1,
which lowers output and income in period 1. For intertemporal smoothing reasons
this reduces period 1 saving. In the model without investment equilibrium saving
will remain unchanged at zero during a global panic. But since we now have
an endogenous decline in investment during the panic, global saving must have
declined as well. This is consistent with the data, which show a decline in global
saving and investment during the 2008-2009 crisis.


5.4    Uncertainty
A simple way to introduce uncertainty is to assume that the level of the …xed cost
z is not known in advance. Let us assume that z can take the values zL or zH , with
zH > zL > 0. The probability of either value is 0.5 and the draw is uncorrelated
across countries. As we will see, this generates business cycle uncertainty only
when there is a panic, consistent with the evidence of a signi…cant spike in GDP
uncertainty during the Great Recession, documented in Figure 3.
    Of the equilibrium conditions (68)-(75) listed in Appendix B, only the consump-
tion Euler equations will change. Previously period 2 consumption was known in
period 1, while now it may be uncertain. Assuming = 0, the Home fragile …rms
default when 1 < z. This depends on the level of z. We assume that the …xed
cost is paid at the end of period 1 and is unknown when consumption decisions
are made.
    Let pD be the probability of default. We have pD = 0 when 1 zH , pD = 1
when 1 < zL and pD = 0:5 when zL             1 < zH . In the latter case, default will
depend on whether the draw of z is zL or zH . The probability of default pD in the
Foreign country depends similarly on 1 .
    Let c2 (n; n ) and c2 (n; n ) be second-period consumption in both countries as
a function of the number of …rms. This takes the form, c2 = 1 n(1 ) (n ) when
g2 = 0 but more generally is derived from (68)-(69) in Appendix B. There are
now 4 possible outcomes, dependent on whether or not there is default in Home
and Foreign. This leads to the following consumption Euler equation for Home
(assuming (1 + i) = 1):
             c1    = pD pD c2 (n; n)    + (1     pD )(1   pD )c2 (1; 1)   +
                       pD (1   pD )c2 (n; 1)    + (1   pD )pD c2 (1; n)          (67)

                                           34
The Foreign consumption Euler equation is analogous.
    We can numerically verify the equilibria by considering all 9 possible values
of the pair (pD ; pD ). Given a set of values for these default probabilities, we can
compute …rst-period consumption from the consumption Euler equations. This
gives us expressions for …rst-period pro…ts in both countries, which maps into
values of pD and pD as described above. When the latter are consistent with their
assumed values, there is an equilibrium.
    To provide an illustration of the type of equilibria that this can generate, con-
sider again the parameter values in Section 3.5. Let zL = 0:5 and zH = 0:58. In
the case of rigid real wages we …nd that for         < 0:92 there are two equilibria.
In one equilibrium there is no panic in either country. Consumption and pro…ts
are high and the probability of default is zero. In the second equilibrium there is
a panic. Consumption and pro…ts are weak. The probability of default is 0.5 as
there will not be default when z = zL . The panic is synchronized across the two
countries. When > 0:92 these same two equilibria still exist. In addition there
are now mixed equilibria where only one country panics, with a 0.5 probability of
default, and the other does not.
    The basic di¤erence relative to the previous equilibria is that in a panic equi-
librium there is now a positive probability of default rather than certain default.
The main result of the paper still holds in that a limited extent of trade integration
( < 0:92) is su¢ cient to guarantee that panics are global. The same equilibria
also apply to nominal wage rigidities, with the cuto¤ for being 0.83, as well as
‡exible wages.33
    Business cycle uncertainty is now endogenous and only spikes during a panic.
Without a panic, consumption and pro…ts are strong. No …rms default, whether
z = zL or z = zH . The exogenous uncertainty about z therefore does not generate
output uncertainty. In a panic, however, consumption and pro…ts are weak. In that
case the value of z does matter. When z = zL defaults can still be avoided even
though pro…ts are weak. But when z = zH the fragile …rms will default. Therefore
the uncertainty about z translates into output and consumption uncertainty only
during a panic.
    The endogenous uncertainty also contributes to the self-ful…lling mechanism
itself. Without uncertainty we saw that the self-ful…lling beliefs operate through
  33
    In the case of ‡exible wages we need to set di¤erent values for zL and zH . For example, if
we set them at 0.4 and 0.54 the same types of equilibria occur, with the cuto¤ for being 0.92.


                                              35
the expected level of second period income. Lower expected income leads to lower
consumption, which causes lower pro…ts that generates bankruptcies that are con-
sistent with the belief of lower expected future income. With uncertainty the
second moment plays a role as well.34 Higher income uncertainty leads to lower
consumption as a result of precautionary saving. This in turn lowers pro…ts, which
makes the fragile …rms more sensitive to …xed cost shocks. This generates uncer-
tainty about defaults, making the belief of income uncertainty self-ful…lling.
     It is also useful to note that panics do not necessarily imply bankruptcies in this
extension. When zL           1 < zH in a panic, bankruptcies only occur when z = zH .
It is the increased expectation of bankruptcies and uncertainty about bankruptcies
that drives the panic. But dependent on z, these bankruptcies may not necessarily
materialize. Moreover, since z and z are uncorrelated, bankruptcies may occur
in only one country, even when the panic is global. In other words, perfect co-
movement may only occur in a global panic and not in subsequent periods.


6      Conclusion
The paper is motivated by evidence of close business cycle co-movement during
the Great Recession. Even though the housing and …nancial shock originated in
the United States, business cycles in the rest of the world were impacted to a
similar extent. Given limited trade and …nancial integration across countries this
is surprising as standard models with exogenous shocks and limited integration
generate only partial transmission. It is also surprising given the much lower co-
movement of business cycles during prior recessions.
    To explain this we have developed a two-country model with self-ful…lling busi-
ness cycle panics. The self-ful…lling mechanism is a result of a circular relationship
between present and future macroeconomic conditions. The link from the future to
the present is standard in almost any intertemporal model as lower expected future
income lowers consumption today. We have modeled the link from the present to
the future through pro…ts and bankruptcies, with lower demand today leading to
weaker pro…ts, which increases bankruptcies and lowers future output. But many
other possible mechanisms may generate such a link from the present to the future.
  34
     See Basu and Bundick (2012) for an analysis of the the impact of exogenous uncertainty in
a sticky-price model. Ravn and Sterk (2012) focus on the impact of job uncertainty.



                                             36
    We have shown that the model is consistent with high international co-movement
observed during the Great Recession. We …nd that limited economic integration
is su¢ cient to assure that a panic, when it occurs, is necessarily perfectly synchro-
nized across countries. In a panic, consumption, investment, and output collapse
similarly across countries. Moreover, perceived uncertainty increases equally across
countries.
    At the same time we shed light on the fact that such strong business cycle
co-movement as seen during the Great Recession is historically unusual. We have
argued that several factors made the 2008 episode particularly vulnerable to such
a global panic: tight credit, very low interest rates, rigid …scal policy, combined
with increased economic integration across countries. And of course there was an
unusually strong trigger event for a panic in the form of U.S. …nancial market
turmoil. The combination of these conditions separates the 2008 episode from
previous recessions.




                                         37
Appendix
   A. GDP Forecast Expectation and Variance

    This Appendix describes in some more detail how the numbers in Figure 3 are
computed. The data has been purchased from Consensus Economics. In their Jan-
uary newsletter of “Consensus Forecast” and “Asia Paci…c Consensus Forecasts”
they publish one-year-ahead GDP forecast probabilities since 1999 for the coun-
tries listed in the Figure. More speci…cally, for every country and year there are
seven intervals of growth forecasts (e.g. 1-2%, 2-3%). The precise intervals may
change from year to year. The data reports probabilities of each interval as the
percentage of forecasts that lie in that interval. We compute the expectation and
variance of the forecasts by using the midpoint of each interval, together with the
probabilities of the intervals.
    One issue is that the intervals at both ends of the range are not bounded (e.g.,
an interval can be “< -1%”). In that case we adopt two scenarios to choose a
midpoint for the interval. In the …rst scenario, we choose a midpoint by assuming
that the interval width is the same as that for the other intervals. In the second
scenario we choose a midpoint by assuming that the interval width is twice that
for the other intervals. This leads to almost identical results. Figure 3 shows the
results for the …rst scenario.


   B. Model Equilibrium

    In this Appendix we show how the model can be described a set of eight equa-
tions. Throughout the paper we use these equations to look at various special




                                        38
cases. These equations are:
                                                                        1
                                  P2             P2
                               c2                    c2 + g2                     =n               (68)
                            1 A PH;2            PH;2
                                                                             1
                                      P              P2
                                (c2 ) 2                  c + g2                   = (n )          (69)
                            1 A      PF;2            PF;2 2
                    c1      = (1 + i)c2                                                           (70)
                    [c1 ]    = (1 + i )[c2 ]                                                      (71)
                                                                                  1=
                                  PH;1                      P1
                         = c1 +        g1            c1         c1 + g 1                          (72)
                                   P1           A          PH;1
                                                                                   1=
                                                                  P2
                            +            c2 n    (    1)              c2 + g2
                                1+i A                            PH;2
                                                                                        1=
                                PF;1                               P1
                         = c1 +      g               (c1 )             c + g1                     (73)
                                P1 1             A                 PF;1 1
                                                                                             1=
                                                                            P2
                            + (c ) (n )                      (     1)           c + g2
                         1+i A 2                                            PF;2 2
                       n   if < z
                    n=                                                                            (74)
                       1   if   z

                             n      if      <z
                    n =                                                                           (75)
                             1      if       z
    With relative prices as in (36), these are 8 equations in c1 , c1 , c2 , c2 , n, n ,
and . They are derived as follows. (68) follows by substituting the labor supply
schedule W2 =P2 = c2 and PH;2 (j)=PH;2 = n1=( 1) into the optimal price setting
equation (20). It also uses the expression (19) for y2 (j) that enters into the optimal
price setting equation (20), after substituting (35) into the expression for y2 (j).
(69) is the Foreign counterpart of (68). (70) follows from the intertemporal con-
sumption Euler equation (8) after substituting the zero in‡ation monetary policy
(P2 = P1 ). (71) is the Foreign counterpart.
    (72) is an expression for available funds = 1 + 2 =(1 + i). It is derived as
follows. First, we derive 1 , which is on the …rst line of the right hand side of (72).
It is equal to
                                 PH;1        W1 1
                            1 =       y1 (j)        y1 (j)1=                          (76)
                                  P1          P1 A
Using that PH;1 (j) = PH;1 , we have from (29) that y1 (j) = cH;1 + cH;1 + g1 .
Substituting cH;1 = (P1 =PH;1 )c1 and cH;1 = (1        )(S1 P1 =PH;1 )c1 , and also using

                                                     39
P1 c1 = S1 P1 c1 from (35), we have y1 (j) = (P1 =PH;1 )c1 + g1 . When we substitute
this into (76), together with W1 =P1 = c1 , we get the …rst line on the right hand
side of (72). The second line is       2 =(1 + i). We derive an expression for     2
                                                  1               1=
as follows. From (21) it is equal to 2 (j) = A (W2 =P2 )y2 (j) . We substitute
W2 =P2 = c2 and the expression (19) for y2 (j). In the expression for y2 (j) we also
substitute (35) and PH;2 (j)=PH;2 = n1=( 1) . This then delivers the second line on
the right hand side of (72). (73) is the Foreign counterpart. Finally, (74) follows
from the bankruptcy condition (26) and (75) is its Foreign counterpart.
    The paper considers two special cases of this system of equations. In sections
2.5 and 3.1-3.4 we assume gt = 0 and in the vulnerability section 4 we assume
  = = 1. We will now show that gt = 0 allows us to summarize the equilibrium
in the form of the 6 equations (37)-(42) and that = = 1 implies the symmetric
equilibrium given by (54)-(56) in the vulnerability section.
    Setting g2 = g2 = 0 and taking (68)-(69) to the power =(1          + ), these
two equations can be written as
                                               1
                                    P2    1    +
                                                        c2 = n                 (77)
                                   PH;2
                                               1
                                   P2     1    +
                                                        c2 = n                 (78)
                                   PF;2

with and de…ned in Section 2.5. Substituting the expressions for relative prices
from (36), this gives two equations in c2 and c2 that can be solved as a function
of n and n . Using that c1 = [ (1 + i)] 1= c2 and c1 = [ (1 + i )] 1= c2 from the
consumption Euler equations (70)-(71), we then have
                                                1=
                                  [ (1 + i)]
                           c1 =                         n(1   )
                                                                  (n )         (79)
                                                   1=
                                  [ (1 + i )]
                           c1 =                         n (n )(1         )
                                                                               (80)

This corresponds to the equilibrium equations (37)-(38) in Section 2.5 for the case
where monetary policy is (1 + i) = (1 + i ) = 1. (39)-(40) follow directly from
(72)-(73) after again setting (1 + i) = (1 + i ) = 1 and gt = gt = 0. This
monetary policy also implies c2 = c1 and c2 = c1 . We therefore replace second
period with …rst-period consumption on the second lines of (72)-(73). We also use
that the second period relative prices are equal to the …rst period relative prices.


                                          40
This follows from (36), together with c2 = c1 and c2 = c1 . Finally, (41)-(42)
correspond exactly to (74)-(75).
    In the vulnerability section 4 we only consider symmetric equilibria, under the
assumption that = = 1. All relative prices are then equal to 1. It then follows
immediately from (68) that c2 = n= . Together with the consumption Euler
equation (70) this gives (54). (55) follows from (72) after substituting c2 = n= ,
setting = = 1 and setting all relative prices equal to 1.
    Finally, a couple of brief comments are in order about the ‡exible price equi-
librium for the case where gt = 0, discussed at the end of Section 2.5. In that case
there are two additional variables to solve for, the nominal interest rates i and i .
There are also two additional equations, which are the period-1 analogues of (68)-
(69), which follow from optimal price setting in period 1. Solving these equations
for period 1, using the expression (36) for the relative price and the fact that the
number of …rms is 1 in period 1, gives c1 = c1 = 1= . This in turn implies that
  1 = 1 = [ (1     )+ ]=( ). Under Assumption 1, it follows that 1 > z, so that
also > z as 2 > 0. Therefore no …rms go bankrupt and n = 1. Similarly we also
have n = 1. Solving for (68)-(69) with g2 = 0 we then also have c2 = c2 = 1= .
First and second period consumption are therefore equal and it follows from the
consumption Euler equations (70)-(71) that (1 + i) = (1 + i ) = 1.

   C. Proof of Proposition 2

    We already know that both symmetric equilibria exist when (n) < z < (1).
We therefore focus on the existence of asymmetric equilibria. We will only consider
the asymmetric equilibrium (n; n ) = (n; 1) as the other asymmetric equilibrium,
(n; n ) = (1; n), exists if and only if the …rst one exists.
    From (37)-(38), setting n = n and n = 1 gives c1 = (1= )n(1 ) and c1 =
(1= )n . Substituting these values for c1 and c1 into (39)-(40) gives
                  1                    (    1)           (1   )+
           ^ ( ) = n(1    )
                                  1              n   +              n   (1   ) 1


                                  (1       )+
           ^ ( ) = (1 +       )                  n

where ^ ( ) and ^ ( ) are the values of and         when (n; n ) = (n; 1) and =
(1    )=[(1     + )(2       1) + 2(1   )]. We will consider values of between 0.5
and 1. The asymmetric equilibrium (n; n ) = (n; 1) exists when ^ ( ) < z ^ ( ).
This is clearly the case for = 1 as ^ (1) = (n) and ^ (1) = (1).

                                            41
    Using the negative relationship between and , it follows immediately from
the expressions for ^ and ^ above that the derivative of ^ with respect to is
negative and the derivative of ^ with respect to is positive for between 0.5 and
1. We will also show that there is a value > 0:5 for which ^ ( ) = ^ ( ). These
two results together imply the proposition. As we lower below 1, ^ rises and ^
falls, until we reach a level (z) > 0:5 so that either ^ ( (z)) = z or ^ ( (z)) = z.
If this were not the case, then ^ ( ) < ^ ( ) for all between 0.5 and 1, which is
inconsistent with the …nding that they are equal for = > 0:5. For values of
above (z) we have ^ < z and ^ > z, so that (n; n ) = (n; 1) is an equilibrium.
For values of below (z) we either have ^ > z or ^ < z, so that (n; n ) = (n; 1)
is not an equilibrium.
    We …nally need to show that there is a value > 0:5 for which ^ ( ) = ^ ( ).
Let the corresponding value of be . Equating the expressions above for ^ and
^ gives
                                    ( + (1        ))(1 + )
                      n(1 2 ) =                                                 (81)
                                     (    1) n + ( (1n )+ )
It follows from n < 1 that the term on the right hand side is less than 1. Therefore
it must be the case that < 0:5, from which it follows that > 0:5. It follows
that there is a value = > 0:5 for which ^ ( ) = ^ ( ), which completes the
proof of Proposition 2.

D. Introducing Wage Rigidities

   In order to introduce wage rigidities we …rst introduce labor heterogeneity.
Labor Lt in the production function is now a CES index of labor supply by all
households:                      Z                !
                                         1                       ! 1
                                                      ! 1
                            Lt =             Lt (j)    !    dj                  (82)
                                     0

where Lt (j) is labor by agent j. Given Lt , this speci…cation leads to the following
demand for individual labor:
                                                             !
                                              Wt (j)
                              Lt (j) =                           Lt             (83)
                                               Wt
where Wt (j) is the wage rate for labor supplied by agent j and
                                    Z    1
                                                                   1
                                                                  1 !
                                                      1 !
                            Wt =             Wt (j)         dj                  (84)
                                     0


                                              42
Aggregate labor demand in period t in the Home country is nH;t Lt . Demand for
labor supplied by agent j is then
                                                 !
                                        Wt (j)
                         1   lt (j) =                nH;t Lt                 (85)
                                         Wt

   We can now maximize agent j utility with respect to Wt (j). All households
choose the same optimal Wt (j), which will then be equal to Wt . We will replace
the lt in the utility function with ~ lt . Dropping the j, maximization of utility
with respect to the individual wage rate gives
                                    Wt
                                       = ct                                  (86)
                                    Pt

where = ~ !=(! 1). With the rede…ned this is the same as (13). Nothing else
in the model changes.
    When wages are rigid, they are set at the start of each period. This makes no
di¤erence for period 2 as there are no shocks during period 2. For period 1 the
only shock is a self-ful…lling panic. We assume that the probability of a panic is
in…nitesimal. Then the right hand side of (86) needs to include the expectation of
c1 at the start of period 1 giving in…nitesimal weight to a panic occurrence. The
expectation is therefore based on c1 = 1= , its value in the absence of a panic.
When the real wage is set at the start of period t, it will then be set at = . If
instead the nominal wage is set, it will be equal to P = , where P is the price
index in the non-panic state. This is equal to PH1 , the price set at the start of
period 1 by all …rms. The real wage will then be (PH;1 =P1 )( = ), where PH;1 =P1
depends on c1 =c1 as in (36).




                                        43
References
 [1] Adrian, Tobias, Paolo Colla and Hyun S. Shin. 2011. “Which Financial Fric-
     tions? Parsing the Evidence from the Financial Crisis of 2007-09.” Federal
     Reserve Bank of New York Sta¤ Report 528.

 [2] Aghion, Philippe, Philippe Bacchetta, Abhijit Banerjee. 2000. “A simple
     model of monetary policy and currency crises.” European Econonomic Re-
     view 44, 728–738.

 [3] Bacchetta, Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. 2013. “Explaining Sudden Spikes
     in Global Risk.”Journal of International Economics 89, 511-521.

 [4] Bacchetta, Philippe, Cedric Tille and Eric van Wincoop. 2012. “Self-Ful…lling
     Risk Panics.”American Economic Review 102, 3674–3700.

 [5] Basu, Susanto and Brent Bundick. 2012. “Uncertainty Shocks in a Model of
     E¤ective Demand.”mimeo.

 [6] Benhabib, Jess, Pengfei Wang and Yi Wen. 2012. “Sentiments and Aggregate
     Demand Fluctuations.”NBER Working Paper 18413.

 [7] Bodenstein, Martin. 2010. “Trade Elasticity of Substitution and Equilibrium
     Dynamics.”Journal of Economic Theory 145, 1033-1059.

 [8] Broda, Christian and David E. Weinstein. 2006. “Globalization and the Gains
     from Variety.”Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (2), 541-585.

 [9] Chari V.V., Christiano, Lawrence J., Kehoe, Patrick J. 2008. “Facts and
     Myths about the Financial Crisis of 2008.” Working paper. Federal Reserve
     Bank of Minneapolis.

[10] Christiano, Lawrence J. 2004. “The Zero-Bound, Low In‡ation, and Output
     Collapse.”Working paper.

[11] Cole, Harold L. and Maurice Obstfeld. 1991. “Commodity Trade and Inter-
     national risk sharing: How much do Financial Markets Matter?” Journal of
     Monetary Economics 28, 3-24.




                                       44
[12] Dedola, Luca and Giovanni Lombardo. 2012. “Financial Frictions, Financial
     Integration and the International Propagation of Shocks.” Economic Policy
     27(70): 319-359.

[13] Devereux, Michael B. and Alan Sutherland. 2011. “Evaluating International
     Integration under Leverage Constraints.”European Economic Review 55(3):
     427-442.

[14] Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2010. “The Paradox of Toil.”Federeal Reserve Bank of
     New York, Sta¤ Report 433.

[15] Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Paul Krugman. 2012. “Debt, Deleveraging, and the
     Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach.” The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 127(3), 1469-1513.

[16] Farmer, Roger E.A. 2012a. “The Stock Market Crash of 2008 Caused the
     Great Recession: Theory and Evidence”Journal of Economic Dynamics and
     Control 36, 693-707.

[17] Farmer, Roger E.A. 2012b. “Con…dence, Crashes and Animal Spirits” The
     Economic Journal 122 (559), 155-172.

[18] Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan F. Rubio-
     Ramírez. 2012. “Supply-Side Policies and the Zero Lower Bound.”mimeo.

[19] Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizzio Perri. 2012. “Wealth and Volatility.”work-
     ing paper, University of Minnesota.

[20] Helbling, Thomas, Raju Huidrom, Ayhan Kose and Christopher Otrok. 2011.
     “Do Credit Shocks Matter? A Global Perspective.” European Economic Re-
     view 55, 340-353.

[21] Hirata, Hideaki, M. Ayhan Kose and Christopher. 2013. “Regionalization ver-
     sus Globalization.”IMF Working paper 13/19.

[22] Hooper, Peter, Karen Johnson, and Jaime Marquez. 2000. “Trade Elasticities
     for the G-7 Countries.”Princeton Studies in International Economics 87.

[23] Kahle, Kathleen M. and René M. Stulz. 2013. “Access to Capital, Investment,
     and the Financial Crisis,”Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

                                       45
[24] Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Elias Papaioannou and Fabrizio Perri. 2013. “Global
     Banks and Crisis Transmission.” Journal of International Economics, forth-
     coming.

[25] Kamin, Steven B. and Laurie Pounder DeMarco. 2012. “How Did a Domestic
     Slump Turn into a Global Financial Crisis?”Journal of International Money
     and Finance 31, 10-41.

[26] Kollmann, Robert, Zeno Enders and Gernot Muller. 2011. “Global Banking
     and International Business Cycles.”European Economic Review 55, 407-426.

[27] Krugman, Paul. 1998. “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the
     Liquidity Trap.”Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1998, 137-205.

[28] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Matthew Weinzierl. 2011. “An Exploration of Op-
     timal Stabilization Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring,
     209-249.

[29] Perri, Fabrizio and Vincenzeo Quadrini. 2012. “International Recessions.”
     working paper.

[30] Ravn, Morten and Vincent Sterk. 2012. “Job Uncertainty and Deep Reces-
     sions.”working paper.

[31] Rose, Andrew and Mark Spiegel. 2010. “The Causes and Consequences of the
     2008 Crisis: International Linkages and American Exposure.” Paci…c Eco-
     nomic Review 15: 340-363.

[32] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie. 1997. “Comparing Four Models of Aggregate Fluc-
     tuations due to Self-Ful…lling Expectations.”Journal of Economic Theory 72,
     96-147.

[33] van Wincoop, Eric. 2013. “International Contagion through Leveraged Finan-
     cial Institutions.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, forthcom-
     ing.




                                      46
            Figure 1 Global Growth (Percent; Annual; Real)*

10                        GDP                                                        Investment
                                                           15
8                                    Non-US G20
                                                           10
6
                                                            5
4
                                                            0
2
                                                           -5
0
                                           US             -10
-2
                                                          -15
-4
                                                          -20
-6
      Q1     Q1     Q1     Q1      Q1      Q1      Q1     -25
     2006   2007   2008   2009    2010    2011    2012           Q1      Q1       Q1       Q1       Q1       Q1        Q1
                                                                2006    2007     2008     2009     2010     2011      2012
                   Consumption
 6
 4
 2
 0
-2
-4
-6                                                        * Source: Datastream. Growth over past 4 quarters. Broken line is the
      Q1     Q1     Q1      Q1      Q1      Q1      Q1    U.S.; solid line is the non-U.S. G20 minus Saudi Arabia. Consumption
     2006   2007   2008    2009    2010    2011    2012   and investment also do not include China.
Figure 2 Real GDP Growth During the Great Depression


   10



    5

                                                                        Non-US G20
    0


                                                           US
    -5



   -10



   -15
         1928   1929   1930   1931        1932          1933          1934          1935


                                     *Source: Angus Maddison. Broken line is the U.S.; solid line is
                                     the non-U.S. G20 minus Saudi Arabia minus South Africa.
         Figure 3 GDP Growth Forecasts Probabilities:
                 Expectation and Variance*

          Average Expectation                                               Average Variance


                                                                                            US




                                                                                                          non-US




*Data from Consensus Forecasts, based on one-year ahead forecast probabilities. See Appendix A for a description.
Non-US: Australia, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Africa, Taiwan,
Thailand, Japan, Germany, France, U.K., Italy, Canada
                                   Figure 4 Total Credit
                       Private sector                                               Household
                                                            115
115                                  Non-US G7
113
111                                                         110
109
107                                                         105
105
103                                        US               100
101
 99                                                          95
 97
 95                                                          90
       Q1      Q1     Q1     Q1      Q1     Q1     Q1              Q1     Q1      Q1      Q1      Q1      Q1      Q1
      2006    2007   2008   2009    2010   2011   2012            2006   2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012

             Non-financial Corporations
125

120

115

110

105

100
                                                         Source: Bank for International Settlements, Long series on credit to
 95
                                                         private non-financial sectors. The credit series are divided by the GDP
       Q1      Q1     Q1     Q1     Q1      Q1     Q1
                                                         deflator and normalized at 100 in 2006:Q1. The non-US G7 series is
      2006    2007   2008   2009   2010    2011   2012
                                                         computed using relative PPP-adjusted GDP weights.
    Figure 5 Symmetric Equilibria*


                          A


                                     z

           B




                                     c1
 Figure 6 All Equilibria: Role of Trade Integration



            H,F: no panic
                                     H: no panic;F: panic



c1                                   H: panic;F: no panic

            H,F: panic




                             (z )                     
     0.5                                          1
                       Figure 7 Corporate Profits
150

130                                                                                                US

110

90

70                                                                                         Non-US G7


50

30

10

-10
   Q1 2006         Q1 2007           Q1 2008          Q1 2009           Q1 2010           Q1 2011           Q1 2012

      Source: Worldscope, Net profits (income). Profits are aggregated over continuing firms firms within each country,
      divided by the GDP deflator, and normalized at 100 in 2006:Q1. The non-US G7 series is computed using relative
      PPP-adjusted GDP weights.
     Figure 8 On Existence of Asymmetric Equilibria*




                                                                       1*
                                                                               z=z1
                                                                               z=z2

                                                                               z=z3
                                                                      1


                                                                                
     0.5                                                   1  3         1

* The profit schedules are drawn under the assumption that there is a panic in Home and no
panic in Foreign. When z=zi a mixed equilibrium exists as long as >I for i=1 and i=3. When
z=z2 a mixed equilibrium exists as long as >  .
Figure 9 Panic Vulnerability: Role of Credit



                               A’

                               A
                                       high

                                       low
                 B




                                        c1
    Figure 10 Panic Vulnerability: Role of Monetary Policy


                   Equilibria                             Two IS Curves
                                   A
                                                i
                                                      Panic    No Panic

                       B’
                  B



                                                              B           A
                                            i=1-1/
                                               i=0
                                                              B’              c1
                                           c1
    i  i  1 1 /    i0       i0
                       i small   i large
    Figure 11 Panic Vulnerability: Role of Fiscal Policy*



                     A’
                                     g1  g  c1  1 /  
             g1  g
                                                                A
                      A
                                                  B
                 B



    g 1 g                           g1  g




                            c1                                      c1
