NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL PROVISION OF LOANS AND INSURANCE AGAINST UNEMPLOYMENT
FROM A LIFETIME PERSPECTIVE
Joseph Stiglitz
Jungyoll Yun
Working Paper 19064
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19064

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joseph Stiglitz and Jungyoll Yun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Optimal Provision of Loans and Insurance Against Unemployment From A Lifetime Perspective
Joseph Stiglitz and Jungyoll Yun
NBER Working Paper No. 19064
May 2013
JEL No. D86,J65
ABSTRACT
In an earlier paper, we showed that integrated individual accounts, allowing individuals to borrow
against future pensions when they are unemployed, can be welfare increasing, because it allows increased
inter-temporal consumption smoothing without attenuating incentives to search. Here, we examine
from a lifetime perspective how the optimal mix between publicly provided unemployment insurance
(UI) and loans against pension accounts changes over time in a model where unemployment may occur
in any period. Even loans can have an adverse effect on search, because they attenuate the consequences
of unemployment; and even more so when there is a chance that the loan will not be repaid. As we
present the optimal mix of loans and UI as the one that balances the adverse incentive costs with the
benefits of inter-state and inter-temporal smoothing while taking into consideration the interactions
between loans and UI benefits, we provide general conditions under which loans should still be a part
of the unemployment package for the young unemployed. We also show that, if the incidence of long-term
unemployment is relatively low, the optimal mix entails more loans and a smaller UI benefit for the
young than for the old, while the amount of consumption for the unemployed young is greater than
for the unemployed old. We demonstrate that there will be incentives to save excessively in good states
as well as to borrow excessively from the market when unemployed. Individuals and markets do not
take into account the externalities of such actions: they affect search, and thus the magnitude of UI
payments and loan defaults in subsequent periods. Finally, we show how non-market groups can improve
welfare through loan-cosigning, which may be voluntarily provided within the group, as it allows
income smoothing with lower incentive costs, and while the income sharing is less effective than market
pooling, the incentive benefits of co-signing dominate.

Joseph Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 212
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu
Jungyoll Yun
Department of Economics,
Ewha University,
Seoul
Korea
jyyun@ewha.ac.kr

I. Introduction
Unemployment insurance has been criticized because of its adverse incentive effect.1 For
most individuals, the fraction of life time income that is lost as a result of episodic
unemployment is small, so that individuals are close to risk neutral with respect to such losses.
Hence, individuals should, with perfect capital markets, smooth their consumption, and using
loans to do so, rather than insurance, would avoid the adverse incentives. The problem is
that, with imperfections in capital markets, temporarily unemployed individuals are forced to
cut consumption. Several studies (Chatty (2008)) have shown that the liquidity constraint is
one of the most serious difficulties facing unemployed individuals.

But allowing borrowing

against one’s retirement savings can effectively “resolve” the market imperfection created by
capital market constraints. Self-insurance has the advantage that there are not associated
moral hazard (adverse incentive) effects.
With capital market imperfections, while a loan provides inter-temporal consumption
smoothing with little incentive costs, if there are large unemployment shocks (e.g. extending
over a significant fraction of an individual's working life), it does not provide any inter-state
(across states of the world where there is and there is not episodes of unemployment)
consumption smoothing (insurance).2

Unemployment insurance does this, but with some

incentive costs. This suggests that a desirable form of income support for unemployed
individuals may involve a combination of loans and UI benefit. In a model where the
unemployment shock is small (so that there is no risk of default associated with loans),
Stiglitz-Yun(2005) showed that under seemingly fairly weak conditions, provided that the
duration of unemployment is limited, self-insurance through borrowing e.g. against future
retirement benefits, could enhance welfare of workers by providing them with intertemporal
income smoothing without attenuating incentives.3 The optimal mix between loans and
insurance always entails a positive amount of loans, collateralized by pension savings,
suggesting that (contrary to current practice) individuals should be allowed to borrow at least
a limited amount against their future retirement benefits when they are unemployed.
should not be complete reliance on unemployment insurance (UI).

1

There

Indeed, when

See Flemming (1978), Hopenhayen and Nicolini (1991).
As the discussion below will make clear, this is not quite accurate, because if there is a risk
of default, there is some inter-state smoothing.
3
See also Altman and Feldstein (1998), Costain (1999)
2
2

unemployment risk is negligible compared to lifetime income, there should be no reliance on
UI. Since there is negligible risk to lifetime income, the only market failure is related to the
inability to borrow, and government loan programs (effectively collateralized by retirement
savings) should be relied upon.
This paper analyzes the optimal combination of loans and UI in a model where
unemployment may occur at any point in time in an individual's life, or alternatively, when an
individual may experience long-term unemployment or may (again) get unemployed later in
his lifetime. The precise mix depends upon the relative benefits and costs of the one
compared to the other, which vary with one’s employment history and with the point an
individual is in his lifetime. It also depends on the importance of incentive effects (e.g. the
elasticity of search).

Since the amount of loans at any point is based upon one’s lifetime

income expected at the time of unemployment, the introduction of loans necessitates
designing social insurance against unemployment and retirement from a lifetime perspective.4
The package of unemployment benefit that is optimal from a lifetime perspective, on the
other hand, has to be one that addresses the possible interactions between UI and loans across
time and the possible response (in terms of savings and loans) from the private sector.
Specifically, we will examine in this paper how the possibility of long-term (or extended)
unemployment affects the optimal mix for the young unemployed and how the timing of
being unemployed changes the optimal package.
While our earlier analysis suggested that when the risks of loss of income from temporary
unemployment were very small, loans were preferable to UI (income was smoothed, but there
was no attenuation of incentives), in a life-time model, there is a risk of extended
unemployment. When that is the case, we show the benefits of loans may be limited, while
an incentive costs associated with loans may arise.

With the chance of extended

unemployment, there is the risk that the requisite borrowing against retirement savings results
in individuals depleting their pension accounts. This has two effects.
the ability to smooth consumption through loans is limited.

First, it means that

And secondly, it means that

there is a risk that individuals will not be able to repay what they have borrowed.

The

“bailout” that then results can be thought of as a form of UI for extended bouts of
unemployment, but that, in turn, means that there are incentive effects associated with loans
4

The analysis below will make it clear that even without a formal government program of
lending against pensions (as is considered here), the fact that individuals borrow and save
affects the optimal design of UI programs, and necessitates taking a life-time perspective.
3

as well as with UI; loans, like UI, attenuate incentives to get reemployed. Furthermore, if UI
benefits are given to those with extended periods of unemployment, there may be interactions
between the adverse incentive effects associated with the UI benefit and those associated with
loans, implying a reduction in the scale of loans (from what they would be in the absence of a
UI benefit).

For instance, a larger UI benefit in the future, when they are unemployed again,

exerts a negative externality upon the loans. It induces less search, and thus a higher
likelihood of unemployment, and hence a higher likelihood of non-repayment.
The government program we characterize in this paper not only takes into account the
externality among different unemployment benefits and between UI and loans, it also
balances out adverse incentive effects with inter-temporal and inter-state consumption
smoothing. The optimal program of this sort, which has not been dealt with in the literature,
has some important features about the optimal mix between loans and UI, the optimal
consumption for the unemployed and about the desirability of introducing loans for the
unemployed, among others.
This paper shows that a loan should be a part of unemployment benefit package even
when extended unemployment is highly probable, if the search elasticity is also high. This is
because a high search elasticity leads to small UI, which increases the need for loans. This is
true even if the probability of extended unemployment is high--so there is a high chance of
non-repayment (a bailout). Despite the high incentive costs for the long-term unemployed,
the optimal mix entails a positive amount of loans in earlier episodes of unemployment--in a
sense loans become more desirable under the stipulated conditions, for under these conditions,
the UI benefit (in the later period) becomes zero, when the search elasticity is high because of
the high incentive costs, and thus the cross period/cross market externality associated with
loans (normally, higher loans reduce incentives for search in later periods, and thus induce
greater expenditures on unemployment insurance) is diminished.
This paper also allows us to understand how the optimal package of unemployment
benefit changes with timing of being unemployed. Not surprisingly, the optimal mix of loans
and UI changes over time and does not achieve perfect consumption smoothing: Unless the
probability of being unemployed long-term is high, it should entail more loans and a smaller
UI benefit when unemployed young than when old, while the amount of consumption for
those unemployed young should be greater than for those unemployed old. After all, those
unemployed when they are young anticipate that the losses are likely to be made up over the
4

rest of their lives; while those who are unemployed when they old know that that cannot be
the case. This in turn means that there is greater need for insurance when an unemployment
episode occurs later in life:
the later periods.

the UI benefit should be smaller in the earlier periods than in

But this in turn means that those that are unemployed when young

especially need intertemporal consumption smoothing—that is, there is a role for loans. But
the possibility of long-term unemployment reduces the amount of loans for the young
unemployed (from what it would be if there were not this risk), and the amount of
consumption for those unemployed is decreasing in the probability of extended
unemployment. Unless the probability of extended unemployment is fairly high, however, the
loan provision may lead to a level of consumption for the young unemployed greater than
that for the long-term unemployed (since there is a good chance that their lifetime income
will not be too adversely affected by this bout of unemployment), while the opposite may be
true in the absence of the provision of loans.
One interesting implication of our analysis is that, given the optimal package by the
government, individuals may save excessively, and the private market may have excessive
incentives for offering loans, as private individuals ignore the externality exerted upon the
government program by savings and loans. This suggests that in implementing the optimal
package the government needs to take into account the adverse incentive on the part of
private markets. First, the excessive precautionary savings, while increasing the ability of
individuals to smooth out consumption on their own, aggravates incentive costs (when
individuals have a large "nest egg," they search less intensively). The excessive private
savings implies smaller UI benefits (as well as a greater reliance on self-insurance) in the
future optimal package of benefits than would be the case if the level of savings could be
controlled by the government.
Similarly, unfettered markets may offer excessive loans, since lenders will not take into
account the adverse externalities to either the public (retirement) loans or UI programs.
With more private loans, individuals incentives to search are reduced, and the risk of a “bailout” on the retirement-lending program is increased. This paper thus uncovers a new market
failure—the risk that the market provides too much income smoothing.5 To discourage the

5

In a sense, this market failure is related to that analyzed by Arnott and Stiglitz (1991), who
point out that the provision of insurance against one risk may affect risk taking affecting
other insurance contracts. This, in turn, is related to the fundamental nondecentralizatibility theorem of Greenwald and Stiglitz [1986).
5

market from offering excessive loans for the unemployed, the government has to offer more
UI (than it would in the absence of private loan markets). In short, unrestrained loan markets
are socially dysfunctional: It leads to too little efforts at job search. It is markets, not
government, that, in some sense, is responsible for excessively high unemployment. Of course,
with government programs, unemployment may be higher than it would be without
government programs, but optimally designed government programs balance out carefully
the benefits of risk reduction and the costs of any induced unemployment. 6 Alleged
improvements in capital markets--increasing the availability of private loans for the
unemployed--can be welfare reducing.
On the other hand, we show that, unlike the market, a non-market group (such as family,
village, etc.) that has a superior monitoring ability (to that of government or markets) and a
sense of peer pressure among its members, can be used to improve welfare as they
supplement publicly provided UI benefits through loan-cosigning. 7

The informational

advantage and the peer pressure associated with a non-market group can interact with each
other, leading to an equilibrium where loans for one member are voluntarily cosigned by
another member.

This equilibrium can be Pareto superior to one without co-signing. In

these situations, there is a positive externality between individual actions and government
programs.
There is, of course, an extensive literature on optimal unemployment insurance
(Hopenhayn-Nicolini (1997), Kocherlakota(2004), Shimer-Wernings (2005)). The existing
literature focuses, however, on single episodes of unemployment, e.g. how consumption
changes during the unemployment tenure of an individual, while this paper analyzes multiple
episodes of unemployment, how the optimal consumption for the unemployed changes with
the timing of unemployment in one’s lifetime career, and how that affects the design of public
programs.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next section describes the basic model

Chetty and Saez(2010) discuss, in a general framework of insurance provision, how the
presence of private insurance market affects the optimal social insurance.
6
Of course, some governments may have provided UI benefits in excess of the optimum.
Our analysis shows that to obtain the optimal level of unemployment, restrictions have to be
placed both on the amount of insurance that government provides and the amount of
borrowing that individuals can undertake.
7
This can be compared to Arnott-Stiglitz(1991), who argues that the presence of a nonmarket group may not be welfare-increasing in the provision of insurance unless it has
perfect control of the actions taken by its members.
6

that characterizes the optimal mix of UI benefits and loans from the lifetime perspective and
analyzes how it varies with changes in the probability of unemployment in later periods and
the possibility of the extended unemployment. Section III explores how the externality
associated with private loans and savings affect the optimal program for the unemployed by
the government, while Section IV addresses the welfare implications of loan-cosigning.
Section V collects the main results of this paper with some concluding remarks.

II. The Model and Baseline Optimum
Consider a 3-period model in which an individual may work for period 1 and 2 at the wage
w per period, and then retires in period 3 (Fig.1). For simplicity, we assume w is fixed and
there is no discounting (the safe rate of interest is zero). The worker may be confronted with
an unemployment shock in each of the two periods. The probability of an unemployment
shock occurring to an individual in period 1 is q, while that in period 2 depends upon whether
or not he is unemployed in period 1. The probability of a shock in period 2 for a worker who
unemployed is p .8

was previously employed is p , while that for a worker who was

There are thus three different unemployment shocks in the model: unemployment shock in
period 1 (called unemployment shock 1), unemployment shock in period 2 for those who
have not been unemployed (unemployment shock 2), and unemployment shock in period 2
for those who have previously been unemployed (unemployment shock 3). Each
unemployment shock occurs at the beginning of the relevant period (that is, the individual at
any point of time does not know whether he will experience future unemployment shocks,
though we assume he knows all the relevant probabilities).

After each shock, a worker may

choose to search or not to search for a job. If he expends sufficient search effort e, then he
finds a job; if he doesn’t search, he is unemployed that period.9

8

10

Search costs may differ

A couple of different interpretations of the parameter p
should be noted. It could be
interpreted as the correlation coefficient between the two unemployment shocks in period 1
and 2, i.e. pU > pN implies that an individual who is unemployed today has a higher probability
of facing an “unemployment shock” next period than an individual who is employed. pU = 1
means that an individual who is unemployed today will be unemployed next period (in the
absence of search) . In a slightly different formulation, with analogous results, p p could
also refer to the duration of unemployment relative to one’s lifetime income.
9
An individual who is unemployed in period 1 and does not experience an unemployment
shock in period 2 can be thought of as having been laid off for one period.
7

across the three shocks: we denote e , e , e , for the amount of search required to find a
job, given the unemployment shock 1, 2, 3, respectively. The search cost

e ,e , e

are

independent random variables with distribution functions F , F , F , respectively. The
individual finds out his search costs before committing to search.
It is easy to show that there exists a threshold level e i

1,2,3 , such that when the

realized search cost for an individual in a period is lower (higher) than a threshold level, he
will choose to search (not to search). Hence, if the threshold for the unemployment shock 1 is
e , then the first period unemployment rate among those who have faced the shock is
1

F e .

We denote by h ≡

i

1,2,3 the search elasticity of unemployment,

i.e., the degree of sensitiveness of unemployment with respect to search activity, for a shock i,
and assume that h is constant over e .
An unemployed worker (under shock i) receives money from the government consisting of
two components: an unemployment insurance (UI) benefit r i
have to be repaid), and a loan in the amount of R i

1,2,3 , which does not

1,2,3 . The loan for a worker is to be

repaid out of his retirement income, which consists of the savings he has made out of his
wage income during his working career. If an individual gets unemployed again in period 2 as
well as in period 1, his retirement income will become zero so that he may be unable to repay
what he borrowed in period 1 when he was unemployed. In this case the government bails
him out. But at the time the government provides the “loan” in period 1, it does not know
whether the individual will have to be bailed out.11
The UI benefit provided to the unemployed workers is financed by an (unemployment) tax
imposed upon employed workers. For analytic simplicity, we assume that there are three
separate UI insurance programs, each insuring against each of the risks (i.e. against the three
10

The search activity in the model takes no time and guarantees a job for the worker with
probability 1. Thus, a worker choosing to search will not be unemployed in the period, like
the one with no unemployment shock. Here we also assume away the possible externality
that can be caused by search by assuming that the number of job openings is so large that an
individual search activity may not affect the return to search of the others.
11
We put the word “loan” in quotations, to remind the reader that it is a “contingent” contract,
to be paid back only if the individual is employed in the second period. But, of course, all
loans are, in this sense, contingent, to be paid back if and only if the individual can, e.g. if he
does not declare bankruptcy.
The government would not provide a loan in period 2 to those who were unemployed in
period 1 as the government knows that they would not have any income left for retirement.
This point will be made clear later in this section.
8

different shocks.)

In particular, the UI benefits for shock 1, 2 and 3, - r , r and

financed by the tax T , T and

- are

that are imposed upon those who get employed under

shock 1, 2 and 3, respectively. (See Figure 1) Also, we assume that the expected cost of the
bail-out for defaulted loans is, in effect, borne by borrowers at the time of borrowing as part
of the price for the loan. Heuristically, we can think of the loan a facilitating life time
consumption smoothing while the UI benefit focuses on inter-state smoothing.

Note,

however, that a loan with the possibility of bail-out provides insurance against an
unemployment shock in period 2.

Intertemporal smoothing and interstate smoothing are

interlinked.
In this section, we assume that the government is the only provider of unemployment
insurance and loans for the unemployed workers12 and that individuals are homogeneous.13
Let V i

N, U

denote the lifetime expected utility for a worker who is employed or

unemployed in period 1. The lifetime expected utility V for an individual at the beginning of
period 1 will be

V

Max

1

,

q V

qV

q

edF

(1)

where q is the probability that the shock 1 occurs, and
q≡q 1

F e

,

giving the probability of being unemployed under shock 1. e is the threshold search cost
in period 1, above which individuals do not search; it is determined as follows:
e

V

V

(2)

where VN and VU are the life-time expected utility of an individual who is employed (not
12

Or, we can assume that the government can perfectly control provisions of benefits and
loans from private sectors so that it may implement optimal package of unemployment
compensations.
13
When individuals are heterogenous and they are privately informed of their types, i.e.,
when they differ in the probability of getting re-unemployed in period 2 after being
unemployed in period 1, for example, the government provision of loans may be desired
compared to the market provision.
9

employed) in period 1.

The individual searches if the lifetime benefits from search are

worth the costs.
Let V

We will now calculate these lifetime values.

i, j

N, U indicate the lifetime

utility expected at the beginning of period 2 for a worker who is employed or unemployed in
period 2 after having been employed or unemployed in period 1. Normalizing the constant
wage to 1 for simplicity, we then have the individual maximizing with respect to ei, given s ,
and the government maximizing with respect to s :
V

Max

U 1

s

T

p

1

F 1
s

Max

1

V

Max

U 1

V

Max

U r

V

U r

P

1

p

V

Max

V

2U

U 1

T

1
s

V

p 1

F 1

U s

s

2U

U s

R

R 1

Max

e

F e
T

V

edF

2U

R

V
U s

e

p
R

1

F e

V

edF

2U

where { s , s , s } denote savings for an individual in the three states of nature

and

e , e indicate the threshold search cost upon unemployment shock 2 and 3, respectively.
(In this formulation, the government gets to set the savings rate si; later, we will deal with the
more general case.) We can then see that
e

V

V

(3)

e

V

V

(3’)

and

T
T

r
r

10

T

r

where the probability of a person who is employed or unemployed the first period being
unemployed the second is given by p
p ≡p

1

F 1

e

p ≡p

1

F 1

e

or p , respectively, i.e.,

The price of loan, P, refers to the price of public loans provided to those unemployed in
period 1, which is equal to the probability of default, p . An individual who gets a loan
that obligates him to repay R1 receives only R1(1 - , p
R1(1 - , p

) and has consumption of r1 +

). Note that the only "bail out" occurs in the case of an individual who is

unemployed in the first period andf remains unemployed in the second.

Note also that

individual savings s , s are determined so as to equalize consumption across periods.
The optimal savings s

in period 1 is determined so as to balance inter-temporal

consumption smoothing against the disincentive associated with savings:

U 1

s∗

T
h

∗

p U

1

r U

∗

∗

p U
U

∗

U′

∗

0.

(5)

In this paper we treat the savings in period 1 as the mandatory (“social security’) savings
for retirement. This can be justified by the possible moral hazard behavior in the choice of
savings that can be caused by the government subsidy r to those with no income for
retirement, which is a part of the government program in this paper.14
On the other hand, the private savings s that individuals would like to make, which is
different from s∗ ,

U 1

14

s

is determined as

T

1

p U

p U

0.

(5’)

Without the mandatory retirement savings in period 1, the loan for the unemployed in
period 2 may not be necessary, because individuals can consume a part of their savings when
unemployed.
11

We can then prove the following Proposition.
Proposition 1
s∗

s .

This is clear from the comparison of (5) with (5’). That is, because private individuals do
not take into account the incentive costs caused by their savings, the level that individuals
would save on their own account (private savings)
level

∗

.

is greater than the socially optimal

This implies that individuals will make saving beyond the optimal level s ∗

mandated by the government. We will assume for the remaining part of this paper that,
whenever applicable, the government can implement the optimal savings s ∗ on the part of
individuals by imposing taxes upon the extra (private) savings individuals make in period 1.
We will check later, however, how, if this is not the case, the uncontrolled private savings
may affect the government program for unemployed individuals.15
The interior solution for the optimum unemployment insurance/loan program r ∗ , R∗ i
1,2,3 , which maximizes the lifetime expected utility V will then satisfy the following
conditions (by the envelope theorem on the savings s ):
r∗ :
U r∗

R∗ 1

p

r∗ U r∗

M T

R∗ 1

p

∙M T

0

(6)

R∗ :
U r∗

R∗ 1

p

R∗ U r ∗

M T
R∗ 1

p

∗

0

(7)

r∗ :

15

Our analysis is based on full individual rationality. In practice, individuals may be
excessively myopic, so that they do not fully anticipate future risks and needs; in that case,
private savings will be less than the desired mandatory level. Our welfare criterion focused
on maximizing social welfare, given the actual probabilities of unemployment, not ex ante
expected utility, given individual's failure to take fully into account future risks of
unemployment.
12

U r∗

R∗

R∗ :
R∗
r∗ :
U
R∗ :

∗

R∗

where M T

M T

∗

r∗ U r∗

h

R∗ ∙ M T

0

(8)

∗

M T

(9)

R∗ U r ∗

h

R∗ 1

r∗ M T

p

U

∗

0

0

(10)

(11)
≡U 1

s∗

T , M T

≡U

∗

and M T

≡U

∗

, is

the marginal disutility of tax T , T (for an individual employed either in period 1 or in both
of the two periods) and of tax T (for an individual employed in period 2 only), respectively.
The above conditions imply that the optimal UI benefit and loan in each of the optimal
government programs is determined so as to balance its benefit of consumption smoothing
across states or periods with the moral hazard (adverse incentive) costs associated with
them.16
The first order conditions make clear that there are some interesting interactions
between unemployment insurance and loans that can affect the optimal mix in an important
way. The first period loan R

and the second period UI benefit r

for the long-term

unemployed, for example, exert an externality upon each other as one affects the probability
of reemployment which in turn affects the incentive costs of the other. This interaction
highlights an important aspect of the optimal package of unemployment benefits from a
lifetime perspective, which has not been dealt with in the optimal UI literature.
Using the necessary conditions presented above, we will analyze the desirability of
introducing loans as a part of unemployment benefits in the presence of its default possibility
and how the optimal package of UI benefit and loans changes over lifetime depending upon
timing of unemployment.

Desirability of Loan Provision
16

Equations (6) –(10) highlight the different incentive effects and how these are affected by
changes in various of the policy variables. In (6), for instance, the incentive effect of UI in
shock 1 is affect both by UI and by loans. Interestingly, in our formulation, r1 only affects
first period search, R1 only second period search (in shock 3), and r2 only second period
search (in shock 2).
13

We will first explore whether or not it is desirable to introduce loans when there is some
chance that an individual remains unemployed for a long time and thus may not repay what
he has borrowed,17 and how the loan provision affects optimal consumption of the young
unemployed relative to that of the long-term unemployed. In particular, we will address this
issue by analyzing loans R

and consumption

R 1

r

p

for the unemployed

under shock 1.
We will first consider as a benchmark a set of parameters q, h ’s, Ω, under which loan
provision is desirable.

For that purpose we substitute R

0 into (6) and (10) to get the

following two conditions:
U r∗

≡

,

(A1)

∗

∗

r M =

∗

,

We can then prove the following Lemma on

≡

and

,

(A2)

,

:

Lemma
1) There exists a unique r ∗ or r ∗ that satisfies (A1) or (A2), respectively.
0,

2)

0 and

0,

0.

The proof can be found in the Appendix.
Let

φ q, h ; p , h

≡

,

M 1

,

,

to define
Ω p ,h

≡

q, h |φ q, h ; p , h

0.

Recall that for this part of the paper, in analyzing the optimal government program r ∗ , R∗ ,
s∗ .
we will assume that the government can control private savings so that s
14

17

That is, Ω p , h

is a set of q, h ’s under which the optimal benefit package involves a

positive amount of loans in the presence of a possibility of extended unemployment. We can
then establish the following proposition.
Proposition 2
∗

i) Condition for positive
(a) If q, h

:

∈ Ω p , h , q′, h

for q

and h

(c) Suppose q, h
q, h

and q, h ′ ∈ Ω p , h

h .
0 for any given p , h such that, if U 0

(b) There exists K p , h
Ω p ,h

∈ Ω p ,h

p ,h ,

∅.
∈ Ω 0,0 .

∈ Ω p ,h

for p

There then exists p ′

0 for any given h such that

p ′. .

ii)) Relative Consumption of Long-term Unemployed:
There exists k

k, r ∗

such that, for p

R∗ 1

p

∗

.

Proposition 2 (i) suggests that the desirability of having positive loans as part of an
unemployment benefit program is not only affected by the probability (p ) of unemployment
being extended or search elasticity (h ) associated with future reemployment, but also has to
be viewed in its relationship with the current UI (r ) and the future UI (r ) for the long-term
unemployed. The loan is to some extent a substitute for the current UI (r ), suggesting that
higher q and/or higher

, which reduces r , increases the desirability of positive loans

as is shown in Proposition 2 i)(a). While

,

may improve search incentives in earlier

periods, on the other hand, it exerts a negative externality upon the future UI for the longterm unemployed, as it affects the probability of reemployment in the future. Based upon
these relationships between R and r

and between R

and r , Proposition 2 i)

demonstrates two results.
First, for the unemployed whose marginal utility of income is high at zero income,
loans become a part of the optimal benefit package even when the probability of extended
unemployment (p ) is high if the first period incentive costs (h ) or probability (q) of
unemployment shock is high enough to yield a small UI benefit for them. In particular, if
search elasticity ( ) associated current unemployment is very high, loans would always be a
15

part of the optimal unemployment benefit under shock 1, no matter how high the probability
of extended unemployment (

) or search elasticity (

) associated with future unemployment

may be.
Second, high search elasticity h

may not prevent loans from being a part of optimal

benefit package, as is implied by Proposition i) (c). To see this we need to understand that the
search elasticity (h

and the probability (p

of extended unemployment affect the UI r

for the future unemployment and the loan R differently: higher search elasticity (h
reduces

more than it reduces

, whereas higher

reduces

more than it reduces

. The externality relationship between r and R would then suggest that when search
elasticity (

) associated with the future unemployment is high, unless the probability of long-

term unemployment (and the resulting default) is high, it is optimal to introduce some loans
as a part of the benefit package for unemployed individuals.18
The intuition for this result is the following:

Loans and UI benefit r adversely

affect search, exerting in effect negative externalities on each other and implying that, the
presence of loans decreases the optimal level of UI and vice versa.

Now, as the sensitivity

of search later in life to effort increases (h3 increases), overall benefits when the individual is
unemployed later in life decrease.

The question is, as h increases, which of the two –

loans and r - becomes zero earlier than the other. Proposition 2 shows that r does, unless
the probability p

of extended unemployment is high. The main reason is the following.

Although the consumption-smoothing (across states) effect is larger for r than for loans, the
incentive effect is also larger. The incentive effect for loans is limited by the probability
p

of extended unemployment; that is not the case for r , so that a lower p

increases the

difference in the incentive effect between the two. Note, on the other hand, that when UI
benefit r for long-term unemployment is zero because of high incentive costs (indicated by
a high value of h ), the loans R

would not exert any externality upon any other

unemployment benefit so that it will be a part of the optimal benefit package .
Proposition 2 (ii) says that there is imperfect consumption smoothing: Those who are
unemployed the first period have a higher level of consumption the first period than they do
in the second. This is perhaps not surprising: The first period, unless the probability of
long-term unemployment is high, their expected income is still high because of the
18

Note that it is the externality loans exert upon r that leads to zero loans in the optimal package. If r is
set to be zero exogenously, the optimal amount of loans R would always be positive despite a high probability
of extended unemployment.
16

expectation of a second period job, and they wish to smooth consumption over their lifetime.
Insurance does not fully replace lost income, and so when the adverse shock occurs in the
second period, consumption has to decrease.

Furthermore, the loan provision for the young

would reduce UI benefit he could have in the future because of the externality between the
two.
Loans for the long-term unemployed are zero in this model, as they have no future income
to borrow against. If we solve, in an unrestricted way, for the optimal value of R2, loans for
those unemployed in period 2 only, which does not involve any possibility of loan-default
(since it is effectively backed by first period savings), it may be positive or negative,
depending upon the relative size of UI r and savings s made in period 1. Negative
loans implies that the unemployed would like to save (in period 2) out of UI benefit r for
retirement. We will leave discussion of loans for those unemployed in period 2 to Proposition
6, which deals with the optimal mix in the presence of private savings.
Now let us turn to the optimality of introducing UI benefit in the presence of loan
provision. While the substitutability between UI benefit and loans may lead to the optimal
mix involving no loans, it does not imply that the optimal mix may involve no UI benefit.
We can prove the following Proposition on this issue, with the proof being delegated to the
Appendix.
Proposition 3
It is always the case that r ∗

0 for i

1,2, while it may be true that r ∗

0.

Note that the amount of expected lifetime consumption per period for an unemployed
individual with no UI benefit is smaller than that for an employed individual. This implies
that the optimal mix always entails positive amount of UI benefit unless it exerts some
externality upon some other unemployment benefits (including the implicit benefit associated
with a loan bailout). The optimal mix for the young unemployed always entails positive UI
r or r as it does not exert any externality upon other unemployment benefits, while it may
involve zero UI r for the long-time unemployed as it exerts an externality upon the loans
R for the young unemployed through its price p

.

17

Now let us examine r ∗ , R∗ (i=1,2), analyzing how the government loan program and
the resulting unemployment benefit will be affected by the timing of unemployment.

In this

analysis we will mostly presume that the probability of long-term unemployment is small in
order to focus on the effect of timing of unemployment upon optimal mix, i.e., the optimal
mix for those unemployed only in period 1 in comparison with that for those unemployed
only in period 2. We can state the following proposition.
Proposition 4
Suppose that F x
that, for p
p

F x for any x and that p

p , the followings are true: a) r ∗

0 such that for r ∗

R∗ 1

p

r∗

q. There then exists p
r ∗ and R∗

R∗ for p

q

R∗ ,

b)

, while r ∗

0 such
there exists
r ∗ in the

absence of loan provision.
.
Proposition 4 compares the optimal mix for the young unemployed with that for the old
unemployed. It looks at the central case where the search cost distributions in the first period,
and in the second period, for those who have been employed in the first, are identical and
where the probability P

of an unemployment shock the second period to someone who

was not unemployed the first is equal to the probability q of an unemployment shock the
first period.

It makes two assertions.

First, if the probability of extended unemployment is

low enough, then the first period UI benefit is smaller than the second period UI benefit, but
the first period loan (to those unemployed) is greater than the second period loan. Second, if
the incidence of unemployment is not high, the increase in the first period loan outweighs the
loss in the UI benefit in the same period, implying that the loan provision enables the
consumption for the unemployed in the first period to be greater than that for those
unemployed in the second period only, while the opposite is true in the absence of loan
provision.19
The intuitions for these results are as follows. In comparing the optimal mix for the
19

The intuition for the result is the following. When the probability of unemployment being extended is small,
the first period unemployed would suffer from smaller reduction in the expected utility compared to those
unemployed in the second period. Those unemployed in the first period expect to be employed in the second,
and hence can effectively smooth their income, while those unemployed in the second period have just savings
they made (in the first period) for retirement. Note also that this result should hold in the case of a corner
solution for loans, i.e., when no provision of loans is optimal as in the case described by Proposition 2 (when q
is very low, for example).
18

young unemployed with that of the old, we need to take into consideration the two points:
(a) an unemployed young person has a longer time over which to smooth consumption; (b)
one can only smooth going forward, not going backward. First of all, the larger UI benefit
r ∗ for the old unemployed compared to r ∗ for the young ones is mainly because, when p
is so small that an individual could be unemployed either young or old (not both), those
unemployed young have more periods over which they smooth out their lifetime income after
being unemployed than do those unemployed when old.20 By the concavity of utility function
this leads to the smaller difference in the lifetime expected payoff between unemployment
and employment under shock 1 compared to that under shock 2.21. Secondly, the larger
amount of loans R∗ for the young unemployed compared to that R∗ for the old ones is not
only due to the substitutability between UI benefit and loans but also to the fact that the
young unemployed have larger amount of future income to borrow against than the old ones.
Specifically, in the absence of insurance, the expected lifetime resources for those
unemployed in period 1(at the beginning of that period) is close to 1 (or w) while that for
those unemployed in period 2 (at the beginning of that period) will only be the savings s
they made in the previous period.

So long as the incidence of unemployment is small,

consumption for the young unemployed will be greater than that of the old, because
precautionary savings will be low, R∗ is greater than R∗

(by an amount that is larger than

s ), while the difference in UI benefit between the young and the old becomes smaller due
to the smaller difference in incentive costs associated with UI. When there are no loans,
however, consumption of the young unemployed would be lower, because UI benefit is still
subject to a more serious incentive problem under shock 1 than under shock 2 when p

Comparative statics:

0.

effects of changes in the incidence of unemployment and its

expected duration
We now examine how the optimal mix of unemployment benefits changes as the
incidence of unemployment or its (expected) duration varies. In doing this we will focus upon
its impact on r ∗ , R∗ .22 In particular, we assume for simplicity that P

20

0 and that the UI

Note that, prior to unemployment shock, individuals would not be able to effectively smooth out their
consumption over time.
21
This will be true even for small p or q. When p or q gets greater, the case for smaller r (relative to
r ) becomes stronger as the expected payoff from being employed under shock 1 is decreasing in p .
22
Note that R∗ 0 while R∗ is uniquely determined by r ∗ through inter-temporal smoothing
(as R∗ does not entail any bailout costs).
19

benefit r for shock 3 is exogenously given as a socially acceptable minimum level r̅ of
consumption.23 In this case individuals choose the socially optimal level of savings s in
period 124:
s∗

s .

(12)

Confining ourselves to the case when the optimal mix of UI benefit and loans involves a
positive amount of each type of benefit, we can establish the following Proposition:
Proposition 5 (Comparative statics of unemployment insurance)
As the two unemployment shocks in period 1 and 2 get more highly correlated (as p
increases), the optimal mix of unemployment benefits involves a greater UI benefit, r ∗ , and
smaller loan-based self-insurance, R∗ 1
the probability q of

p . The converse will be true, however, when

the period 1 unemployment shock 1 gets higher. The total

unemployment benefits r ∗

R∗ 1

p

is decreasing in q or in p .

The results of Proposition 5 are intuitive. First, as an unemployed worker is more likely to
experience a longer duration of unemployment, i.e., as p gets higher, the welfare benefit
from loan-based self-insurance decreases, because loans provide no interstate smoothing
and limited inter-temporal smoothing but still suffer from incentive costs. This leads to a
partial substitution of UI benefits for loans, while the total amount of unemployment benefits
(UI plus loans) decreases, not surprisingly, given the decrease in total expected lifetime
income. Second, when the probability q of the period 1 unemployment shock gets higher,
the burden of financing UI benefit gets larger, leading to an optimal mix involving a smaller
total amount of unemployment compensation, with a smaller fraction of the benefits in the
form of UI benefits.
23

Those who get unemployed for both of the two periods should be the ones who need to be
assisted by the government through the various social assistance programs. These
expenditures represent the “bail-out” described earlier. But earlier, we chose that level
optimally based on our “expected utility” model. In many cases the level of assistance for
these individuals tend to be determined by social and political factors, as well as economic
ones.
24
So the first problem on which we focus in the next section does not arise.
20

III. Presence of Private Loan Market and Excess Savings
We have thus far assumed that the government can ensure that individuals’ savings
in period 1 are at the optimal level s ∗ . If the government cannot control individual savings,
however, it has to take into account the change in private savings in response to the
government unemployment insurance program. The fundamental problem is suggested by
Proposition 1: individuals wish to save more than the government would like them to.
The reason is simple:

if individuals have more savings, if they become unemployed, their

incentive to search is lessened, and accordingly there are externalities to government loan and
UI programs, which individuals will fail to take into account.25
So too, so long as the optimal provision of loans entails incomplete inter-temporal
smoothing due to the moral hazard, private lenders would have an incentive to provide
additional loans, as they would not take into consideration the effect of their loan provision
upon search and losses under the government loan and UI programs.26
\
Excess savings
We can prove the following Proposition on the government program r , R

in the

presence of uncontrolled private savings.
Proposition 6
r

r∗

if U"′

0.

The proof can be found in the Appendix. The proposition says that, if the government
cannot intervene to cure the distortion in savings caused by the externality, private savings

25

If individuals had wanted to save less than the government wanted them, then all the government would have
had to worry about is individual borrowing against their retirement earnings privately, undoing, in effect, the
“forced” government savings. Restrictions on the set of admissible enforceable contracts and/or requiring
individuals to register loan contracts to be enforceable, and imposing taxes (to compensate for the externality
generated) could be used to restrict such excessive lending. (These comments are relevant to the discussion in
the second subsection below. It is obviously much more difficult to restrict excessive savings, simply because
savings can take so many different forms, some of which are hard for government to detect.)
26
While this paper should be viewed as mainly a contribution to the literature on the design of unemployment
insurance schemes, it can also been seen as a contribution to the literature on search, which has, for the most
part, ignored the impact of the variables to which we have called attention (savings and loans) on search
intensity. See, e.g. Mortensen [1986, 2010], Pissarides [2000] and Diamond [1981].
21

induces government to provide smaller UI benefits while increasing retirement income.27
In response to the larger amount of savings the government offers a smaller amount of UI
benefit for those unemployed in the later periods, as its incentive costs becomes higher due to
the enhanced probability of unemployment for them and as the resulting reduction in the
probability of unemployment has the further benefit of reducing incentives to save28. The
amount of self-insurance for the unemployed under shock 2, on the other hand, which would
be sum of private savings plus loans

would be larger than would be the case when

individual savings can be controlled by the government.
The policy implications of this are not clear, mainly because this form of precautionary
savings is inseparable from other forms of savings.
stance that they wish to encourage savings.

Many governments have taken the

In that policy discourse, little note is given to

the adverse effect that any induced savings (stimulated, for instance, by favorable tax
treatment) might have in discouraging search.

Excess borrowing in periods of unemployment
Because under shock 2, government loans achieve complete inter-temporal consumption
smoothing, there is no incentive for private markets to provide loans then. But the presence of
the market would affect the loan provision under shock 1. Obviously, if the government can
observe and control the provision of loans by private lenders, the private provision of loans
would not matter. Suppose, however, that the government cannot observe the private
provision of loans by the market, but, of course, it can infer what the market will do. In this
case the presence of the market would affect the government program in important ways
which we discuss in this section.29 We will suppose that the government delegates the
provision of loans to the private market, which, in any case, will exceed the amounts it would
have provided i.e., that, once the government offers UI r , the private market responds to it
27

This result can be compared to the one reported by the existing literature, which analyzes
how unobservable savings affects the inter-temporal consumption structure for the
unemployed during the unemployment duration (Kocherakota(2004), Shimer-Wernings(2005)),
who found the optimal UI benefit to be non-decreasing in unemployment tenure. This should
also be contrasted with to Hopenhyen-Nicolini (1998) who focuses on the depletion of
savings as unemployment persists. In this paper we focus upon how the unobservable
savings affects the optimal mix of benefits in the government program for the next
unemployment bout in one’s future career.
28
The possible effect of lower UI benefit upon increased savings would be small if U"′ 0.
29
This is the case, even if, after the government adjusts its loan and UI program, the market
chooses not to make any loans.
22

by offering loans R .30

To keep the analysis simple, we will assume and that r

r̅, a

socially acceptable minimum level of consumption that may be determined by the
government based upon social and political factors as well as economic ones.
We will first analyze the set of sustainable loan contracts in the presence of a competitive
loan market and then analyze the optimal response on the part of the government.

Private

lenders always have incentives to provide loans to individuals whenever additional loan can
improve intertemporal consumption smoothing. That is, for given r , R and P (price of
loans), additional loans will be offered whenever

U r

R 1

P

U

0,

because the price P of additional loan in a competitive loan market is equal to the (expected)
probability that an individual is unemployed in period 231, that is, P
U

e

U

.

The amount of loan R P, r

p 1

F e

, where

for an individual that is

sustainable in the market should then satisfy

r

R P, r

1

P

,

.

(12)

That is, the "sustainable" loan contract for the individual has to entail complete intertemporal smoothing between period 1 and 2 in the presence of a private loan market. Note,
however, that it does not imply that the contract entails complete insurance against shock 3,
and thus not full consumption smoothing. In other words, an individual choosing the contract
would have some (albeit insufficient) incentive to search under shock 3.32
We can see from (12) that the package r , R , which is provided by the government
30

Under certain circumstances, however, the government may choose not to leave loan
provision to the market but to provide loans by itself. When individuals are heterogenous in
the probability of extended unemployment and are privately informed of their types, for
example, the utilitarian optimum, which might entail some subsidy from one type to the
others, can be implemented only by a compulsory provision of loans by the government.
31
These individuals will not repay their loans. Our analysis assumes that those who can
repay do, that lenders are risk neutral, and charge the actuarial fair interest rate to
compensate for the risk of non-payment.
32
In a more general model, if the private sector could observe the amount of loans
outstanding, it would take into account the effect of lending on search in the event of shock 3.
In the absence of such information, though, there is an additional market failure.
23

and the market, has to satisfy

R

where

,

p

p 1

The UI benefit r

(13)

F e

and e

U

U

.

provided by the government should then be the one that satisfies the

following condition:
U r

R 1

p

U

h R U r

R 1

r U r
R 1

p

r̅ U

p

U
U

0
(14)

where, from (13),

0 (by (7)).

In the presence of the market, loan provision is increased; and the government must take
this into account in setting the UI benefit.

(14) shows what that entails.33

We can

establish the following proposition on the optimal provision of UI benefit in response to the
market provision of loans.
Proposition 7
In the presence of a private market for loans that cannot be controlled by the government,
the amount of unemployment benefits (including loans provided by the market) under shock
1 is greater than that in the absence of the private market, i.e., r
R∗ 1

R 1

p

r∗

p . Welfare is lower than in the case without private loans.

The proof is delegated to the Appendix. The last result is almost obvious: the problem
33

As the full inter-temporal smoothing is maintained in the presence of private loan market,
more provision of UI would always reduce the need for loans and thereby reduce the scope
for private provision of loans.
24

considered here is “second best” to that considered in the previous section, so that necessarily,
welfare is lower. The amount of reduction in welfare depends upon the seriousness of moral
hazard associated with loans.
A priori, there might seem to be two effects on UI from excessive borrowing. As the
market provides loans so as to secure complete inter-temporal smoothing, which is costly in
terms of search incentives, to encourage more search, the government might want to cut back
on insurance—to increase the private cost of not finding a job.

But more UI makes

borrowing from the market less necessary.34 As a result, it may be that the government offers
a larger amount of UI to reduce the amount of loans that the market offers.35 We have not
been able to derive a general result depicting when one effect dominates the other.

But what

we can show is that total unemployment benefits increase. Private borrowing obviously
supplants government borrowing, but if there is a reduction in UI benefits, it only partially
offsets the “excess” provision of markets.

IV. Welfare Effects of Loan-Cosigning in the Provision of Loans
Faced with possibility of default associated with the loans on the part of the unemployed,
the government may want the loans to be cosigned by other employed workers. A worker
who has a job who has co-signed a loan with a worker who is unemployed makes (partially)
good on the loan. This provides him with an incentive to monitor—to ensure that the person
for whom he co-signs searches for a job. In this section we ask whether the introduction of
a loan-cosigning program would increase welfare and whether such a program could be made
to work, i.e. would a potential cosigner have an incentive to cosign the loans.
We first note that an individual who is close to the cosignee, such as member of the same
informal group (like the same family, close friends, etc.), is in a superior position for loan-

34

A similar argument can be applied to the UI benefit r̅ offered for those unemployed in
period 1 and 2. The presence of private provision of loans may lead the government to
increase r̅ to reduce private incentive for lendings as higher r̅ will yield higher probability
p of unemployment under shock 3 and thereby lower loans R .
35
This can be compared to the arguments of the literature (Bailey(1978), CrossleyLow(2011)) that the presence of a borrowing constraint increases optimal UI. Here the
presence of uncontrolled market for loans may reduce optimal UI. It is the possibility of
default associated with loans and of excessive borrowing in the private market that plays a
role in the model, whereas it is not considered in the literature.
25

cosigning

for a couple of reasons. First, he may be in a position to monitor the actions

taken by the cosignees more effectively than others. Second, the cosignee may be subject to
so-called peer pressure from an individual within the same informal group.36 How much an
individual cares about the peer pressure within a group and how much one can effectively
control

actions taken by the others would depend upon many other factors (cultural ones,

for example) exogenous to this model.37

The peer pressure may affect the behavior of both

cosigner and cosignee, as will be discussed below.
In the model below examining the welfare effect of loan-cosigning we formulate a precise
specification of both the informational advantage and the effect of peer pressure. When the
search cost for an unemployed individual is realized, the cosignee can notice it with some
probability

(<0). The probability

thus indicates the degree of informational advantage

that a cosigner has over the government, who cannot identify the realized search cost at all.
We will next suppose that the co-signing group determines the target threshold cost of search,
e ′, which is the one that is optimal from the group’s point of view, as will be specified below.
We will also suppose that whenever the search cost is found to be lower than the target level
e ′, the cosignee chooses to search, because of the peer pressure.38 Then, the probability that
an unemployed individual chooses to search under the loan-cosigning, F , would be
F e ,e ′
γF e ′
1 γ F e
γF e ′ , (15)
F e
F e
,
where e is the threshold search cost that is chosen by an unemployed individual in the
absence of loan-cosigning.39
Let us consider a “group” of two individuals, within which an employed individual is
supposed to cosign the loans provided to the unemployed individual.40

The government

demands that all individuals who participate in the government loan program have a cosignee,
36

The incentive effects created by the peer pressure in a group have been discussed by
Lazear (1990).
37
Here we suppose that an individual does not care about the well-being of the others within
a group, implying that there is no need for intra-group transfers, ex post.
38
We assume here that the amount of peer pressure for a cosignee choosing not to search is
greater than his benefit associated with pursuing a no-search strategy.
39
In the assumed information structure, an unemployed individual knows whether the peer
group has observed his search costs before he makes a decision on whether to search. In a
slightly different formulation with similar results, the peer group announces e ′e and a
punishment should they observe a deviation from the peer level.
40

The results can be easily generalized.
26

who, if the borrower defaults, must repay a fraction c of the amount owed . The government
sets c, as well as UI benefit and loan for the unemployed, to maximize the expected utility of
an individual.
Suppose that an employed individual cosigns the loans R for his colleague (within the
same group) who is unemployed in period 1. If both of the two individuals in a group are
employed or unemployed, there would be no loan-cosigning.41 We will let the price of the
loan vary with rate of loan-cosigning.
0 and

this section that

For the sake of expositional simplicity we assume in
1 and that

is exogenously given as a socially

acceptable minimum level of consumption, ̅ .
Using this formulation we can write the expected payoff of an individual in the group as
follows:

V

1

q V

qV

q

edF

where
V
V

U 1

q U r

s

1

T

R 1

P 0

q 1

F 2U

1

s
2

F e 2U

q 1
1

e3edF3 1 q Ur1 R11 Pc F32U1 R1 T32 1 F3 2Ur2

F 2U
F e

1

s
2

2U

e3′edF3 .

,
Here s is the savings in period 1, and

̅

,

are taxes for UI benefit

, ̅ , respectively, i.e.,

(16)

41

In general, an individual who is unemployed in period 1 may have different packages of UI
benefit and loans, depending upon whether his colleague is employed or not. In this section,
however, for expositional convenience we will assume that the same amount of UI benefit
and loans are provided to unemployed individuals in period 1 regardless of whether or not
the loan can be cosigned. This assumption does not matter for the analysis below, because
we will be examining whether or not the introduction of loan-cosigning is welfareincreasing.

.
27

Also, P c is the price of loan that is cosigned at the “rate” c,42 where
P c

1

F

1

c

for c

0.

This suggests that with the loan-cosigning cR the price of loan decreases by c 1

F

as

the expected default cost gets lowered. In that respect the loan-cosigning provides an interpersonal (and, most importantly from our perspective, inter-state) income transfer within the
group. In particular, we can notice that it plays a similar role to UI benefit, in that the cost is
to be borne by an employed individual and that the total resources available to the
unemployed increases. The loan-cosigning is different from the UI benefit, however, in that
the risk for an individual is effectively pooled (among the entire population) in the latter case
whereas it is not in the former. On the other hand, loan-cosigning can improve individual
search incentives (especially in period 2) due to the informational advantage on the part of
cosigners.
The threshold search costs e , e and e ′ will be determined as follows:
e

V

V

e

2U

2U r̅

e ′

2U

2U r̅

2U

U

,

(17)

The target threshold search cost e ′ set by the group maximizes the welfare of the group, i.e.,
the sum of utilities of cosigner and cosignee.43 We can also notice from (15) (16) and (17)
cR , a measure of the extent

that the incentive effect of loan-cosigning hinges upon

loan cosigning, as well as the degree of informational advantage indicated by

.

of

Using the

above conditions for the threshold search costs, we can express the incentive effects of the
loan-cosigning as follows:

1
R U
42

R

r1

R1 1

P

q
1 q

U′

1 s

1

2

0

0

Note that F
F when c 0.
We can think of the group as agreeing on this ex ante, before they know which (if any) of
the members of the group will be unemployed.
28
43

That is, the loan-cosigning has a positive incentive effect under shock 3, while it has a
negative incentive effect under shock 1 (since individuals know that if they do not get
employed, some of the costs are borne by their cosignees.44)
On the other hand, the savings by an employed individual will be determined by intertemporal smoothing45:

U 1

s

T

F U

1

F U

0

(18)

Given this behavior of individuals in a group, the government sets the amounts of UI
benefit

and loan

, and “c” to maximize the expected payoff V subject to the

government constraints (16). We can then establish the following Proposition.
Proposition 8
The introduction of loan-cosigning in the government provision of loans for the
unemployed increases welfare so long as an individual cosigner is better informed of the
realized search cost for the cosignee than the government.

The proof can be found in the Appendix. Although loan-cosigning is similar to UI benefit
in its risk sharing properties, the former would not be able to fully replace the latter, as the
risk is not perfectly pooled. Because at c

0, however, the risk pooling effect is trivial by

the envelope theorem, the benefits of co-signing arise solely from the improved incentives.
Co-signing is only advantageous because of the informational advantage compared to the
government. The mix of UI and loan-cosigning balances the imperfect risk-pooling and the

44

This negative incentive effect is due to the risk sharing of cosigning, which lowers the
difference in expected utility between getting a job and getting unemployed under shock 1.
Risk itself has a positive incentive effect. (Arnott-Stiglitz, 1988, Stiglitz, 1982). It is still the
case that incentives with co-signing are better than without co-signing.
45
Notice that we have allowed peer pressure to effect only search costs the second period
for an individual who is unemployed the first period. The group could exercise peer
pressure to effect search in other contingencies and savings. If so, the welfare benefits of
group co-signing would be enhanced.
29

informational advantage associated with loan-cosigning.46
Finally, there is the question of whether individuals will agree to co-sign. Note that the
loan cosigned by an employed member of a group is priced lower than it would otherwise be
because the loan cosigned is subject to a lower default probability, and all members of the
group benefit in expected utility. Thus, ex ante, it makes sense for them to agree to co-sign,
Even if it weren’t, one could argue that peer pressure might suffice.

Moreover, it is

reasonable to assume that peer pressure is sufficiently great (at least for small c) that they
would not renege from such an agreement.47

V. Conclusion
There is little doubt that under current arrangements, those who face a bout of
unemployment suffer a great deal:

there is imperfect consumption smoothing over time and

imperfect risk-sharing across states.
Markets on their own did not provide unemployment insurance. Government had to step
in to fill the lacuna.

But government programs have been criticized for their adverse effects

on search. In the U.S., for instance, normally benefits are cut off after six months because of
the concern that extended benefits would greatly attenuate search and job acceptance.
One of the reasons that unemployment extracts such high costs--even when the loss of
lifetime income is relatively small, as a result of a short term bout of unemployment-- is that
46

The question arises over the possibility of private incentives for loan-cosigning beyond
the rate mandated by government. As long as the group does not take into account the effect
of its choice upon the UI tax or the price of loan, it is easy to imagine circumstances under
which the private group might have an incentive to go beyond the level required by the
government. But unless the cosigners fully control the action of unemployed cosignee, this
may decrease welfare, because the additional risk sharing attenuates first period search
effort (The argument is analogous to Arnott-Stiglitz(1991).) In this paper, moreover, there is
no incentive for additional loan-cosigning on the part of a group once unemployment risk is
realized in period 1, because there is no interdependence of utility functions by members of
the group.
47

More formally, we can assume that the marginal peer pressure associated with the initial

cosigning (i.e., at c

0) is greater than the marginal cost (for the cosigner) of cosigning at c

0,

so that the cosigner would voluntarily accept some level of cosigning for his (unemployed)
colleague.

30

individuals are unable to smooth consumption over their lifetime.
imperfect.

Capital markets are

That is why models assuming perfect capital markets ascribe so little costs to

economic fluctuations (Lucas(1987)).

It was that insight that motivated our earlier paper,

which showed that, indeed, if episodes of unemployment are short enough, one could make
extensive use of loans: a well-designed government loan program could ensure income
smoothing without the attenuation of incentives, while only a limited UI program might be
needed.
Previous analyses within the search literature, which have focused on the adverse effects
on search of government UI programs, have not attempted to balance the adverse incentive
costs with the benefits of cross-state and cross-time income smoothing. In fact, most
advanced industrial countries do not make use of loans, whereas Singapore, with its
Provident Fund, in effect relied heavily on loans.
But some individuals do experience episode(s) of unemployment that represent a
significant fraction of their potential life-time income, and in that case, one cannot rely
simply on loans. In particular, there is a risk that (in a utilitarian-optimal unemployment
scheme), loans may not be repaid, if individuals have (unexpected) repeated episodes of
unemployment. In such circumstances, there needs to be greater reliance on UI: from a lifetime utility maximization perspective, those with extended unemployment have greater need
for insurance and even less of an ability to smooth income over time.

This paper analyzes

the optimal combination of UI benefit and loans for unemployed individuals from a lifetime
perspective: taking into consideration the possible interactions between UI’s and loans and
the interactions between the government program and private savings (and loans), it
examines how the level and composition of benefits (say the proportion of benefits provided
in the form of loans) changes over time in a model where unemployment may occur in any
period.
Methodological contributions. This paper is a contribution both to theory and policy. At
the center of this paper are three fundamental ideas, which are relevant more generally in
situations where moral hazard (incentive) effects may arise. First, in the context of an
intertemporal model, a shock (an "accident" or, as here, the loss of a job) has an effect on the
individual's current position that is normally greater than the impact on his lifetime prospects,
which means that the adverse effects can be diminished by lifetime smoothing.

Simply

enhancing opportunities for lifetime smoothing has the advantage that there are not the
31

adverse incentive effects typically associated with insurance. 48

But with uncertainties

associated with future income, lifetime budget constraints are uncertain.

This poses limits

on the extent of lifetime smoothing that is possible in the absence of perfect cross-state
insurance (i.e. insurance that would eliminate uncertainty in the lifetime budget constraint.)
Because of the adverse incentive effect of such insurance, there will be only limited crossstate insurance; but that in turn implies a limit to the extent of lifetime smoothing. In short,
we need to simultaneously solve for the optimal lifetime smoothing and the optimal crossstate smoothing.

This paper shows how this can be done, in the context of a particular

model of some policy relevance.49
Secondly, this paper explores the implications of a number of externalities which, to date,
have received insufficient attention, and which result in market inefficiency with and without
government programs (Greenwald-Stiglitz, 1986, 1988). While earlier literature had called
attention to the externalities within and across insurance markets (that is, the provision of
insurance by one firm affected the risk-taking behavior of individuals, and therefore the
losses experiences by other insurance firms (Arnott and Stiglitz, 1990), here we show that
such externalities are more pervasive, e.g. between savings, credit markets, and insurance.
We show, for instance, that such effects also arise from private savings and borrowing
decisions--indeed, there is a presumption that a private unemployment insurance system that
carefully balanced the benefits of cross-state and cross-time smoothing with the costs of
adverse incentives would not be Pareto efficient. Well-designed government programs take
these into account, thereby limiting the effects.
Thirdly, this paper examines the interactions between government programs, markets and
non-market institutions and their implications. The latter is particularly important, given the
limitations in the ability of government to monitor and control externality generating
48

There can still be effects on incentives, because, for instance, the expected marginal
utility associated with additional work (or search) will change as a result of the increased
opportunities for lifetime consumption smoothing.
49
Income contingent loans represent a particular way of combining interstate and
intertemporal smoothing. (See Chapmen and Hunter, 2009, Chapman and Tan, 2009, and
Chapman, 2010.) Because in our model, repayment depends on whether individuals get a
job in subsequent period, the loans are, in a sense, "income contingent," but, of course, they
would be more so, if the wages individuals received when employed were variable, and
repayment depended on those wages. If the extent of search affected the wages individuals
received, then the design of the income contingent loans would affect the extent of search.
See Stiglitz and Yun, 2013.
32

activities. In particular, we show how non-market institution (such as family, etc.) may be
used to enhance welfare performance of government programs: a government program of cosigning can be welfare enhancing, and can be implemented voluntary by members of a group,
if members of the co-signing group have an informational advantage over the government
and can exert peer pressure to induce "better" behavior (in this context, ensure that
individuals with low search costs search for a job.)
The externalities/markets failures that we have analyzed here arise whenever there are
insurance markets (public or private), and whenever individuals take actions at one date that
may affect their willingness to take actions at a subsequent date that will affect the magnitude
or likelihood of a loss.

These are examples of diffuse externalities—hard for any insurance

firm to control. A health insurance company might naturally try to restrict smoking, which
is directly related to a number of risks insured by the company.

But individuals save and

borrow for many reasons, and savings and debts affect behavior in many ways—including
individual’s risks taking behavior, and their incentives and ability to repay loans to others.
Our paper illustrated the risk of excessive lending (borrowing) in one particular context, but
the problem is more pervasive. A loan by one lender may reduce the likelihood of another
lender being repaid. Excesses in this market played a big role in the financial crisis of 2008.
Those excesses may partially be attributable to miscalculations of risk (hardly consistent with
assumptions of rational expectations); but even with rational expectations such problems
could arise, as we have noted, simply because individual market participants do not take into
account the externalities that their actions impose on others.

Redesigning unemployment insurance programs The analysis of this paper suggests that
there is considerable room for improvement in most UI programs. Given the heterogeneity
of the population (e.g. with respect to utility functions, search cost functions, etc), a precise
model of the kind formulated here can only be suggestive50. Several of the results of our
analysis we think are likely to prove robust.

50

In principle, one could design unemployment programs (mixes of UI and loans) contingent
on observed characteristics, and offer choices, using principles of self-selection, to
differentiate among individuals with unobservable but relevant characteristics; but
practically, it is unlikely that governments would adopt programs of such complexity.
33

Most important, our analysis suggests that optimal policy maximizing lifetime utility
involves greater reliance on loan programs, since with a loan program there can be
(especially for the young) greater consumption smoothing with less incentive-attenuation.
The loan programs, like the insurance program, have to be sensitive to (i) the impact that they
have on search; (ii) the risk of not being repaid; and (iii) private incentives for savings and
lending which, too, may attenuate search incentives. We noted, for instance, that there will
be excessive precautionary savings,51 which will lead to too little search.52
Another robust result concerns the relationship between unemployment benefits and past
unemployment experience. In our model, the optimal policy involves
for those with past episodes of unemployment.

a larger UI benefit

This stands in contrast to current US

programs, which pays no attention to longer term employment experience, but gives a smaller
benefit to those who have been unemployed (at least in the recent past).
On the other hand, we are not convinced that our result on how the relative reliance on UI
benefits vs. loans should change with age is robust. In our idealized model, those who are
unemployed when older have less ability to compensate for an adverse shock by smoothing
over time, and that suggests the UI benefit for the young should be smaller. But in a more
general model, the relationship between UI and age is not so clear:

because the lifetime

benefits of search are greater when young, adverse effects on search may be weaker,
suggesting a higher UI benefit for the young.
There is one more qualification to the direct application of our results:

We have

conducted our analysis within the usual rational individuals with rational expectations
framework, modified only by a recognition of certain market failures. If young people
excessively discount the consequences to their retirement consumption53, then switching from
UI benefits to loans may not have the positive incentive effects predicted by this paper;
instead, it may simply result in greater poverty among the elderly and/or a greater need to
"bail out" those who have had the misfortune of experiencing several unemployment shocks
over their lives.
51

In some countries, such as the United States, there seems to be insufficient precautionary
savings, but this probably has to do more with "behavioral economics" considerations, e.g.
individual's underestimation of the risk of their facing spells of unemployment. In this model,
we have assumed rational expectations.
52
In our simplified model, in which there are no problems of adverse selection, there is
excessive private lending. In more general models, this may not be the case.
53
As asserted by much of the recent literature in behavioral economics (KahnemanTversky(1991), Benartzi-Thaler(2004))
34

The paper has focused on how governments, with limited information, and limited ability
to correct these market failures, can intervene to improve welfare.

It assumes that when

individuals search for a job, there is a job to be found; as we noted earlier (in footnote 13), if
the number of jobs is less than the number of job seekers, more search simply increases the
length of queues for the jobs that are available, and can worsen welfare.

The implication is

clear: UI systems should be made contingent on the state of the economy.
We have focused too on how market forces affect individuals willingness to search.
There are other market externalities that might affect his ability to search, some manifest in
the current crisis. Excessive indebtedness may, for instance, restrict his ability to invest in
search over longer distances and may inhibit his ability to purchase a home in another locale
(particularly important in countries with limited rental markets.54 )
Given the suffering associated especially with extended periods of unemployment, and
given the significance of potentially adverse incentive effects for job search posed by poorly
designed unemployment systems, there is need for thinking carefully about how one can
structure systems which improve the well-being of the unemployed while limiting societal
costs from adverse incentives.

It is hoped that this paper will have made a contribution to

that understanding.

54

. Delli Gatti et al [2011] have raised this possibility in the context of the current
recession. The role of capital constraints in affecting migration was long noted in the
development literature (Stiglitz, 1969).
35

APPENDIX <Proofs of Propositions>

<Lemma>
We can see from (A1) that LHS is decreasing in r ∗ and RHS is increasing in r ∗ for any given q and h , while
LHS is greater (or smaller) than RHS as ∗ → 0 (or as ∗ → 1). Also (A2) implies that LHS is increasing in r ∗
for any given
and
and RHS is decreasing in r ∗ , while LHS is smaller (or greater) than RHS as ∗ → 0
∗
(or as
→ 1). These prove Lemma 1). As RHS of (A1) is increasing in q and
while LHS of (A2) is
increasing in
and , Lemma 2) is proved.

<Proposition 2>
i) (a) is proved by Lemma.
1

i) (b) Since

̅

1

1, M

and

≡
̅

and/or q becomes large, U r ∗ → U′ 0 . If U 0

∞ . As h
∈ Ω p ,h ,

, therefore, there will exist q, h

proving i) (b).
i) (c) Consider a q, h

such that q, h

p ′

such that

0

∈ Ω p ,h

q, h
ii)

for any h

Since

for p

U

U
r∗

R∗ 1

p

′

p ,h

for p

M 1

q, h

(from

(10)),

. This implies that U r
∗

q, h

. This implies that there exists
p ′ , suggesting that

p ′. This proves (i) (c).

U

U

∈ Ω 0,0 , i.e., that

there

exists

k

R 1

p

U

such

that,

for

,

by (7) and (10), suggesting that

.

Proposition 3
Suppose that r ∗
M T

∗

s∗

≡U 1

thus that r ∗

0. Note that R∗ 1
T . Since 1

0 by (6).

M , whereas R∗

Finally, when p

T

M (by (8)), suggesting that r ∗
so that R∗

V

V

r ∗ . It then implies that R
V
∗

2p

U

M T , where
p

M T , and

, which is smaller than

0. These will prove the first part of Proposition.

0, we can see from (10) that a higher h can lead to zero r ∗ .

R

0 by (5) (when p ≅ 0 . This suggests that e
V

∗

(9) implies that R∗

0.

p

0), U R∗ 1

(because T

Suppose also that r ∗

p q; h , h

Proposition 4
i) Suppose that r ∗

s∗

, while (6) implies that R∗ 1

p

U

because R
V

∗

V
3 U r

∗

R
V

2 1
V

R 1

s

e because
p

U

∗

∗

T
U
0(because r
R
1 s
when p
0, implying
U 1 s
that q p because q p . Since q p , (6) and (8) imply that r ∗ r ∗ because
(by
∗
∗
R
3 r
r
by (6) and (8) (when p ≅ 0), R
R by (5)
2 1 s
(5)). Since R
36

and because r ∗ r ∗ .
Also, suppose that r
U

2p

R 1

∗

U

p

R . Then, by (6) and (8),

r

3 U r

R 1

p

∗

U

∗

U 1

s

V

V
T

V

∗

U

V

∗

U
U 1 s
T
U
2p U
0 . Thus, e
V
V
V
V
e , suggesting that q p , implying that
0 by (5) if p
R 1 p
R by (6) and (8), which is contradictory. Finally, suppose that no loan is provided to
r
r
the unemployed. When r
r
r, V
V
V
V
T
T
1 s
1 s
U r
U s
T
p U r
2U
U 1 s
1 p 2U
U s
2
2
1
U r
2U
2
p 2U
U r
U s
U 1 s
T
2U
U s
U 1 s
T
U s
by the concavity of U(.)). That is, e
> 0 ( because 2U
e , suggesting that q p , implying that r ∗ r ∗ in the absence of loan provision.
V

V

V

V

<Proposition 5>
0, 1

If p
U r

s

, so that the condition (6) can be rewritten as

U

r U r

where X ≡ R 1
U r
r

Let
r

X
∗

X

r

U′

r X; q, h

or

X∗; p , h , r

(6’)

X

U r
∗

r

r ; q, h

from

0,

0 . Since

0; p , h , r

because, for p

Suppose that r 0; q, h

X

(6’),

r U

and

let

0
X

∗

X r ; p ,h ,r

0, r

0.

0; q, h

1

s

or

0, because

Also, from (6’) and (7’),
0; p , h , r .

0; p , h , r , the solution, which is unique, can be illustrated

X

by the intersection A of r R ; q, h

0 (from (7’)),

(7’)

so that an interior solution r ∗ , X ∗ for (6’) and (7’) exists.

0; p , h , r

0 and r 0; q, h

Since

X

from (7’). See Figure 2. We can see from (6’) and (7’) that

0 and

0; q, h

r R ; q, h

0

p . We can then rewrite (7) as

U

0,

U

and X r ; p , h , r

curves as in Figure 2. As

∗

increases,

∗

curve shifts leftward, so that r decreases while X increases. On the other hand, as p

increases, X r ; p , h , r
1

and (7’) that

curve shifts leftward, so that r ∗ increases while X ∗ decreases. Note also from (6’)
0, suggesting that

∗

∗

∗

,

∗

0.

<Proposition 6>
Differentiating (5’) with respect to s and r , we have
/
/

where SS ≡

U′ 1

0, because

,
1

̅

′

̅

′

.
37

0 (by the second-order condition) and

Since

p U"(
(as U"′

s1 +r2
2

U′

)-U"

0 and

0),

U′

0.

Differentiating the lifetime utility V with respect to
0
0 at s

because

0

U"

∗

at

to find the optimal

,

,

,
∗

s by Proposition 1. This implies that

.

<Proposition 7>
Figure 3 depicts (by A) how the original optimal mix r ∗ , R∗ 1
r X, ; q, h

r X, ; q, h

r X, ; q, h

∗

∗

X r ;p ,h ,r

and the curve X

and of the curve X

can see (from A and B in Figure 3) that R 1
(

X r ; p , h , r , and by the

in Figure 3, respectively. Comparing (14) and (12) with (6) and (7), respectively, we

can see that the curve r
curve r

r X, ; q, h )

is determined by (6)(r

X r ; p , h , r ). Let (12) and (14) be represented by the curve X

and (7) (X
curve r

P

are on the right hand side of the

X r ; p , h , r , respectively. Since
P

r

R∗ 1

P

1

0, we

r ∗ as B is to the right of the 45o line

).

<Proposition 8>
To see whether or not the loan-cosigning enhances welfare we will evaluate the expected payoff V of an
individual at c

1

Since 1

U r

0 and differentiating V with respect to c at c

q q 1

s

F R U r
R 1 P
U
r
1 s
q
U r
R 1 P
U
U 1
h
1 q
2
1 q
1
r̅
1 s
R U r
R 1 P
γU
h
r̅ U
2
1 q
2
when c

T

R 1

0, to obtain

P

we can see that, if γ

U

s

T

0 by (18), and since the necessary condition for

h

U r

R 1

P

U

U 1

is

s

T

0,

0,

0 at c = 0.

38

<References>
R. Arnott, J Stiglitz (1991), “Moral Hazard and Non-market Institutions: Dyfunctional Crowding Out
or Peer Monitoring,” American Economic Review, 81, pp. 179-190
R. Arnott, J Stiglitz (1990), “The Welfare Economics of Moral Hazard,” in Risk, Information and
Insurance: Essays in the Memory of Karl H. Borch, H. Louberge (ed.), Norwell: Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1990, pp. 91-122.
M. Bailey (1978), “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Public
Economics, 10(3), 379-402
S. Benartzi, R. Thaler (2004), "Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase
Employee Savings," Journal of Political Economy 112.1, Part 2, pp.S164–S187
Chapman, B & Hunter, B 2009, 'Exploring creative applications of income contingent loans',
Australian Journal of Labour Economics, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 133-144.
Chapman, B & Tan, M 2009, 'The Australian University Student Financing System: The Rationale for,
and Experience with, Income-contingent Loans', in Aida, Yunus, Rosni Bakar and Shukran Abdul
Rahman (ed.), Student Loan Schemes: Experiences of New Zealand, Australia, India and Thailand
and Way Forward for Malaysia, Universiti Sains Malaysia Press, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia, pp. 38-64.
Chapman, B 2010, 'Policy Design Issues for Risk Management: Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard
in the Context of Income Contingent Loans', in Greg Marston, Jeremy Moss and John Quiggin
(ed.),Risk, Welfare and Work, Melbourne University Press , Carlton, Australia, pp. 233-252.
R. Chetty (2008), “Moral Hazard vs. Liquidity, Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of
Political Economy, 116(2), 176-233
R.Chetty, E. Saez (2010), “Optimal Taxation and Social Insurance with Endogenous Private
Insurance,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2(2), 85-114
T. Cosley, H. Low (2011), “Borrowing Constraint, The Cost of Precautionary Savings, and
Unemployment Insurance,” mimeo
J. Costain (1999), “Precautionary Savings,” Working Paper, University Pompeu Fabra
Diamond, P (1981), “Mobility Costs, Frictional Unemployment, Efficiency,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 89, No. 4
Domenico Delli Gatti ; Mauro Gallegati ; Bruce C. Greenwald ; Alberto Russo ; Joseph E. S
tiglitz, "Sectoral Imbalances and Long Run Crises," paper presented to the International Economic
Association meeting, Beijing, July 8, 2011.
M. Feldstein, D. Altman (1998), “Unemployment Insurance Savings Account,” NBER Working Paper
6860
J. Flemming (1978), “Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance: search, leisure, savings, and
capital market imperfections,” Journal of Public Economics, 10, pp. 403-25
39

B. Greenwald, J. Stiglitz (1986), “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and
Incomplete Market,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, pp. 229-64
_____(1988) “Pareto Inefficiency of Market Economies: Search and Efficiency Wage Models,”,
American Economic Review, 78(2), May, pp. 351-355
H. Hopenhayn, J. Nicolini (1997), “Optimal Unemployment Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy,
105, 312-438
E. Kandel, E. Lazear (1992), “Peer Pressure and Partnership,” Journal of Political Economy
Lucas, R.E., 1987, Models of Business Cycles, New York: Blackwell.
R. Lucas, N. Stokey (1987), “Money and Interest in a Cash-In-Advance Economy,” Econometrica,
Vol. 55(3), pp. 491-513
D. Kahneman, A. Tversky(1992) , “Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative
Representation of Uncertainty,” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5, pp. 297–323.
N. Kocherlakota (2004), “Figuring out the Impacts of Hidden Savings on Optimal Unemployment
Insurance,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 7. 541-554
Mortensen, D. (1986). "Job search and labor market analysis". In Ashenfelter, O.; Card, D.. The
Handbook of Labor Economics. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland. ISBN 0444878572.
Mortenson, D. 2010, Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Differently?, Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Pissarides, C (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory (2nd ed.). MIT Press. ISBN 0262161877
M. Rothschild, J. Stiglitz (1976), “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets: An Essay on the
Economics of Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 90, pp 629-650
R. Shimer, I. Wernings (2005), “Liquidity and Insurance for the Unemployed,” Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, Staff Report, 366
J. E. Stiglitz,Stiglitz, J.E. (1969) Staff Report, 366 An Essay on the EconomiSocial Insurance,f
Report, 366Journal of Econo,icEast African Economic Review, 1-2, December 1969, pp. 1-27.
_________ “________cember 1969, pp. 1-27.ation, Surplus Labor and the RelationshJournal of
Public Economics, 18, 1982, pp.ic Eco
J. Stiglitz, J. Yun (2005), “Integration of Unemployment Insurance with Retirement Insurance,”
Journal of Public Economics, 89, pp. 2037-67
J. Stiglitz, J. Yun (2009), “Optimality and Equilibrium In a Competitive Insurance Market under
Adverse Selection and Moral Hazard,” mimeo
________2013 "A Modest Proposal for an Improvement in Unemployment Insurance Schemes",
paper presented to International Economics Association Roundtable on Income Contingent Loans for
Public Policy, Bangkok, March 16-17, 2013 and forthcoming in Proceedings, Palgrave-McMillan.

40

M. Whinston (1983), “Moral Hazard, Adverse Selection, and Optimal Provision of Social Insurance,”
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 22, No. 1, pp 49-71

41

Period1

Period3

U(w-s2-T)

U(s1+s2)

1-pN

U(w-s1-T)

Search

pN

1-q

Period2

Search
No Search

U(r2+R2)

U(s1-R2)

U(w-s3-T')

U(s3-R1)

q
No Search
1-pu

U(r1+R1(1-p))

Search

pu

No Search

U(r3)

T=

q

N

1 q

r1

p N r2 )

T

pu
=

pu

r3

U(r3)

p: price of loan

< Figure 1 > Model

42

<Figure 2> Optimal Mix (r1* , R1* )
X  R1 (1  Pu )

X

r  r ( X ;q , h )
1

1

1

(q )

X

*

( pu )

0

X≡ R

1

< Figure 2 >

*

r

1

*

r  X r  X
1

*

X  X (r ; p , h , r )
1

3

u

3

r

1

1

p )
Optimal Mix (r ∗ , R∗

43

<Figure 3> Optimal Mix (r10 , R10 )
X  R1 (1  Pu )

X

r  r ( X ;q ,h )
1

1

1

r1  ~
r1 ( X ; q, h1 )

X
X

*

A

B

~
X  X (r1 ; Pu , h3 , r3 )

0

X  X (r ; p , h , r )
1

0

X≡ R

1

< Figure 3 >

*

r

1

0

r

1

*

r  X r  X
1

*

u

3

3

r

1

1

p )
Optimal Mix (r , R

44

