                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              COMPETITION FOR ATTENTION

                                          Pedro Bordalo
                                         Nicola Gennaioli
                                         Andrei Shleifer

                                       Working Paper 19076
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19076


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2013




We are grateful to Charles Angelucci, Daniel Benjamin, Stefano DellaVigna, Matthew Gentzkow,
Daniel Gottlieb, Emir Kamenica, Botond Koszegi, Annie Liang, Jeffrey Picel, Josh Schwartzstein,
Jesse Shapiro, Charlie Sprenger, and Yanos Zylberberg for extremely helpful comments. Gennaioli
thanks the Barcelona GSE Research Network and the Generalitat de Catalunya for financial support.
Shleifer thanks the Kauffman Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition for Attention
Pedro Bordalo, Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 19076
May 2013
JEL No. D03,D43,L13,M31

                                             ABSTRACT

We present a model of market competition and product differentiation in which consumers' attention
is drawn to the products' most salient attributes. Firms compete for consumer attention via their choices
of quality and price. With salience, strategic positioning of each product affects how all other products
are perceived. With this attention externality, depending on the cost of producing quality some markets
exhibit “commoditized” price salient equilibria, while others exhibit “de-commoditized” quality salient
equilibria. When the cost of producing quality changes, innovation can lead to a radical change in
markets. In the context of financial innovation, the model generates the well documented phenomenon
of “reaching for yield”.


Pedro Bordalo                                       Andrei Shleifer
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
Royal Holloway                                      Harvard University
University of London                                Littauer Center M-9
Egham Hill, Egham, TW20 0EX                         Cambridge, MA 02138
United Kingdom                                      and NBER
pedro.bordalo@rhul.ac.uk                            ashleifer@harvard.edu

Nicola Gennaioli
Department of Finance
Università Bocconi
Via Roentgen 1
20136 Milan, Italy
ngennaioli@crei.cat
1     Introduction
In many markets, consumers’ attention to particular attributes of a product seems critical.
In fashion goods, business class airline seats, and financial products, consumers focus on
quality rather than price. Firms advertise quality, and rarely mention prices. In fast food,
regular air travel, or standard home goods, consumers seem much more attentive to prices.
In these markets, firms often advertise low prices to draw consumers’ attention.
    Scholars of strategy and marketing are keenly aware of these distinct modes of market
competition, and tirelessly emphasize the importance of having differentiated attributes and
drawing consumer attention to them (Levitt 1983, Rangan and Bowman 1992, Mauborgne
and Kim 2005). Southwest wants to be known as ”the low cost airline;” Singapore as the
winner of prizes for luxury and comfort. Walmart touts its everyday low prices, Nordstrom’s
its service. Yet the salience of one attribute relative to others is not a natural feature of eco-
nomic models of product differentiation, in which all attributes matter symmetrically. There
is a bit of a gap between how economists and business strategists think about competition.
    We seek to bridge this gap by introducing the idea of salience into a standard model of
market competition in which firms choose qualities and prices. This idea, developed in our
earlier work (BGS 2012a,2012b), holds that the attention of consumers or decision makers
more generally is drawn to the most unusual, surprising, or salient attributes of the options
they face, leading them to overweight these attributes in their decisions. We have shown
in previous work that salience can naturally account for a range of puzzles in the theory
of individual choice, from Allais paradoxes to preference reversals to decoy effects, but also
helps think in a new way about market phenomena such as products being put on sale
immediately after their introduction, or the demand for insurance with small deductibles.
In many of these situations, the context of the decision influences consumer attention and
choice, even when this context should be irrelevant to a rational consumer.
    In this paper, we show that salience allows us to describe product differentiation and
market competition in a way more congruent with business strategists’ views, but also yield-
ing new empirical predictions. We examine markets in which firms compete on both quality
and price. When salience matters, part of product market competition is that for consumer
attention via the choice of quality and price. Strategic positioning of one product affects
how all other products are perceived, by influencing the salience of either quality or price of
each product. A very high quality good draws attention not only to its own quality, but also
to the fact that the competitor product has lower quality, reducing the competitor’s relative
valuation. A good with a very low price draws attention to the competitor’s higher price,
reducing the competitor’s relative valuation. This attention externality is at the heart of our
model.
   Depending on the cost of producing quality, some markets exhibit price salient equilibria,
in which consumers are attentive to prices rather than quality and become relatively less
sensitive to quality differences than price differences. Firms compete on prices, and quality
could be under-provided relative to the efficient level. Because consumers neglect quality,
escaping such “commodity magnets” is difficult. We suggest that markets such as fast food
or air travel are well described in this way.
   In other markets, equilibria are quality salient in that consumers are attentive to quality
and are to some extent insensitive to price differences. Firms compete on quality, which can
be over-supplied relative to the efficient level. In these markets, it is again difficult to escape
the high quality equilibrium, because consumers neglect price cuts. We think of financial
services or fashion as well described by such equilibria.
   We show that although equilibria in this model are fairly stable, there is a possibility of
radical change in markets when the cost of producing quality changes dramatically. This
can take the form of de-commoditization, whereby a firm acquires access to a technology
of producing quality at a much lower cost than its competitor, and is able to change the
market from a price-salient to a quality-salient equilibrium. In such markets, prices can rise
dramatically, but quality as perceived by consumers rises more. We think of the introduction
of Starbucks coffee into a market of tasteless drip, or the introduction of fashion men’s briefs
by Calvin Klein in the early 1980’s as examples of this phenomenon. Market transformation
can also take the form of commoditization, and reductions in quality, as happened in airlines
after deregulation. Companies such as Southwest and Ryan Air were able to change the
equilibrium in that market from quality salient to price salient because they enjoyed an
enormous advantage relative to the incumbents with high legacy costs. Our model enables


                                                2
us to analyze these situations.
   We also consider in detail the case of financial innovation, as exemplified by the creation
of new products with higher expected return and risk. We show that such innovation is
particularly attractive in low interest rate environments, and when the innovation allows
to create higher returns at a moderately higher risk. Indeed, higher returns are salient
to investors when alternative yields are extremely low and the (small) extra risk of the
new product is underweighted. The model generates the well documented phenomenon of
“reaching for yield” in an intuitive psychological way, based on the properties of salience.
   Our paper is related to recent work on “behavioral industrial organization” (Ellison 2006,
Spiegler 2011). One strand of this research studies settings in which consumers restrict their
attention to a subset of available options, the consideration set, which can be manipulated
by firms by expending a marketing cost (Spiegler and Eliaz 2011a,b and Hefti 2012) or by
setting a salient low price on some products (Ellison and Ellison 2009). Our paper provides
a formal model of salience, in which firms draw consumers’ attention to different product
attributes by suitably differentiating their products. Our model thus features an attention
externality within a given consideration set and provides insight into quality provision even
in standard competitive environments.
   Another strand of the literature considers the working of market competition in settings in
which some product attributes are “shrouded”, namely sufficiently obscured that consumers
find it difficult to compare them across products (Gabaix and Laibson 2006, Ellison and
Ellison 2009, Spiegler and Piccione 2012). This literature takes as given the attributes that
consumers pay attention to. In our analysis, consumers may pay differential attention to
quality or price, but the neglect of one attribute or the other is endogenously determined by
product design and market competition.
   Azar (2008), Cunningham (2012), and Dahremöller and Fels (2012) explore models in
which the relative weight that consumers put on different attributes depends on the choice
context, and can thus be manipulated by firms. These papers model consumer attention by
using approaches different from salience (technically, they do not combine the diminishing
sensitivity and ordering properties) and explore a different set of issues, such as properties
of markups or the monopolist problem. Finally, our analysis builds on recent work studying


                                              3
how different forms of inattention affect consumer demand. As in our salience approach,
Koszegi and Szeidl (2013) propose that consumer attention to different product features is
determined ex-post, depending on which product attribute stands out. Other approaches
– such as Gabaix (2012), Mateijka and McKay (2012), and Persson (2012) – are grounded
in the rational inattention framework, in which attention to different product features is
efficiently allocated ex-ante.1
        The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe our basic model of competition
and show how salience would influence product valuations by consumers. In section 3, we
take qualities as fixed and examine the basic analytics of price competition and of price and
quality salient equilibria. Section 4 focuses on the full model of quality competition, and
derives our main results for markets for products where attribute salience matters. In section
5, we apply the model to discuss innovation. Section 6 concludes.



2         The Model
There are two firms, 1 and 2. Firm k = 1, 2 produces a good having quality qk under a
firm-specific cost function ck (qk ). From the viewpoint of consumers, the good of firm k is
identified by its quality qk and price pk . Qualities and prices are competitively set by firms.
Following Shaked and Sutton (1982), we assume that firms play a two stage game. In the
first stage, each firm k makes a costless commitment to produce quality qk ∈ [0, +∞). In
the second stage, firms set optimal prices given the quality-cost attributes they committed
to (qk , ck ), for k = 1, 2, where ck ≡ ck (qk ). In light of these quality and price offerings,
consumers choose which product to buy. In what follows, we consider only pure strategy
Nash equilibria of this game.
        There is a measure one of identical consumers, each of whom chooses one unit of one good
from the choice set C ≡ {(q2 , −p2 ), (q1 , −p1 )}.2 Absent salience distortions, each consumer
    1
     For explorations of the role of inattention in financial markets, see Barber and Odean (2008), DellaVigna
and Pollet (2009), and Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer (2013).
   2
     For simplicity, we assume the consumer does not consider the possibility of not buying either good (e.g.,
the outside option of not buying is not considered because it has a large negative utility relative to the two
goods). We show in Appendix C that our results are robust to the inclusion of an outside option when the
costs of quality are not so high that they preclude the existence of a market.



                                                      4
values good k = 1, 2 at:


                                           u(qk , −pk ) = qk − pk .                                         (1)

       Both qualities and prices are measured in utils and assumed to be known to the consumer.
A salient thinker departs from (1) by inflating the weight attached to the attribute that he
perceives to be more salient in the choice set C ≡ {(q2 , −p2 ), (q1 , −p1 )}.3
       Following BGS (2012b), we assume that there is a salience function σ (x, y) that satisfies
two properties: ordering and homogeneity of degree zero. According to ordering, if an
interval [x, y] is contained in a larger interval [x0 , y 0 ], then σ (x, y) < σ (x0 , y 0 ). According
to homogeneity of degree zero, σ (αx, αy) = σ (x, y) for any α > 0, with σ(0, 0) = 0. In
the choice set C, the salience of price for good k is equal to σ (pk , p) while the salience of
quality for good k is equal to σ (qk , q), where p = (p1 + p2 )/2 and q = (q1 + q2 )/2 are the
average price and quality in the market. Good k’s quality is more salient than its price – or,
for short, quality is salient – if and only if σ (qk , q) > σ (pk , p). Ordering and homogeneity
of degree zero imply that the salience of a good’s quality is an increasing function of the
percentage difference between the good’s quality and the average quality in the choice set,
and similarly for price. In particular, consumers have diminishing sensitivity to attribute
differences: increasing the prices of both goods by a uniform amount  makes prices less
salient, σ(pk + , p + ) < σ(pk , p) for k = 1, 2.4
       Given a salience ranking, the salient thinker’s perceived utility from good (qk , −pk ) is
given by:                                  
                                            q − δpk if quality is salient
                                            k
                                           
                                           
                         uST (qk , −pk ) =   δqk − pk if price is salient  ,                                (2)
                                           
                                           
                                            q − p if equal salience
                                           
                                              k     k


where δ ∈ [0, 1] captures the extent to which valuation is distorted by salience.5                      When
   3
     We are thus assuming that firms do not strategically manipulate the set of goods considered by con-
sumers, for example by offering decoys (see BGS 2012b). This distinguishes our approach from Spiegler and
Eliaz (2011a,b), who study the incentive for firms to alter consideration sets.
   4
     Interpreting salience as a perceptual difference between attribute levels, this property is consistent with
Weber’s law of sensorial perception. See BGS (2012b) for more details on the properties of the salience
function and their psychological foundations.
   5                                                                             2
     Relative to BGS 2012b, we omit for simplicity the normalisation factor 1+δ     .



                                                       5
δ = 1 valuation is rational, as it coincides with (1). When δ < 1, the consumer overweights
the salient attribute. The competitive equilibrium then depends on δ, allowing us to study
how salience affects market competition.
        The assumptions of consumer homogeneity and rank-based salience weighting allow us
to characterize the basic implications of our framework. In Appendix B we show that our
main results also hold in a more continuous specification in which the salience of different
attributes, and therefore of preferences over the two goods, has a stochastic component and
varies in the population of otherwise identical consumers.
        We solve this model in two steps. In Section 3, we take each firm’s quality and cost
(qk , ck ) as given and study price competition among firms. This price setting stage is of
independent interest from endogenous quality choice because in the short run firms often
take quality as given, and react to cost shocks only by adjusting their prices.6 Section 4
investigates how firms choose quality in the first stage so as to influence price competition
in the second stage.



3         Price Competition
We begin with an analysis of price competition between firms 1 and 2, assuming that qualities
q1 , q2 and costs c1 , c2 are fixed, and only prices are set by firms. We assume that firm 1 has
a weakly higher quality and cost than firm 2, namely q1 ≥ q2 and c1 ≥ c2 (in Sections 3 and
4 the ranking of quality and costs is determined endogenously). Before characterizing the
outcome under salience, consider the rational benchmark that obtains when δ = 1.

Lemma 1 When δ = 1, the equilibrium under price competition is as follows:
i) If q1 −c1 > q2 −c2 , the consumer buys the high quality good 1. Prices are p1 = c2 +(q1 −q2 )
and p2 = c2 . The profit of firm 1 is equal to π1 = (q1 − q2 ) − (c1 − c2 ).
ii) If q1 − c1 < q2 − c2 , the consumer buys the low quality good 2. Prices are p1 = c1 and
p2 = c1 − (q1 − q2 ). The profit of firm 2 is equal to π2 = (c1 − c2 ) − (q1 − q2 ).
iii) If q1 − c1 = q2 − c2 , the consumer is indifferent between the high and the low quality good.
Prices are p1 = c1 and p2 = c2 . Firms make zero profits.
    6
        In some settings firms may be unable to adjust quality, due to regulatory or technological constraints.

                                                         6
       The firm creating greater surplus qk − ck captures the entire market and makes a profit
equal to the differential surplus created.7 When, as in case iii), the two goods yield the same
surplus, firms share the market and make zero profits, as in standard Bertrand competition.
The benchmark of fully homogeneous goods and zero profits corresponds to the special case
q1 = q2 = q, and c1 = c2 = c.
       To see how salience affects price competition, suppose that the firm producing the low
quality product 2 sets price p2 ≤ p1 . The next section shows that this always holds in
equilibrium. Homogeneity of degree zero of the salience function then implies that the same
attribute – either quality or price – is salient for both goods. Moreover, quality is salient
(that is, quality is more salient than price for both goods) provided:

                                                 q1  p1
                                                    > .                                                  (3)
                                                 q2  p2

Price is salient if and only if the reverse holds. Inequality (3) says that quality is salient if
and only if the proportional difference between qualities is higher than that between prices.
Equivalently, quality is salient when the high quality good has a better quality to price ratio
than the low quality good, namely q1 /p1 > q2 /p2 . Price is salient when the low quality good
has a better quality to price ratio than the high quality good, namely q1 /p1 < q2 /p2 . Because
by Equation (2) the good that fares better along the salient attribute is overvalued relative
to the other good, salience tilts preferences in favor of the good that has the highest ratio of
quality to price (BGS 2012b).
       According to Equation (2), the valuation of a good depends not just on the good’s char-
acteristics but also on the entire competitive context. If qualities vary more than prices
across all choice options, the consumer pays more attention to (overweights) quality differ-
ences when making his choice. If prices vary more than qualities, the reverse is true. This
implies that, by changing its price, a firm exerts an “attention externality” on the compet-
ing good. To see this, recall that q1 > q2 and p1 > p2 , and suppose the high quality firm
reduces its price p1 . This change does not simply improve the consumer’s valuation of good
   7
    In principle, the price competition game has multiple equilibria, corresponding to different price levels
the losing firm may set leading to zero demand for its good. We refine the set of equilibria by assuming that
the firm that loses the market sets price equal to production cost (as setting price below cost might entail
negative profits). See Appendix A, footnote 17 for details.


                                                     7
1: by making prices less salient, it also draws the consumer’s attention to the low quality
of good 2. Suppose, alternatively, that the low quality firm reduces its price p2 . This does
not only improve the consumer’s valuation of good 2: by making prices more salient, it also
draws his attention to the high price of good 1. In other words, by cutting its price a firm
draws the consumer’s attention to the attribute along which it fares better. As this attention
externality makes price cuts more effective in attracting consumers, it seems that it should
strengthen competitive forces. As we will see, however, this is not always the case.


3.1     Salience and Competitive Pricing

When a firm sells to salient thinkers, it sets its price to render salient the advantage of its
product relative to its competitor. To explore how salience affects competitive pricing, we
examine price setting in two opposite situations, one in which quality is salient and firm 1
wins the market, another in which price is salient and firm 2 wins the market.
   Consider first the optimal price set by the high quality firm 1 in order to win a quality-
salient market. Suppose that firm 2 has set a price p2 for q2 . The maximal price p1 at which
firm 1 lures the consumer into buying its product while keeping quality salient solves:


                                    max      p 1 − c1
                                    p1 ≥p2

                                    s.t. q1 − δp1 ≥ q2 − δp2 ,                             (4)

                                             q1 /p1 ≥ q2 /p2 .                             (5)


      Constraint (4) ensures that the consumer prefers good 1 when quality is salient, while
constraint (5) ensures that quality is indeed salient. There are two departures from the
rational case. On the one hand, firm 1 now has an additional reason to cut its price: by
setting p1 low enough, it makes quality salient in (5), inducing the consumer to buy its
high quality product. On the other hand, when quality is salient the high quality good is
over-valued, which may allow firm 1 to hike its price p1 above the rational equilibrium level.
This effect of salience is captured by Equation (4).
   Consider next the optimal price set by the low cost firm 2 to win a price salient market.
The maximal price p2 at which firm 2 lures the consumer into buying its product while

                                                8
keeping prices salient solves:


                                                max      p 2 − c2
                                                p2 ≤p1

                                                s.t. δq2 − p2 ≥ δq1 − p1 ,                            (6)

                                                         q2 /p2 ≥ q1 /p1 .                            (7)


    Once again, price setting is constrained by consumer participation and salience. One the
one hand, salience provides firm 2 with an additional incentive to cut its price. By lowering
p2 , firm 2 does not just make its product more attractive, it also makes its lower price salient,
inducing the consumer to buy the cheap good. This effect is captured by (7). On the other
hand, by causing an over-valuation of the cheap good, salience can allow firm 2 to charge a
higher price than in the rational case. This effect is captured by (6).
    This preliminary analysis suggests that, depending on the balance between the salience
and participation constraints, salient thinking may boost or dampen prices relative to a
rational world. To see which force dominates, we now characterise equilibrium prices under
salience. To do so, we make the simplifying parametric restriction:

    A.1:           δ(c1 − c2 ) < q1 − q2 < 1δ (c1 − c2 ).

    Assumption A.1 ensures that salience fully determines the preference of consumers among
goods when goods’ prices equal their production costs. If quality is salient, consumers prefer
the high quality good 1; if price is salient they prefer the cheap good 2. As evident from A.1,
this is akin to assuming that the two firms produce sufficiently similar surpluses qk − ck that
changes in salience change the consumer’s preference ranking. Under A.1, we can characterise
which firm wins the market. Appendix A contains all the proofs.

Proposition 1 Under A.1, pure strategy subgame perfect equilibria under price competition
satisfy:
        q1       q2
i) if   c1
             >   c2
                    ,   quality is salient, the consumer buys the high quality good, and prices are

                                                c2       1
                                p1 = min{q1 ·      , c2 + (q1 − q2 )} and p2 = c2 .
                                                q2       δ



                                                            9
          q1       q2
ii) if    c1
               <   c2
                      ,   price is salient, the consumer buys the low quality good, and prices are

                                                               c1
                                   p1 = c1 and p2 = min{q2 ·      , c1 − δ(q1 − q2 )}.
                                                               q1

           q1        q2
iii) if    c1
                =    c2
                        ,   quality and price are equally salient, the consumer buys the good delivering
the highest (rational) surplus qk − ck , and prices are


                                                p1 = c1 and p2 = c2 .


    Under salience, the market outcome critically depends on the quality to cost ratios qk /ck
of different products. A firm with a higher ratio qk /ck monopolizes the market and makes
positive profits. When the two firms have identical quality to cost ratios, they earn zero
profits in the competitive outcome.
    Proposition 1 holds because the firm having the highest quality to cost ratio can always
engineer a price cut turning salience in its favor. When q1 /c1 > q2 /c2 , the high quality firm
can set a sufficiently low price that quality becomes salient, monopolizing the market. The
low quality firm is unable to reverse this outcome: in fact, doing so would require it to cut
price below cost. When instead q1 /c1 < q2 /c2 , the low quality firm can set price sufficiently
low so that price is salient, and it monopolizes the market. The high quality firm is unable to
reverse this outcome: once again, doing so would require it to cut price below cost. Finally,
consider the case in which q1 /c1 = q2 /c2 . In this case, salience changes as soon as a firm tries
to set its price above cost. In particular, a firm that hikes prices is immediately perceived
as having a lower quality to price ratio than its competitor. As a consequence, the firm’s
disadvantage becomes salient and the price hike becomes self defeating. The only equilibrium
outcome is zero profits for both firms.
    The central role of the quality to cost ratio is economically appealing because it pins
down salience distortions in terms of average costs of quality ck /qk . As we show when we
endogenize quality, this feature allows our model to make tight predictions about how changes
in cost structure affect salience and market outcomes. Before turning to that analysis, it is
useful to look more closely at some implications of Proposition 1.



                                                         10
3.2    Price salient vs. Quality salient equilibria

Depending on the quality and cost parameters, salience leads to two types of equilibria: price
salient and quality salient. In quality salient equilibria (case i of Proposition 1), consumers’
attention is drawn to quality and they pay less attention to prices. This resembles de-
commoditized markets described in the marketing literature, such as fashion or financial
services. In contrast, in price salient equilibria (case ii), consumers’ attention is drawn
to prices and they neglect quality differences among goods. This resembles the canonical
description of commoditised markets, where consumers buy the cheapest goods.
   According to Proposition 1, in both types of equilibria the profits of the winning firm
can be either lower or higher than in the rational benchmark. To see this, note that - due to
the salience constraint - the equilibrium profits of the winning firm k (the one with lowest
average cost) must satisfy:
                                                                  
                                           c−k              c−k ck
                              πkS   ≤ qk ·     − ck = q k      −     ,                       (8)
                                           q−k              q−k qk

where equality holds when the salience constraint binds. Equation (8) shows that equilibrium
profits increase in the difference between the firms’ average cost of quality. Consider the
following special cases:

   • The two goods yield different surpluses q1 − c1 6= q2 − c2 but exhibit identical (similar)
      average costs of quality. Under rationality, the high surplus firm would make positive
      profits. Under salient thinking, in contrast, industry profits are zero (negligible). Intu-
      itively, when average costs of quality are identical (similar), a firm can always undercut
      its competitor and render its advantage salient. Price cuts are thus very effective and
      profits are lower than under rationality.

   • The two goods yield the same surplus q1 − c1 = q2 − c2 , but differ in their average costs
      of quality. Here, profits are zero under rationality, but positive under salient thinking.
      The reason is that the firm with the lower average cost of quality can set a price above
      cost and still be perceived as offering a better deal than its competitor. Price cuts by
      the losing firm are ineffective, and salience dampens competitive forces.


                                                  11
        Salience can create abnormal profits in both quality and price salient equilibria. In quality
salient equilibria, consumers overvalue the high quality good. The high quality firm is then
able to hike prices and earn high profits. Financial services and fashion may be examples of
this type of competition. In price salient equilibria, consumers are attentive to prices and
under-appreciate quality differences among products. This grants an extra advantage to the
cheap (and low quality) firm, allowing it to raise the price above cost.8 Fast-food industry
and low-cost airlines may be examples of this type of competition.



4         Optimal Quality Choice
We now examine endogenous quality choice in the two-stage game introduced in Section
1. In the first stage, each firm k = 1, 2 makes a costless commitment to produce quality
qk ∈ [0, +∞). In the second stage, firms compete in prices given the quality-cost attributes
each firm committed to (qk , ck (qk )), for k = 1, 2. We denote by ck (q) the increasing and
convex cost of firm k in producing the quality q it committed to, where k = 1, 2.9 Cost
functions are common knowledge.
        We assume that firm 1 is the low cost firm, in the sense that it has weakly lower total
and marginal costs of quality than firm 2. Formally, c1 (q) ≤ c2 (q) and c01 (q) ≤ c02 (q) for all
qualities q. We think of this cost function as consisting of a fixed and a variable component.
Formally, ck (q) = Fk + vk (q), where vk (q) is an increasing and convex function satisfying
vk (0) = 0. To obtain intuitive closed form solutions, we sometimes use the quadratic form:

                                    ck 2
                    ck (q) = Fk +     · q , for k = 1, 2, where c1 ≤ c2 and F1 ≤ F2 .                    (9)
                                    2

The critical question is whether the low cost of quality firm 1 will choose to produce higher
or lower quality than the high cost of quality firm 2, and what this implies for the equilibrium
market outcome.
    8
    This result extends to industry profits as a whole, namely the sum of the profits of both firms.
    9
    This implies, plausibly, that a firm’s marginal cost of quality increases with the quality it produces.
Results would change under the alternative assumption that the marginal cost of producing the good does
not depend on q but firms must incur a variable cost H(q) at t = 0 to produce quality q at t = 1. Abstracting
from the issue of firm entry or exit (thus taking as given the presence of the two firms in the market), in
that case quality will always be salient at t = 1 and only quality-salient equilibria would exist.


                                                     12
       To fix ideas, consider the rational benchmark. In stage 2, the market is monopolized by
firm k producing the highest surplus qk − ck (qk ). Anticipating this, at t = 1 the two firms
set their qualities as follows.

Lemma 2 Under rationality, it is (weakly) optimal for firm k = 1, 2 to set qk∗ such that:


                                                c0k (qk∗ ) = 1.                                          (10)


a) If firms have the same marginal cost of quality v10 (q) = v20 (q) = v 0 (q), they set identical
quality levels q1∗ = q2∗ = q ∗ . Firm 1 sets price p∗1 = c2 (q ∗ ) and monopolizes the market
(making positive profits) if and only if F1 < F2 . If F1 = F2 , equilibrium profits are zero.
b) If firm 1 has a lower marginal cost of quality than 2, namely v10 (q) < v20 (q), then it
commits to higher quality q1∗ > q2∗ and monopolizes the market (making positive profits) by
setting p∗1 = c2 (q2∗ ) + (q1∗ − q2∗ ).

       By choosing the surplus-maximizing quality in (10), each firm maximizes its chance to
win the market.10 If firms have identical costs c1 (q) = c2 (q), they produce homogeneous
goods, split the market, and make no profits. If instead firm 1 has strictly lower costs than
firm 2, it captures the entire market and makes positive profits. Firm 1 then provides higher
quality if and only its marginal cost of quality is lower than that of firm 2.
       Under the quadratic cost function of Equation (9), firm k sets its quality at the level:

                                                          1
                                                  qk∗ =      ,
                                                          ck

which intuitively increases as the marginal cost falls (as ck becomes smaller), but is indepen-
dent of F . In the rational model, a drop in the marginal cost of quality for all firms increases
equilibrium quality, while a drop in the fixed cost of quality F leaves quality unaffected.
  10
    If firm 1 has strictly lower costs than firm 2, then in equilibrium firm 2 loses the market. Firm 2 is
then indifferent to deviating to a different quality than the one entailed by (10). In principle, there may
be multiple equilibria, each corresponding to a different quality level chosen by firm 2. We refine the set of
Nash equilibria by assuming that firm 2 chooses the surplus maximizing quality, which is a weakly dominant
strategy.




                                                     13
4.1     Salience and Quality Choice

Consider now how salience affects quality choice. To develop an intuition for the main results,
suppose that the two firms have identical costs of quality c1 (q) = c2 (q) = c(q). Suppose that
firms are at the “rational” quality level q ∗ , which is pinned down by the optimality condition
c0 (q ∗ ) = 1. If consumers are salient thinkers, would firm 1 have an incentive to change its
quality?
   Consider the incentive of firm 1 to choose a lower quality, cheaper, product. The new
product has quality q 0 = q ∗ − ∆q and cost c(q 0 ) = c(q ∗ ) − ∆c. Whether this new product is
successful or not against q ∗ critically relies on salience. If the lower quality q 0 is salient, the
new product fails. If instead the lower price is salient, the new product may be successful.
By Proposition 1, price is salient if and only if the quality to cost ratio of q 0 is higher than
that of product q ∗ :
                                q ∗ − ∆q       q∗       ∆c   c(q ∗ )
                                            >         ⇔    >         .                             (11)
                               c(q ∗ ) − ∆c   c(q ∗ )   ∆q    q∗
A cost cutting deviation works if the marginal cost of quality ∆c/∆q is higher than the
average cost c(q ∗ )/q ∗ at the rational equilibrium. This is intuitive: when the marginal cost
is high, a small quality reduction greatly reduces the cost of firm 1. This allows firm 1 to set
a salient low price, and to win the market.
   The attention externality plays a key role here. As prices become salient, consumers pay
less attention to quality, which reduces consumer valuation of the quality q 0 offered by the
deviating firm. This effect may undermine the profitability of the new product. However,
because price becomes salient for both firms, the valuation by consumers of the competing
product q ∗ drops even more! Thus, it is precisely the attention externality that allows
the quality cut to be profitable for firm 1 by causing a large relative undervaluation of its
competitor’s product.
   Consider the alternative move whereby firm 1 deviates to a higher quality product q 0 =
q ∗ + ∆q, which entails a higher cost c(q 0 ) = c(q ∗ ) + ∆c. If the higher price of q 0 is salient, the
deviation fails. If instead its higher quality is salient, the new product may be successful.




                                                  14
This scenario occurs provided:

                                 q ∗ + ∆q       q∗       ∆c   c(q ∗ )
                                             >         ⇔    <         .                    (12)
                                c(q ∗ ) + ∆c   c(q ∗ )   ∆q    q∗

A quality improving deviation can work provided the marginal cost of quality is below the
average cost at the rational equilibrium. Intuitively, if the marginal cost is low, a large
quality improvement entails only a small price hike, making quality salient. Once again,
the attention externality is at work. The salience of quality boosts consumer valuation of
the new product, but it also draws the consumer’s attention to the low quality q ∗ of the
competing product. These effects cause a relative over-valuation of the high quality product
q 0 , allowing the deviating firm to make profits.
   This discussion delivers two messages. First, salience creates incentives to deviate away
from the rational equilibrium. Second, the deviation can be toward higher or lower quality
depending on the relationship between marginal and average costs of quality. In equilibrium,
quality is generally provided at inefficient levels. Firms engaged in competition for attention
find it beneficial to exploit the ordering property of salience by deviating from the efficient
quality level.
   To further explore these forces, let us consider the general case in which firms have
different cost of quality functions, ck (q) 6= cj (q). Suppose that firm j has set the quality
level qj . The best response of firm k is then as follows.

Lemma 3 The best response qkbr of firm k to its opponent’s quality qj satisfies:
i) weakly higher quality qkbr ≥ qj provided c0k (qj ) < cj (qj )/qj ,
ii) weakly lower quality qkbr ≤ qj provided c0k (qj ) > cj (qj )/qj .
Both inequalities above are strict provided cj (qj )/qj ∈ (δ, 1/δ).

   According to the salience constraint in (5) and (7), the maximum price per unit of quality
at which firm k renders its advantage salient is equal to the average cost of quality of its
competitor j. As a consequence, firm k optimally raises quality when the marginal cost c0k (qj )
of producing this extra quality is below the benefit cj (qj )/qj of doing so, while it optimally
lowers quality when the reverse is true.


                                                   15
   This mechanism has interesting implications. When the average cost of quality is high,
the consumer is willing to pay a high price and still perceive quality as salient. Firm k then
has a strong incentive to boost quality, because the associated increase in price is relatively
neglected. In particular, when cj (qj )/qj > 1, consumers overpay for quality and firm k has
an incentive to over-provide it (relative to the rational benchmark c0k (qk∗ ) = 1). In contrast,
when the average cost of quality is low, even a slight price increase is very salient. In this
case, firm k has a strong incentive to cut quality and price. In particular, when cj (qj )/qj < 1
firm k under-provides quality relative to the rational benchmark.
   To describe the market equilibrium, we focus on the symmetric case in which the two
firms have the same cost function c1 (q) = c2 (q) = c(q). This case captures the long run
outcome arising when all firms, through imitation or entry, end up adopting the best available
technology.

Proposition 2 When δ < 1 and firms have identical cost functions, the unique pure strat-
egy equilibrium is symmetric. Denote by q and q the quality levels such that c0 (q) = 1/δ
and c0 (q) = δ, and by qb(F ) the quality level minimizing average cost, namely qb(F ) ≡
arg min c(q)/q. Then, in equilibrium price and quality are equally salient, firms make no
profits, and quality provision is given by:
                                           
                                           
                                           
                                               q     if F > F ≡ q/δ − v(q)
                                           
                    q2S       q1S    S
                                    =q ≡
                                                                     
                          =                    qb(F ) if    F ∈ F,F         .               (13)
                                           
                                           
                                                          F < F ≡ qδ − v(q)
                                           
                                               q    if

   This equilibrium exhibits three main features. First, because costs are identical, firms
produce the same quality and face the same production costs. Price and quality are equally
salient in equilibrium: consumers correctly value the products that are offered (as in the case
where δ = 1), and firms make zero profits.
   Second, although in equilibrium consumers correctly value the goods produced, there is
inefficient provision of quality (and therefore lower consumer surplus) relative to the rational
case. The reason is that salience makes the firms unwilling to deviate towards the socially
efficient quality q ∗ . When quality is over-provided (q S > q ∗ ), reducing quality and price


                                                    16
backfires because consumers’ attention is drawn to the quality reduction, rather than to
the price cut. This sustains an equilibrium with high quality and high prices. Similarly,
when quality is under-provided (q S < q ∗ ), increases in quality and price backfire because
consumers focus on the price rather than the quality hike. This sustains an equilibrium with
low quality and low prices. Although in equilibrium both attributes are equally salient, we
refer to the equilibrium with quality over-provision as quality-salient and to the equilibrium
with under-provision as price-salient. This terminology underscores which salience ranking
constrains firms from deviating towards the efficient quality level.
       The third key feature of the equilibrium is that - unlike in the rational case - quality
provision increases in the fixed cost of quality F .11 Intuitively, F affects average costs and
thus, by Lemma 3, the firms’ best responses. When F is high, costs and thus prices are
high. By the diminishing sensitivity property, the salience of prices is low. The firm has an
incentive to boost quality because any extra cost can be “hidden” behind the already high
price. As a consequence, the extra price is not salient and quality is over-provided. When
in contrast F is low, costs and thus prices are low. By diminishing sensitivity, prices are
now very salient. In this case, any price cut is immediately noticed, encouraging firms to
cut costs to an extent that quality is under-provided.
       To see these effects clearly, consider the case of the quadratic cost function.

Corollary 1 When δ < 1 and firms have identical quadratic costs c(q) = F +c·q 2 /2, quality
provision in the symmetric equilibrium is given by:
                                                  
                                                     1                                1
                                                                if          F ·c>   2δ 2
                                                   qδc
                                                  
                                                  
                            q2S = q1S = q S ≡            2F            1                    δ2   .                 (14)
                                                          c
                                                                 if   2δ 2
                                                                             ≤F ·c≤         2
                                                  
                                                  
                                                        δ                            δ2
                                                                             F ·c<
                                                  
                                                  
                                                        c
                                                                 if                  2


       Figure 1 below plots q S as a function of the unit cost F , and compares it to the surplus
maximizing quality, given by q ∗ = 1/c. As evident from the figure, salience causes quality
to be over-provided when the fixed cost F is sufficiently high and under-provided otherwise.
Recall that for δ = 1, we have q ∗ = 1/c and quality provision does not depend on the fixed
  11
     The reason is that qb(F ) satisfies v 0 (b
                                              q ) · qb− v(b
                                                          q ) = F and the left hand side is increasing in quality because
v is convex.

                                                            17
            Figure 1: Quality provision in the symmetric equilibrium (quadratic cost).

cost F .
       This analysis may help explain why sellers of expensive goods such as fancy hotel rooms
or business class airplane seats compete mostly on the quality dimension, often providing
customers with visible quality add-ons such as champagne, airport lounges, or treats. These
visible quality add-ons help make overall product quality salient, and the profit margin
associated with them can be hidden behind the high cost of the baseline good. In contrast,
sellers of cheap goods such as low quality clothes or fast food compete on the price dimension,
and cut product quality if that allows them to offer substantially lower prices. These cuts
are proportionally larger in the price dimension, draw consumers’ attention to prices, and
thus enable firms that supply these cheap goods to make abnormal profits. In both cases,
equilibrium profits disappear as competing firms adopt the same add-on or quality cutting
strategies, despite the fact that they are providing inefficient levels of quality.12
       Similar intuitions may help shed light on the technological and competitive forces leading
product attributes to be “shrouded” (e.g. Gabaix and Laibson 2006) or to the introduction
  12
    The intuition that diminishing sensitivity (to prices) favors the provision of quality add-ons is present
also in Prospect Theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1981). However, the central ingredient of our approach
– which is absent in other models of choice – is the attention externality, namely the fact that changing
attributes of one product alter the valuation of the competing product. This ingredient is important to pin
down equilibrium quantities and to generate strong reactions to price or quality changes. The benefit for a
firm of increasing quality (and price) is particularly large when it induces the consumer to focus more on
the full quality provided. Our model thus features a complementarity between the add-on quality and the
baseline quality.



                                                     18
of “irrelevant” attributes (e.g. Carpenter, Glazer and Nakamoto, 1994). For instance, in a
world where all hotels charge high prices for phone usage, it may be difficult for one hotel
to cut phone charges and make that advantage salient to consumers (as opposed to other
more important dimensions of hotel quality). On the other hand, being the unique hotel that
introduces a charge for pillows is a competitive disadvantage that is likely to draw consumers’
attention. Such trade-offs can be analysed in a setting with horizontal differentiation. We
leave this important topic to future work.
   So far we considered only the symmetric equilibrium in which the two firms share the
same cost functions. The next section considers the effects of changes to cost structures, and
in particular the case where firms have asymmetric costs.


4.2    Innovation as a Cost Shock

We now use our model to explore the implications of salience for product innovation. Suppose
a market is in the long run symmetric equilibrium of Proposition 2. We view innovation as
a change in product characteristics and market equilibrium triggered by a cost shock. We
distinguish industry-wide cost shocks, such as those caused by deregulation or changes input
prices, and firm-specific shocks such as those stemming from the development of a new
technology by an individual firm. This taxonomy allows us to separately consider the two
key forces driving salience: diminishing sensitivity and ordering. Industry-wide shocks in fact
work mainly through diminishing sensitivity because they alter the average value of different
attributes in the market. Firm-specific shocks instead work mostly through ordering: they
allow one firm’s product to stand out against those of its competitors. The analysis of firm
specific shocks allows us to describe the equilibrium in our model when firms have different
cost functions.
   Real world innovation episodes often combine firm-specific and industry-wide factors.
Initially only some firms discover new technologies or change their strategies in response to
common shocks, so that the initial phase is effectively firm-specific. Subsequently, the new
technologies or strategies spread to other firms, becoming industry-wide phenomena. One
could view our analysis as providing snapshots of short and long-run market adjustments to
shocks. We leave the modelling of industry dynamics under salience to future research.

                                              19
   In what follows, we restrict our attention to the case of quadratic costs, in which ck (qk ) =
       ck
Fk +    2
            · qk2 , for k = 1, 2. We begin our analysis by considering industry-wide shocks to an
industry in symmetric equilibrium.

Proposition 3 Suppose that the market is in the equilibrium described by Equation (14).
We then have:
i) A marginal increase (decrease) in the fixed cost F of all firms weakly increases (decreases)
equilibrium quality provision under salient thinking (δ < 1) while it leaves quality unaffected
under rationality (δ = 1).
ii) A marginal increase (decrease) in the marginal cost of producing quality c of all firms
strictly decreases (increases) equilibrium quality provision. Under salient thinking, the change
in quality is larger than under rationality (δ = 1) if and only if in the original equilibrium
quality is sufficiently over-provided.

   With rational consumers, changes in the fixed cost F do not affect quality provision. With
salient thinkers, they do. This follows from the fact that a symmetric shock to the general
level of costs shifts competition from quality to prices or vice-versa. A drastic increase in
F reduces, by diminishing sensitivity, the salience of price differences. This makes it very
attractive for firms to upgrade their quality. Conversely, a drastic reduction in F increases
the salience of price differences. This makes it very attractive for firms to cut their prices.
Somewhat paradoxically, a drop in costs translates into lower quality provision.
   As an example, the transportation costs involved in exporting German cars to the United
States (akin to a rise in F relative to the home market) may cause the car manufacturers
to compete on quality provision in the US market, more than in the domestic market, by
adding quality add-ons to their cars. Conversely, a reduction in the tariffs on textile imports
from China (akin to a drop in F ) may induce clothing manufacturers in Europe to intensify
price competition relative to the situation with higher tariffs.
   The effect of a drop in the marginal cost of producing quality c is more standard. As
in the rational case, this shock increases quality provision. However, salience modulates the
strength of this effect. The boost in quality provision is amplified at very high cost levels,
when there is over-provision of quality, while it is dampened in all other cases. This effect is

                                                 20
again due to diminishing sensitivity: by reducing the level of prices, reductions in c render
consumers more attentive to price differences, reducing firms’ incentive to increase quality.
       Consider next the effect of a firm-specific shock. Suppose that, starting from a symmetric
equilibrium, firm 1 acquires a cost advantage over its competitor. This enables firm 1 to
monopolize the market (see proofs in Appendix A). To analyze the new equilibrium, we
allow firm 1 to freely adjust its quality but keep the quality of firm 2 fixed.13 For brevity,
we report only the effects of reductions in the variable cost of providing quality.

Proposition 4 Suppose that, starting from the symmetric equilibrium of Equation (14), the
variable cost of firm 1 drops to c1 < c2 = c and firm 1 can optimally reset its quality and
price. There are two cases:
i) The cost shock is large, c1 < c/2. Then, firm 1 monopolizes the market by boosting both
its quality and its price.
ii) The cost shock is small, c1 > c/2. Then, there is a threshold Fb > 0 such that firm 1
boosts its quality and price if and only if F ≥ Fb. If F < Fb, firm 1 keeps its quality constant
at the competitor’s level δ/c, and monopolizes the market by slightly cutting its price.

       The size of the cost shock plays a critical role. If the variable cost reduction is drastic,
or if the fixed cost of quality is high (i.e. F ≥ Fb), firm 1 can win the market by boosting
quality provision. In this case, prices tend not to be salient, because average costs are
high, and therefore quality differences can be large. Thus, it is very beneficial for the low
marginal cost firm 1 to provide extra quality: by doing so, the firm draws the consumers’
attention to quality and raises their willingness to pay even for infra-marginal quality units.
The quality added by the innovating firm acts as a complement to its baseline quality,
greatly increasing the price that firm 1 can charge for its product. This logic implies that
large quality upgradings can alter market outcomes, changing the equilibrium from price- to
  13
     Forcing firm 2 to keep the initial quality is not a significant restriction. Having a dominated technology,
firm 2 is in fact certain of losing the market. As a consequence, it is weakly optimal for it not to alter its
quality provision. In general, in a game in which firm 2 can freely choose its quality in response to the
cost shock, there are several quality levels consistent with equilibrium. To make predictions one needs an
equilibrium refinement criterion. Assuming that firm 2 does not adjust to the cost shock is one possible
refinement criterion, based on the idea that firms face some inertia in adjusting their quality level, and so
they keep quality constant unless it is strictly beneficial for them to do otherwise. See Appendix D for a
more detailed characterization of asymmetric equilibria.


                                                      21
quality- salient. It further provides a testable prediction of the model, namely that quality
add-ons are prevalent particularly for higher quality (and more expensive) goods, and that
the level of add-ons provided should respond positively to increases to the fixed cost of
quality, and to reductions of the marginal cost of quality.
   Matters are different when the cost shock is small, c1 > c/2, and the fixed cost is low (i.e.,
F < Fb). Now, not only prices tend to be salient because of low average cost of quality, but
the small cost advantage also makes it very costly for firm 1 to engineer a drastic increase
in quality. This implies that quality upgrades make the associated price hikes salient, and
thus backfire. As a consequence, it is optimal for firm 1 to keep its quality constant at
the symmetric equilibrium level, and to capture the market by lowering its price below the
competitor’s. This outcome, which is puzzling in a rational model, looks natural from the
perspective of salience: in a price-salient equilibrium quality upgradings are neglected, and
firms exploit lower costs to cut prices.
   An important implication of this analysis is that price-salient equilibria are very stable,
particularly for low cost industries. To escape a commoditized market, an individual firm
must develop a drastic innovation that allows it to provide sufficiently higher quality than
its competitors, and at such reasonable prices that quality can become salient. Small cost
reducing innovations neither beat the “commodity magnet”nor lead to marginal quality
improvements. They just translate into lower prices.
   This result more generally illustrates the working of our model when costs are asymmetric.
The low cost firm wins the market, but whether it does so by setting higher quality or lower
price depends on the extent of its cost advantage. If it has a large cost advantage, the low cost
firm captures the market by setting a salient high quality. If the cost advantage is small, the
low cost firm captures the market by setting a salient low price. In Proposition 4, the strategy
of the losing firm 2 is held at the quality it would set in a symmetric equilibrium where both
firms have cost c2 (q). This is a plausible refinement to study the effect of an innovation shock,
but may be less appealing to study the equilibrium arising under permanently different cost
functions. In Appendix D, we describe asymmetric equilibria more generally, where the high
cost firm 2 is not constrained to the quality level given by (14). Although the results focus
on the case where F = 0, they closely mirror Proposition 4. The only difference is that when


                                               22
the cost advantage of firm 1 is low, equilibria may arise in which – instead of producing the
same quality – the low cost firm wins the market by providing less quality than the high
cost firm. This is a further departure from the rational benchmark: the low cost firm may
deliberately provide lower quality precisely to make its lower price salient to the consumer.



5     Applications

5.1    Southwest and Starbucks

In our previous analysis, we portrayed innovation as a shock to the costs of quality provision
of competing firms initially locked in a symmetric equilibrium. We distinguished between
market-wide and firm-specific shocks. We now suggest how our results might shed light on
two noteworthy innovations: the rise of low cost airlines and quality upgrades in the coffee
shop market.
    The rise of low cost airlines in the U.S. is directly linked to deregulation that started in
the late seventies. Deregulation enabled carriers to freely set routes and prices, but also freed
entry into the industry. Aside from the removal of price controls, these developments can
be conceptualized in our model as a major reduction in the costs F of operating an airline.
Proposition 3 then predicts that such a cost reduction should lead to prices and quality to
fall together. This seems consistent with the observed trends in the U.S. airline industry.
Prices have declined steadily since deregulation, and some aspects of the quality of airline
service have also declined.
    Our model explains this phenomenon as the outcome of a transition from a quality salient
to a price salient equilibrium. In the pre-deregulation era, high operating costs rendered small
differences in airfares non salient. As a consequence, the most effective way for airlines to
compete was to offer visible extra services to consumers. The market was in a quality salient
equilibrium, where high quality and high prices went hand in hand. Deregulation created
the opportunity for new entrants, such as Southwest and Ryan Air, to implement large, and
thus salient, price cuts. Traditional carriers, burdened with legacy costs, were unable to
respond. The salience of low prices characterizing the new regime placed the incumbents



                                               23
at a competitive disadvantage, forcing many of them into bankruptcy. Our model accounts
neither for the progressive restructuring of existing airlines nor for the entry of new low cost
carriers, but it predicts the key feature of the new long run equilibrium: a commoditized
airline market characterized by fierce price competition, low prices, and low quality.14
       A different phenomenon has occurred in the coffee shop market. In the 1970’s, the
low operating costs associated with selling drip coffee at neighbourhood coffee-shops and
fast food restaurants ensured that the market was commoditized: coffee sellers were locked
in a price-salient equilibrium, providing low quality coffee at low prices. In this initial
regime, innovations, such as free refills, effectively translated into price cuts instead of quality
increases. In the 1980’s, firms such as Starbucks and Pete’s Coffee & Tea figured out how to
deliver a much higher quality coffee at only a reasonable extra cost. This included serving
expresso drinks but also training baristas to ensure consistency of the product, and providing
a “cafe” experience through a comfortable in-shop environment. Starbucks thus invented
a way to drastically reduce the costs of producing quality. In line with Proposition 4,
Starbucks boosted the quality of its coffee as well as its prices, but quality increased more
than prices, making salient the quality of its product. By focusing consumers’ attention on
quality, Starbucks could charge higher prices. Starbucks’ well-documented growth trajectory,
while extreme, reflects the growth of the premium coffee market, which was successfully de-
commoditized. This example illustrates the important point that de-commoditization of a
market is not (only) a composition effect of demand, where an increase in quality attracts
a wealthier consumer base (although such effects are probably at work for goods that are
more expensive than coffee). Instead, de-commoditization works through a salient increase
in quality, shifting the attention of infra-marginal consumers from price to quality.
  14
     When considering the role of price controls, two points should be noted. First, in the pre-deregulation
era price controls merely specified a standard of “reasonableness” for prices. In principle, this rule did not
prevent airlines to engage in small scale price competition (potentially affecting the standard price level
itself). Of course, salience could be a reason why competition did not ignite a succession of “reasonable”
price cuts: being small, such price cuts would not be noticed by consumers. In this sense, price controls and
salience may be complementary forces.
   A second observation concerns the asymmetric response to deregulation in business class vs. coach. The
fact that a large price and quality adjustment occurred in coach but not business class is not easily explained
whithin a rational version of our model by the removal of price controls. Salience can instead explain why
the business class market may remain quality salient even after deregulation: being characterized by larger
fixed costs F of space, it is comparatively more likely to experience high quality and high prices.



                                                      24
5.2       Financial Innovation

We now show that our model can shed light on the working of financial innovation and in
the phenomenon of “reaching for yield.”Assume that a financial security i is characterized
by the expected return Ri it yields to investors (net of intermediation fees), and its risk
(variance) vi . The investor’s “rational” valuation of asset (Ri , vi ) is mean-variance, namely:


                                          ui (Ri , vi ) = Ri − vi .                                     (15)


       Under salient thinking, the investor overweights the more salient attribute, which can be
either risk or return. Suppose that the investor chooses between two securities i = 1, 2 and
the salience function is σ (·, ·). The following cases can then occur. If σ(R1 , R2 ) > σ(v1 , v2 ),
returns are salient and the investor values asset i at Ri − δ · vi . If σ(R1 , R2 ) < σ(v1 , v2 ), risk
is salient and the investor values asset i at δ · Ri − vi . Finally, if σ(R1 , R2 ) = σ(v1 , v2 ), risk
and return are equally salient and the investor’s valuation is rational.
       There are two financial intermediaries i = 1, 2, each producing an identical security
delivering a gross expected return R with risk v. This is the no-innovation benchmark,
in which both intermediaries produce an identical “standard” asset (perhaps because it is
prohibitively costly to innovate).
       In this setting, intermediaries compete by offering a net return Ri ≤ R to investors, who
must decide with which intermediary to invest. If Ri < R, the net return offered by firm i
entails a positive intermediation fee. If Ri = R, this fee is zero. Competition then works
as in Section 2, where quality and cost are fixed.15 Each intermediary offers a net of fee
return Ri , which is analogous to product quality, at the cost to the investor of bearing risk
v, which is analogous to price. As a consequence, the upside of the asset with the highest
ratio of return to risk Ri /vi is salient, causing that asset to be overvalued relative to its
competitor’s. Because firms are identical and returns are given exogenously, the following
equilibrium benchmark holds both in the rational case and with salient thinkers.

Lemma 4 With no innovation, firms pledge their net returns to the investor, R1 = R2 = R,
  15
    The only difference is that in the setting of Section 2, firms’ pricing strategies determine the cost for
consumers to buy the good, while here the firms’ pricing strategies determine the “quality” of the asset for
the investor (namely the investor’s return), while cost is exogenously given by the asset’s risk.

                                                     25
the investor is indifferent between the two firms, and firms make zero profits.

   As in standard Bertrand competition, the two firms selling the same asset make zero
profits, offering the totality of the return R to the investor. Under salient thinking, this
result is reinforced by the logic of Proposition 1: because the two assets have the same
ratio of return to risk R/v, as soon as one firm offers to the investor less than R, the firm’s
disadvantage becomes salient and the investor switches to the competing firm.
   Against this benchmark, we model financial innovation as the invention by one of the two
firms of a technology to create excess return at only a moderate extra risk. In particular, we
allow the innovating firm, say 1, to increase the return of its asset to:


                                              R + α,


where α is the new asset’s excess return. Excess return comes at the cost of increasing the
asset’s risk to:
                                                  c 2
                                             v+     ·α ,
                                                  2
where c captures the (low) marginal cost - in terms of added risk - of creating excess return
α. Firm 2 continues to produce the standard asset (R, v). The no-innovation benchmark
can be viewed as the extreme case where c is prohibitively high for both firms.
   Two questions then arise. Does this financial innovation allow firm 1 to capture the
market and make profits? What pins down excess return and risk taking in equilibrium?
When the investor is fully rational, the answers to these questions are straightforward. In
the spirit of Lemma 2, firm 1: i) captures the entire market by offering the investor a net
return of R + (c/2) · α2 (which compensates the investor for bearing the extra risk), and ii)
sets α to maximize its profit:
                                       max α − (c/2) · α2                                  (16)
                                         α


which implies α∗ = 1/c. The lower is the extra risk c, the greater is the excess return promised
by the new asset. Financial innovation enables firm 1 to manufacture an asset with higher
excess return and risk. This process increases social welfare by attracting demand and thus
earning profits for firm 1 (the investor is left indifferent).

                                                  26
       In the case of salient thinking, the critical question is whether, compared to the standard
security, the new security is salient in terms of return or risk, since salience affects the
incentive of firm 1 to create a particular return vs. risk profile. Additionally, in this case the
investor’s risk appetite depends endogenously, through salience, on the characteristics of the
new asset. The new equilibrium is as follows.

Proposition 5 The innovating firm 1 captures the market and makes positive profits. The
optimal excess return satisfies:
                                            
                                                   1
                                        ∗
                                            
                                                  δ·c
                                                            f or R < δ · v
                                      α =                                    .                             (17)
                                                v       1
                                            
                                                R
                                                    ·   c
                                                            f or R ≥ δ · v



Relative to the rational benchmark, under salient thinking there is excessive risk taking if
R < v and too little risk taking if R > v.

       A financial innovation creating a higher return is particularly successful when investors
focus on the extra return and neglect the risk associated with the new securities. To make
this possible, firm 1 must keep the extra risk of the new asset sufficiently low. By doing
so, the firm can charge the investor for the excess return created, which in turn generates
high profits, while still maintaining higher risk non-salient. Precisely for this reason, the
new asset may encourage excess risk taking by the investor, who underweights the risks he
is effectively taking.
       Proposition 5 illustrates the conditions under which such excess risk taking occurs. Fi-
nancial innovation generates excessive risk taking when the net return R of the standard
asset is sufficiently low. By diminishing sensitivity, a low net return causes any excess re-
turn to be very salient. The investor then underweights the extra risk of the new asset and
pursues excessive risk taking. This reasoning may help explain why - for a given level of risk
- investors “reach for yield” in low interest rate environments: the idea is that at low levels
of interest rates any excess return draws investors’ attention. An excess return of, say, 0.5%
is much more salient when the baseline return is 1% than when the baseline return is 6%.16
  16
       If one views the baseline return R as a net return generated after defraying the intermediary’s operating


                                                            27
    Proposition 5 also shows that financial innovations geared at creating excess returns are
much less successful when net returns are already high. In this case, the investor is much
less sensitive to a given increase in return, and the innovating firm must keep the risks of
the new asset very low, lest the investors focus on them. In this case, there is too little risk
taking, in the sense that the intermediary selects an excess return in (17) below its rational
counterpart in (16). Although for simplicity we have not allowed for this possibility, here
the intermediary may find it profitable to reduce excess returns and risks relative to the
standard asset.



6      Conclusion
We have shown how salience changes some of the basic predictions of a standard model of
competition with vertical product differentiation. Yet the paper has only begun to explore
the consequences of salience for market competition. Rather than sumarizing our results, in
conclusion we mention some issues we have not addressed, but which may be interesting to
investigate. These include dynamics of competition, welfare, horizontal product differentia-
tion, and advertising. We have not solved any of these problems, so the discussion here is
strictly conjectural.
    The dynamics of entry and imitation with salience may be very different depending on
whether the innovation ultimately leads to quality-salient or price-salient long run equilib-
rium. If an innovator finds a way to escape the commodity magnet and produce a higher
quality at a higher price, the pace at which this change is implemented, and imitated, might
be relatively slow. The reason is that firms need to keep quality rather than price salient, and
keep consumers from getting focused on price increases. This slows down innovation. As an
extreme example, if consumers are used to free education, as they are in Europe, charging
for education might be extremely difficult even with significant quality improvements be-
costs, the same intuition may explain why banks take more risk when their operating costs are higher. If
intermediaries react to higher operating costs (i.e. a lower R) by cutting the net return paid to investors (as
the rational model would predict), consumers would find this an unattractive deal, reducing their demand,
and the intermediary’s profit. If instead the intermediary takes more risk, investors focus on its excess return.
Because the investors underweight the asset’s risk, the intermediary can increase fees. These fees allow the
intermediary not only to cover its higher operating costs, but also generate profits.



                                                       28
cause the focus will be entirely on prices. (Of course, once prices are high enough, the pace
of innovation and price increases will accelerate.) In contrast, precisely because consumers
are focused on prices and neglect quality, innovation that reduces price and quality will be
adopted extremely fast. The slide to the commodity magnet will be faster than in a rational
model.
   We have shown that – under the natural assumption that consumer welfare is measured
by the undistorted utility – quality provision is generally inefficient in a duopoly, as a con-
sequence of competition for attention between the two firms. An assessment of the welfare
consequences of competition when consumers are salient thinkers would require a deeper
understanding of the model with heterogeneous consumers, and in particular of monopoly
and free entry.
   Our approach might also be used to study horizontal differentiation, and to investigate the
marketing dictum of “differentiate in any way you can” (Levitt 1983). If a firm differentiates
its product from competitors, then differences along that attribute become salient, and will
attract consumers’ attention. In fact, firms might differentiate their products precisely to
segment the market between consumers attracted to different attributes, and thus earn higher
profits. This approach might provide a psychological foundation for the shrouded attributes
model of Gabaix and Laibson (2006). It might also shed light on political competition,
and reverse the median voter result in a plausible way. It would suggest that politicians
might perhaps converge to the median voter viewpoint on some positions, but also seek to
differentiate their views on dimensions that voters might find salient (and attractive). The
two parties in the United States might converge on their views on Social Security, for example,
making sure that voters do not pay attention to that issue, but then seek to differentiate on
the issues they choose, such as immigration or gay marriage.
   Finally, salience may have significant implications for how we think about advertising,
which deals precisely with drawing consumer attention to products and their attributes.
Economists distinguish two broad approaches to advertising: informative and persuasive.
The former focuses on provision of hard information about the product; the latter deals with
its more emotional appeal. Salience suggests that in fact the two approaches are intimately
related, and usually integrated: a key purpose of advertising is to inform about and thus


                                              29
draw attention to the attributes of the product that the seller wants the consumer to think
about, but not others. Advertising of attributes is simultaneously informative (sometimes
about prices, sometimes about quality, rarely both) and persuasive in that the salience of
the attributes being advertised is enhanced. The purpose of advertising is precisely to let
some desirable attributes of the product stand out for the potential customers.
   In all these situations, firms compete to attract attention to the attributes they want
consumers to attend to, and to distract attention away from the attributes that are less
attractive.


References:

Anderson, Simon and Andre de Palma. 1992. “Multiproduct Firms: A Nested Logit Ap-
proach”, Journal of Industrial Economics, 40 (3): 261 – 276.

Azar, Ofer. 2008. “The Effect of Relative Thinking on Firm Strategy and Market Out-
comes: A Location Differentiation Model with Endogenous Transportation Costs”, Journal
of Economic Psychology, 29 (5): 684 – 697.

Barber, Brad and Terrance Odean. 2008. “All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and
News on the Buying Behavior of Individual and Institutional Investors”, Review of Financial
Studies, 21 (2): 785 – 818.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. 2012a. “Salience Theory of Choice
under Risk”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (3): 1243 – 1285.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. 2012b. “Salience and Consumer
Choice”, NBER working paper w17947.

Bordalo, Pedro, Nicola Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. 2013. “Salience and Asset Prices”,
American Economic Review, Papers & Proceedings , Forthcoming.

Carpenter, Gregory, Rashi Glazer and Kent Nakamoto. 1994. “Meaningful Brands from
Meaningless Differentiation: The dependence on irrelevant attributes”, Journal of Marketing
Research, 31 (3): 339 – 350.

Cunningham, Tom. 2012. “Comparisons and Choice”, Mimeo IIES Stockholm.

                                             30
DellaVigna, Stefano and Joshua Pollet. 2009. “Investor Inattention and Friday Earnings
Announcements”, Journal of Finance, 64 (2): 709 – 749.

Dahremöller, Carsten, and Markus Fels. 2013. “Product Lines, Product Design and Limited
Attention”, SSRN working paper 1993128.

Ellison, Glenn. 2006. “Bounded Rationality in Industrial Organization” in Blundell, Newey
and Persson (eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications,
Ninth World Congress, Cambridge University Press.

Ellison, Glenn and Sara Ellison. 2009. “Search, Obfuscation, and Price Elasticities on the
Internet”, Econometrica, 77 (2): 427 – 452.

Gabaix, Xavier. 2012. “A Sparsity-Based Model of Bounded Rationality, Applied to Basic
Consumer and Equilibrium Theory”, Mimeo New York University.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson. 2006. “Shrouded Attributes, Consumer Myopia, and
Information Suppression in Competitive Markets”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121 (2):
505 – 540.

Hefti, Andreas. 2012. “Attention, Competition and Obfuscation”, University of Zurich
Department of Economics Working Paper 28.

Koszegi, Botond and Adam Szeidl. 2013. “A Model of Focusing in Economic Choice”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (1): 53 – 104.

Levitt, Theodore. 1983. The Marketing Imagination. New York : The Free Press.

Matějka, Filip and Alisdair McKay. 2012. “Simple Market Equilibria with Rationally Inat-
tentive Consumers”. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 102 (3): 24 – 29.

Mauborgne, Renée and W. Chan Kim. 2005. Blue Ocean Strategy: How to Create Uncon-
tested Market Space and Make Competition Irrelevant. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business
School Press.

Persson, Petra. 2012. “Attention Manipulation and Information Overload”, SSRN working
paper 2102155.

Rangan, V. Kasturi and George Bowman. 1992. “Beating the Commodity Magnet”, Indus-
trial Marketing Management, 21 (3): 215 – 224.

                                              31
Shaked, Avner and John Sutton. 1982. “Relaxing Price Competition Through Product
Differentiation”, Review of Economic Studies, 49 (1): 3 – 13.

Spiegler, Ran and Kfir Eliaz, 2011a. “On the Strategic Use of Attention Grabbers”, Theo-
retical Economics 6 (1): 127 – 155.

Spiegler, Ran and Kfir Eliaz, 2011b. “Consideration Sets and Competitive Marketing”,
Review of Economic Studies, 78 (1): 235 – 262.

Spiegler, Ran and Michele Piccione. 2012. “Price Competition under Limited Comparabil-
ity”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127 (1): 97 – 135.

Spiegler, Ran. 2011. Bounded Rationality and Industrial Organization. Oxford University
Press.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology
of Choice”, Science, 211 (4481): 453 – 458.




                                              32
A         Proofs
Lemma 1 (price competition under rationality).                         When δ = 1 there are no salience
distortions and utility is given by Equation (1). We also assume that firms do not price
below cost (as that might imply negative profits)17 , so we restrict pk ≥ ck for k = 1, 2.
       If q1 − c1 > q2 − c2 then firm 1 sets price p1 = c2 + (q1 − q2 ) and firm 2 sets price p2 = c2 .
Firm 2 has no incentive to deviate to another price, since it cannot satisfy the participation
constraint while making non-negative profits, (and ). Firm 1 has no incentive to deviate
from p1 , since it cannot increase price without violating the participation constraint, and it
cannot decrease price without reducing profits. If q1 − c1 < q2 − c2 , the argument carries
through switching firms 1 and 2. Finally, if q1 − c1 = q2 − c2 , then both firms price at cost
and share the market. We assume that having market share has some value to the firm,
so that each firm strictly prefers to share the market while making zero profits to having
zero market share. In this case, neither firm has an incentive to deviate: increasing price
would violate the participation constraint, decreasing the price would imply making negative
profits.


Proposition 1 (price competition under salient thinking).                            When δ < 1, utility is
given by Equation (2), where salience determines the relative weight of quality and price.
We proceed under assumption A.1. As we show below, this assumption further implies that,
in equilibrium, the good that wins the price competition sets the price so that its relative
advantage is salient (i.e. the salience constraint weakly binds).
       If q1 /c1 > q2 /c2 , then assumption A.1 implies that firm 1 gains the market by set-
ting p1 sufficiently close to c1 . This ensures that quality is salient for both goods, and
as a consequence consumers choose good 1. Since firm 2 loses the market, it sets price
at p2 = c2 . Firm 1 then hikes up price subject to the constraint that quality is salient
  17
     Formally, if firm k loses the market in equilibrium, setting pk = ck is a weakly dominant strategy for
firm k. If q1 − c1 > q2 − c2 then firm 1 sets price p1 = p2 + (q1 − q2 ) and firm 2 sets price p2 in the range
p2 ∈ [c1 − (q1 − q2 ), c2 ]. In equilibrium, p2 > c2 cannot obtain since by reducing its price firm 2 could then
profitably capture the market. Moreover, p2 < c1 − (q1 − q2 ) can also not obtain in equilibrium since it would
imply that both firms price below cost, making it beneficial for either firm to raise prices. Within the range
[c1 − (q1 − q2 ), c2 ], setting p2 = c2 is weakly dominant since a tremble play by firm 1 results in zero, instead
of negative, profits.


                                                       33
and to the participation constraint (conditional on quality being salient), namely p1 =
min c2 · q1 /q2 , c2 + 1δ (q1 − q2 ) , see constraints (4,5). Firm 1 has no incentive to devi-
   

ate from this price. To see why, suppose the salience constraint is binding, c2 · q1 /q2 <
c2 + 1δ (q1 − q2 ). Then raising the price p1 above the salience constraint makes price salient,
and the participation constraint becomes p1 < c2 + δ(q1 − q2 ). However, A.1 requires
                                                       q1        q2
c2 + δ(q1 − q2 ) < c1 , which together with            c1
                                                            >    c2
                                                                      implies that the participation constraint
is violated. By increasing price to the point where it becomes salient, firm 1 shifts the con-
sumer’s attention to its downside, and lowers the consumer’s valuation to the point where
it loses the market. Suppose instead that the participation constraint is binding. Then, by
construction, any deviation in price leads to a decrease in profits.18
       When q2 /c2 > q1 /c1 , and as a result firm 1 sets price p1 = c1 and firm 2 sets price
p2 = min {c1 · q2 /q1 , c1 + δ(q2 − q1 )}, see constraints (6,7). Now price is salient, because firm
2 has lower price, lower quality but higher quality price ratio than firm 1. To see why this
is an equilibrium, an argument similar to the above carries through. For instance, suppose
that salience is binding for firm 2, namely, c1 · q2 /q1 < c1 + δ(q2 − q1 ). Then reducing p2
decreases profits, while increasing p2 takes firm 2 into a quality salient equilibrium, where
the participation constraint reads p2 ≤ c1 + 1δ (q2 − q1 ). Because the consumer now overvalues
the quality differences across goods, his relative valuation of good 2 decreases drastically.
Assumption A.1 then ensures the participation constraint is violated. Firm 1 has no incentive
to change price, since increasing the price does not win the market, and decreasing the price
might lead to negative profits if it does sell the good (notice the asymmetry in the firms’
best responses, which comes from the fact that firm 2 can explore asymmetries in salience
ranking when it is dominated, but firm 1 cannot).


Lemma 2 (quality competition under rationality).
  18
     Firm 2 might hike up its price to the point where the price of good 1 is salient. That would require
setting p2 > p1 , making good 2 a dominated good. When one good dominates the other, their salience
rankings may be different, potentially allowing good 2 to be quality salient while good 1 is price salient. In
fact, diminishing sensitivity implies that: i) the salience of quality is larger for the lower quality firm 2 than
for firm 1, and ii) as firm 2 raises p2 over p1 , price salience increases for firm 1 faster than for firm 2. So there
is a range of prices where good 2 may be quality salient while the dominating good 1 is price salient, in which
case good 2 is overvalued relative to good 1. This feature of the model occurs because salience distortions
depend only on salience ranking. As we show in BGS (2012b), under continuous salience weighting valuation
is monotonic. To avoid this problem, we restrict optimisation in the price competition stage to p2 ≤ p1 .

                                                            34
    We are interested in pure strategy, sub-game perfect Nash equilibria. Consider first the
case where firms have the same cost structure. In the price competition stage, the firm that
generates the highest surplus wins the market or shares it. As a consequence, in the first
stage of the game each firm i = k, −k sets quality q ∗ to maximize its own surplus qi − ci (qi ).
Since firms are identical, both set the same quality q ∗ that satisfies c01 (q ∗ ) = c02 (q ∗ ) = 1.
    Suppose now firm 1 has lower costs than firm 2. In the price competition stage, firm 1
wins the market, sets price p1 = c2 (q2 )+(q1 −q2 ) and generates profits c2 (q2 )−c1 (q1 )+(q1 −q2 ).
Consider now the choice of quality. As explained in footnote 10, we assume that the firm that
loses the market chooses a surplus maximizing quality (this corresponds to a trembling hand
perfect equilibrium). Profits are maximised when quality q1∗ satisfies c01 (q1∗ ) = v10 (q1∗ ) = 1. In
particular, if firm 1 has the same marginal cost function but a lower fixed cost than firm 2,
then in the first stage both firms set quality q ∗ satisfying v10 (q ∗ ) = v20 (q ∗ ) = 1. In this case,
firm 1 sets price p1 = F2 − F1 . If firm 1 has lower marginal costs, then it commits to a higher
quality, q1∗ > q2∗ since v10 (q1∗ ) = v20 (q2∗ ) = 1 but v10 (q) ≤ v20 (q).


Lemma 3 (best response under salient thinking).                               Consider two firms, k and −k
with cost functions ck (·), c−k (·). Denote firm −k’s average costs by A−k = c−k (q−k )/q−k .
In deriving firm k’s best response on quality, we consider prices p∗k (qk , q−k ) and p∗−k (qk , q−k )
to be set competitively at the price competition stage as a function of qualities qk∗ , q−k
                                                                                         ∗
                                                                                            .
When quality is salient ex post (at the price competition stage), firm k’s best response
features qk∗ ≥ q−k
                ∗
                   and pk = c−k (q−k ) + min A−k , 1δ (qk − q−k ). To see this, note that when
                                            

         1
A−k <    δ
             the price condition becomes the (binding) salience constraint, pk /qk = A−k , while
              1
for A−k >     δ
                  it becomes the (binding) participation constraint conditional on quality being
salient. In particular, the price condition above ensures that firm k provides a weakly higher
quality to price ratio than firm −k.
    In contrast, when price is salient ex post, firm k’s best response features qk∗ ≤ q−k
                                                                                       ∗
                                                                                          and
pk = c−k (q−k ) + max {A−k , δ} (qk − q−k ). Again, this ensures firm k has a weakly higher
quality to price ratio than firm −k.
    We now consider firm k’s best response case by case: if A−k ∈ δ, 1δ , firm k sets quality
                                                                  

c0k (qk∗ ) = A−k . Since costs are convex, the marginal cost c0k (q) is increasing in quality q.

                                                        35
Thus, if c0k (q−k
               ∗
                  ) < A−k = c0k (qk∗ ) it follows that qk∗ > q−k
                                                              ∗
                                                                 and quality is salient. Similarly, if
      ∗
c0k (q−k                                             ∗
         ) > A−k = c0k (qk∗ ) it follows that qk∗ < q−k and price is salient.
                                                    ∗
    If A−k > 1/δ, two possibilities arise. If c0k (q−k ) > A−k then firm k sets quality so that
c0k (qk∗ ) = A−k leading to a price salient outcome, in which qk∗ < q−k
                                                                     ∗
                                                                        . If instead c0k (q−k
                                                                                           ∗
                                                                                              ) < A−k ,
then firm k maximizes profits by setting quality such that c0k (qk∗ ) = 1/δ, as long as quality is
salient and in particular qk∗ > q−k
                                 ∗        ∗
                                    . As q−k increases, firm k can no longer maintain a salient
advantage, either by increasing quality or by cutting quality. Therefore, its best response is
to set qk∗ = q−k
              ∗
                 .
    If A−k < δ, again two possibilities arise. If c0k (q−k
                                                        ∗
                                                           ) < A−k then firm k sets quality
so that c0k (qk∗ ) = A−k leading to a quality salient outcome, in which qk∗ > q−k
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                  . If instead
c0k (q−k
      ∗
         ) < A−k , then firm k maximizes profits by setting quality such that c0k (qk∗ ) = δ, as
long as price is salient and in particular qk∗ < q−k
                                                  ∗        ∗
                                                     . As q−k decreases, firm k can no longer
maintain a salient advantage and its best response is to set qk∗ = q−k
                                                                    ∗
                                                                       .


Proposition 2 (symmetric equilibrium under salient thinking).
    We first show that any pure strategy subgame perfect equilibrium is symmetric. In equi-
librium consumers must be indifferent between the two products and firms share the market
(this is because, as is standard, we assume that each firm prefers to share the market while
making zero profits to being driven out of the market). In particular, no firm’s advantage can
be salient. As a consequence, the two following conditions must hold: q1 /c1 (q1 ) = q2 /c2 (q2 )
and q1 − c1 (q1 ) = q2 − c2 (q2 ). Together, these conditions imply q1 = q2 and necessarily
c(q1 ) = c(q2 ).
    We now show that in (symmetric) equilibrium, both firms provide equilibrium quality
q S given in equation (13). In fact, if firms provide any other quality, Lemma 3 shows that
it is optimal to deviate. We begin by examining firm 1’s incentives to deviate from this
configuration. Consider the case where firm 2’s average cost c(q S )/q S lie in the interval
[δ, 1/δ]. This translates into the restriction that F ∈ [δq − v(q), q/δ − v(q)]. Then, according
to Lemma 3, firm 1’s best response is to set quality q ∗ such that c0 (q ∗ ) = c(q̂)/q̂ which
precisely implies q ∗ = q̂ (recall that, because costs are convex, the average-cost-minimizing
quality satisfies c0 (q̂) = c(q̂)/q̂).

                                                   36
   Consider now the case where c(q S )/q S > 1/δ, or equivalently F > q/δ − v(q). Now firm
1’s best response is to set c0 (q ∗ ) = 1δ , provided q ∗ ≥ q S . But in fact, q ∗ and q S satisfy the
same condition, c0 (q ∗ ) = c0 (q S ) = c0 (q) = 1/δ, and therefore the best response coincides again
with the equilibrium quality q. Finally, when c(q S )/q S < δ or equivalently F < δq − v(q),
firm 1’s best response is to set c0 (q ∗ ) = δ, provided q ∗ ≤ q S . An analogous argument then
shows that q ∗ = q, concluding the argument that this configuration is an equilibrium.




Corollary 1 (symmetric equilibrium for quadratic costs). Consider quadratic costs,
where v(q) = 2c q 2 . Then c0 (q) = c · q so that q =    1
                                                         δc
                                                            ,   and q = δc . Moreover, F =    1
                                                                                             2δ 2 c
                                                                                                      and
      2                                                              p
F = δ2c . Finally, q̂ satisfies c0 (q̂) = c(q̂)/q̂, which yields q̂ = 2F/c.


Proposition 3 (industry wide cost shocks).                      Under the symmetric equilibrium of
Equation (14), consider an increase in the fixed cost of all firms, from F0 to F1 > F0 . If the
interval [F0 , F1 ] has a non-empty overlap with the interval [F , F ], then equilibrium quality
                                   p                p
strictly increases from max{δ/c, 2F0 /c} to min{ 2F1 /c, 1/(δc)}. Otherwise, equilibrium
quality provision does not change, staying at δ/c if F1 < F or at 1/(δc) if F0 > F .
   Note that, when δ < 1, the equilibrium quality can be written as 1c · A(c, F ), where
                      √
A(c, F ) = max{δ, min{ 2F c, 1/δ}}. As a consequence, following an increase in the marginal
cost of producing quality for all firms, quality provision strictly decreases. Consider a
marginal increase in c. When is the change in quality provision in reaction to the cost
shock larger than in the rational case? When δ = 1, quality provision equals 1/c. Therefore,
the change in quality provision increases when δ < 1 if and only if A(c, F ) > 1, namely when
                                                        1
quality is over provided to begin with (i.e. if F >     2c
                                                           ).


Proposition 4 (firm specific cost shocks).              Starting from the symmetric equilibrium
of Equation (14), let the marginal cost of firm 1 drop to c1 < c2 = c. This implies that, at
the symmetric quality level, firm 1’s marginal costs are below firm 2’s average costs. From
Lemma 3 we know that firm 1 responds to the cost shock by weakly increasing quality. We



                                                 37
first compute firm 1’s best response from the equilibrium quality provision, and then show
that firm 2 has no incentive to deviate.
                                                            δ2
   When the fixed costs are sufficiently high, F >          2c
                                                               ,   the average costs of firm 2 satisfy
c(q S )/q S > δ. It then follows from Lemma 3 that firm 1’s best response is to engineer a
salient quality increase. When c(q S )/q S < 1/δ, firm 1 sets q1∗ = q S ·      c
                                                                              c1
                                                                                   > q S . Firm 2 has no
incentive to deviate because it is already minimizing average cost, so it cannot engineer a
quality innovation that gives it a salient advantage which, together with the fact that it has
higher costs, precludes any profitable deviation. When the average costs of firm 2 exceed 1/δ,
firm 1 boosts quality to 1/δc1 , which is above firm 2’s quality provision of 1/δc. Firm 2 again
has no incentive to deviate, since increasing quality (thereby diminishing average costs below
that of its competitor, if possible) is never profitable: if firm 2 engineers a salient quality
advantage then it decreases perceived surplus, while if it creates a salient price advantage it
cannot price above cost.
                                           δ2
   Consider now the case where F <         2c
                                              .   While firm 2 sets q S = δ/c, firm 1’s best response
                   S     S
                                                                        δ 2 c1
is to set q1∗ = c(q c)/q                ∗                                        1
                                              S
                                                                                   
                     1
                           , provided q 1 > q   . This requires  F  >    c   c
                                                                               − 2
                                                                                     . Thus, if firm 1’s
cost advantage is sufficiently large, namely c1 < c/2, then firm 1 strictly increases quality
provision. If instead firm 1’s cost advantage is small, c1 > c/2, then for low enough levels
of the fixed cost F , it is optimal for firm 1 to keep quality provision at the equilibrium level
prior to the shock, q1∗ = δ/c, and translate its cost advantage into profits by setting price
p1 = c(δ/c). Finally, firm 2 has no incentive to deviate because decreasing quality (thereby
diminishing average costs) also decreases perceived surplus.


Lemma 4 (returns competition under rationality).                        This setting is similar to the
price competition game of Lemma 1. While the costs facing investors are fixed at v (the
security’s risk), intermediaries compete in terms of the return they provide investors. Since
intermediaries provide identical securities, this competition game only admits symmetric
equilibria. In particular, both firms offer the maximum return to investors, Ri − F = R − F ,
and share the market. No intermediary has an incentive to deviate from this configuration:
increasing the returns offered to investors would lead to negative profits, while decreasing
the returns would lead to the loss of the market share.

                                                  38
Proposition 5 (financial innovation under salient thinking). Suppose firm 2 creates
a security of fixed total return and cost, (R − F, −v). Firm 1 develops a financial innovation
and can create a family of securities (R + α − F, −v − 2c · α2 ), indexed by α, the increase in
returns relative to the competition. The firms play a two stage game: in the first stage firm 1
chooses α, and in the second stage both firms choose how big a return to pledge to investors.
Firm 1 pledges return Rα − F where Rα ∈ [R, R + α] so that in the return competition stage
it sells security (Rα − F, −v − 2c · α2 ) and maximizes profits R + α − Rα .
    To determine the optimal choice of α, we begin by noticing that, for α sufficiently small,
the marginal cost of quality for firm 1 is lower than its average cost. This is because returns
increase linearly in α, while risk increases quadratically. As a result, firm 1 finds it optimal
to provide a salient increase in returns. The pledged returns Rα must satisfy both the
constraint that returns are salient, and the participation constraint. The salience constraint
                            v+ 2c α2
reads Rα − F > (R − F ) ·     v
                                       (recall that firm 1 provides higher returns at a higher risk),
while the valuation constraint reads Rα > R + δ 2c α2 . The valuation constraint is binding
when R > F + δv. In this case, firm 1 must provide at least Rα = R + (R − F ) δc2 α2 . To
                                                     1
maximize profits R + α − Rα , firm 1 sets α =        δc
                                                        .
    The salience constraint is binding when R ≥ F + δv. In this case, firm 1 must provide at
least Rα = F + (R − F ) 1 + 2vc α2 . To maximize profits R + α − Rα , firm 1 sets α = R−F
                                                                                       1
                                                                                          · 1c .
                                   




B      Heterogeneity in Salience
We now introduce consumer heterogeneity in individual perceptions of salience. Formally,
for given qualities q1 ≥ q2 , we assume that the salience of quality is a stochastic function
σ(qk , q |∆), where ∆ is a random shock that varies across consumers. This captures the
idea that – holding the quality of different goods constant – some consumers may focus on
quality differences more than others, due for instance to their habits.
    Introducing heterogeneity generates “smooth” demand functions, and allows both firms
to earn some profits in equilibrium. These features render the model more suitable to
systematic empirical analysis. Heterogeneous salience also allows us for smoothen the effect


                                                   39
of product attributes on the overall salience ranking, providing a way to assess the robustness
of our findings to the case in which the salience weighting is continuous (rather than rank-
based). An alternative approach would be to model consumer heterogeneity as affecting
utility. This formulation yields similar results but the analysis becomes less tractable.
   As in Section 2, we assume that the objective utility provided by goods 1 and 2 is
sufficiently similar and non-salient dimensions are sufficiently discounted (δ is sufficiently
low) that each consumer chooses the good whose advantage he perceives to be more salient.
That is, a consumer receiving a perceptual shock ∆ inducing him to view quality as salient
chooses the high quality good 1, while a consumer receiving a perceptual shock ∆ inducing
him to view price as salient chooses the low quality good 2. Formally, denoting by (p∗1 , p∗2 )
equilibrium prices, we assume that δ is sufficiently small that q1 − q2 > δ(p∗1 − p∗2 ) and
δ(q1 − q2 ) < p∗1 − p∗2 . As we will see, optimal prices (p∗1 , p∗2 ) are independent of δ, so it is
always possible to find values of δ such that the above conditions hold at equilibrium.
   To attain tractability, we model the shock ∆ as affecting salience through the consumer’s
focus on the ratio q1 /q2 among the quality of the goods. Technically, this ensures that - as
in our main analysis - the two goods have the same salience ranking (i.e., quality or price
is salient for both good). In particular, we assume that the perceptual shock transforms
                        q1 /q2 ·(2+∆)+∆
the ratio q1 /q2 into    2−∆(q1 /q2 +1)
                                          ,   where ∆ = 1 − 2 and 1 , 2 are iid from a Gumbel
distribution with scale β > 0 and location µ = 0. As a result of this transformation, the
salience of quality for goods 1 and 2 depends on ∆. It is easy to show that quality is salient
for good 1 when
                                         q1                  p1
                                                 + ∆ >
                                    (q1 + q2 )/2        (p1 + p2 )/2
while quality is salient for good 2 when

                                q 1 + q2          2q2           p1 + p2
                                         ·                    >
                                   2q2     2q2 − ∆(q1 + q2 )     2p2

(Taking ∆ = 0 in either of the above equations yields condition (3)). By construction, we
find that quality is salient for each good if and only if:

                                                       (rp − rq )
                                        ∆ ≥ 2 ·                    .
                                                   (rp + 1)(rq + 1)

                                                     40
where we denote, for simplicity, rq = q1 /q2 and rp = p1 /p2 .
       The assumed structure for stochastic disturbances to salience yields a simple equation for
quality. Because the shock ∆ is distributed according to a logistic function, the underlying
demand sturcture is akin to a simple modification of the conventional multinomial logit
model:19

Lemma 5 Firms i = 1, 2 face demand Di (p1 , p2 ) given by

                                        1                                             1
                        D1 =          1
                                        ·K·[rp −rq ]
                                                       ,         D2 =            − β1 ·K·[rp −rq ]
                                                                                                           (18)
                               1+e    β                                  1+e

where K = 2/[(rq + 1)(rp + 1)].

       Proofs are collected in Appendix B.1. This demand structure has some very intutive
properties. First, good 1 has a larger market share than good 2 if and only if quality
is salient, namely if rq > rp , which is equivalent to the same condition q1 /p1 > q2 /p2 of
Section 2. The scale parameter 1/β measures how sensitive demand is to the difference ∆r
between the salience of quality and price: for large 1/β, demand is extremely sensitive to
any deviations from equal salience, thus implying that providing a higher quality to price
ratio is critical to attracting a large share of consumers. For low 1/β consumers effectively
choose randomly between the two options.
       Firms i = 1, 2 sets price pi to maximize profits πi = Di · (pi − ci ). We focus on pure
strategy equilibria. We prove:

Proposition 6 In equilibrium, firms sets prices p1 , p2 satisfying

                                            p 1 − c1   p2 − c2 −K∆r
                                                     =        e                                            (19)
                                                p1        p2
  19
    Consider alternatively the case where noise enters through independent shocks to the perception of (or
tastes for) qualities, ui = qi + i − pi for i = 1, 2. Here the i are taken (independently) from Gumbel
distributions. Then good 1 is chosen iff q1 + 1 > q2 + 2 and qq21 +
                                                                    +1
                                                                       2
                                                                         > pp12 , in other words, if and only if
                                                                                              
                                                                     p1              p1   q1
                          1 − 2 > q2 − q1 ,              1 − 2 ·    > q2 ·          −
                                                                     p2              p2   q2

If either of these conditions fail, then good 2 is chosen. Good 2 has an advantage in this setting because its
price is always perceived (correctly) to be lower, while the quality ranking may be affected by noise. Because
there are two conditions, in this model it is difficult to compute the probability that 1 gets chosen.

                                                           41
As a result, firm i with the lowest average cost: i) sets the highest markup pi /ci > p−i /c−i ,
ii) captures the highest market share Di > D−i , and iii) makes the highest profit πi > π−i .

       Adding heterogeneity in consumers’ salience rankings preserves the key result of our basic
model, namely that under salient thinking quality cost ratios are critical to determine the
outcome of price competition.
       Consider now the implications of Proposition 6 for the symmetric case where both firms
produce the same quality q1 = q2 = q at identical costs, c1 = c2 = c. Condition (19) then
implies that firms set equal prices p1 = p2 = p. Inserting this condition into the first order
conditions, we find
                                                         1/β
                                            p=c·                                                  (20)
                                                       1/β − 4
When consumers are sufficiently sensitive to salient advantages (namely 1/β > 4), there
exists a symmetric equilibrium with prices above costs.20            When consumers are infinitely
sensitive to differences in quality to price ratios, namely β → 0, equilibrium prices fall to
cost and the model boils down to the standard Bertrand competition case.
       We can now study the exogenous quality case when firms have identical cost of quality
structures, c1 (q) = c2 (q) = c(q). We find:

Proposition 7 The unique pure strategy subgame perfect equilibrium with identical firms is
symmetric. Firms provide quality q ∗ satisfying

                                                       1   c(q ∗ )
                                        c0 (q ∗ ) =       · ∗                                     (21)
                                                      1−β   q




       Propositions 6 and 7 extend essentially all our results for discrete salience in the symmet-
ric case. In particular, as β approaches zero and consumers are infinitely attuned to salience
ranking, expression (21) states that firms choose quality that minimizes average cost.
  20
   The fact that prices are above costs mirrors Anderson and de Palma (1992)’s description of imperfect
competition under logit demand.




                                                      42
B.1        Proofs

Lemma 5 (Demand under salience heterogeneity).                                                The probability that good 1 is
chosen is
                                                                                                                  
                                                   q1                  p1
                        P r(u1 > u2 ) = P r                + ∆ >
                                              (q1 + q2 )/2        (p1 + p2 )/2
                                      = P r (∆ > K · [rp − rq ])                                                             (22)

                p1            q1                       2
where rp =      p2
                   ,   rq =   q2
                                   and K =       (rp +1)(rq +1)
                                                                .   To compute this expression, we first integrate
over 2 keeping 1 fixed, and then integrate over all 1 . The first integration is written in
                                                                                                                  −x
terms of the CDF of the Gumbell distribution, which is CDF (x) = e−e . To integrate over
                                                                                     −x
1 we use the Gumbel PDF, which is P DF (x) = e−x e−e . Therefore, equation (22) becomes
                                                      Z                             
                                                                  −1 +K·[rp −rq ]                    −1
                              P r(u1 > u2 ) =               e−e                          · e−1 e−e         d1               (23)

                                         1
We find P r(u1 > u2 ) =             1+e−K·[rq −rp ]
                                                      from which the result follows.


Proposition 6 (Equilibrium prices under salience heterogeneity).                                                       Denote ∆r =
rp − rq . Optimal prices satisfy:

                                                            rq + 1 p1 − c1
                                   F OC1 :       D1 eK∆r k ·        ·          =1
                                                            rp + 1      p2
                                                              rq + 1 p1 (p2 − c2 )
                                   F OC2 :       D2 e−K∆r k ·         ·            =1
                                                              rp + 1       p22

Since D1 eK∆r = D2 , together these imply condition (19). This captures several properties
of equilibrium prices:21

   • In the symmetric case, c1 = c2 = c, firms price at cost, p1 = p2 = c.

   • The good with the larger quality price ratio also has the larger markup. Suppose
        ∆r > 0 so that q2 /p2 > q1 /p1 and price is salient. Then (19) implies that (p1 −c1 )/p1 <
        (p2 − c2 )/p2 so that p2 /c2 > p1 /c1 . The reverse conditions hold when ∆r < 0.
 21
      Still need to check that p1 ≥ p2 always.


                                                                    43
   • The good with the highest quality price ratio is the good with the highest quality to
      cost ratio (or the lowest average cost). To see that, rewrite (19) as
                                                                
                                   c1 q 1                 c2 q 2
                                                                           h       i
                                                                       q     p  p
                                                                    −K p1 q1 − q2
                                 1− ·     =             1− ·       e     2    1  2                          (24)
                                   q1 p 1                 q 2 p2

      This implies that q1 /p1 > q2 /p2 if and only if q1 /c1 > q2 /c2 . In particular, if firms have
      equal average costs, they both price at cost and make zero profits.

   • Finallly, this implies that the firm with lower average cost makes higher profits (equiv-
      alently, it extracts higher total surplus). It is clear that if quality is salient the higher
      quality firm makes higher profits. It is also straightforward to see that if the low quality
      firm has sufficiently lower average costs, it makes higher profits. By continuity, and
      by the fact that both firms make zero profits when average costs are equal, the result
      follows.




Proposition 7 (Symmetric equilibrium under salience heterogeneity).                                      At the
quality selection stage, firms take into account the outcome of the price competition stage,
where they implement a price schedule given by p(q) = c(q)/(1 − 4β). At the first stage,
firm 1’s optimisation problem is then

                                                 1
                                 max             1        · [p(q1 ) − c(q1 )]
                                   q1
                                        1 + e β K∆r

Notice that rp = c(q1 )/c(q2 ) and rq = q1 /q2 . The first order condition then reads
                                                                                          
                  0            c(q1 )          1
                                                 K∆r   2        c(q1 )/c(q2 ) − q1 /q2
                 c (q1 ) =        1        e   β         ∂q
                             1 + e β K∆r               β 1 (c(q1 )/c(q2 ) + 1)(q1 /q2 + 1)

This is evaluated at the symmetric equilibrium condition q1 = q2 , so that ∆r = 0. The
                                                                           c(q1 )
factor multiplying the derivative term then simplifies to                    β
                                                                                  .   Developing and simplifying
the expression above gives the result (21).



                                                          44
C         Competition with an outside option
We extend the analysis of the paper to the case where each consumer chooses one unit
of one good from the choice set CO ≡ {(q2 , −p2 ), (q1 , −p1 ), (0, 0)}, where (0, 0) represents
the outside option of buying neither good 1 nor good 2. Including an outside option has
two effects on market competition: first, as in standard models, it makes the participation
constraint weakly stronger; second, by shaping the reference good, the outside option also
influences the attention externality each good exerts on the other. We now show, however,
that the fundamental role of the quality cost ratio in determining who wins the market
survives in this setting as well.
       Consider first the price competition stage, where qualities q1 , q2 and costs c1 , c2 are given.
As in section 3, assume that q1 > q2 and c1 > c2 . In the choice set CO , the reference good
has q = (q1 + q2 )/3 and p = (p1 + p2 )/3. For good 1, its advantage – namely, quality – is
salient when q1 /q > p1 /p, and it is easy to see this condition is equivalent to


                                               q1 /p1 > q2 /p2                                            (25)


Thus, assumption A.1 implies that good 1 is preferred to good 2 if and only if the salience
constraint (25) holds, independently of the salience ranking of good 2. The preference ranking
between the goods, under assumption A.1, is thus invariant to the inclusion of the outside
option (0, 0).22
       We now consider the impact of the outside option on the participation constraint. When
(25) holds, the consumer buys good 1 provided the participation constraint q1 − δp1 > 0
is satisfied. When (25) does not hold, the consumer buys good 2 provided its valuation is
positive. To determine good 2’s valuation, we now characterise its salience ranking. To do
so, note that q2 > q iff q2 > q1 /2, and p2 > p iff p2 > p1 /2. As a consequence, there are four
cases to consider, depending on whether good 2’s quality and price are above or below the
reference good’s quality and price. Here we focus on the cases where good 2 is preferred to
  22
     This is not generally the case with an arbitrary outside option, so the reasoning may have to be adjusted
in situations where there is a clear default option. However, in a choice context defined only by goods 1 and
2, it is natural to represent the alternative of not buying a good as (0, 0), which can be thought of as narrow
framing.



                                                      45
good 1, namely q2 /p2 > q1 /p1 . Consider first the case where good 2 is close to good 1 along
both dimensions, namely q2 > q1 /2, p2 > p1 /2. In this case, the two goods have opposite
salience ranking: good 2’s quality is salient and good 1’s price is salient. When good 2 is
distant from good 1, namely q2 < q1 /2, p2 < p1 /2, the two goods have the same salience
ranking (as in the absence of the outside option), so price is salient for both goods. Finally,
when q2 > q and p2 < p good 2 has a high quality-price ratio, so good 1 is price salient,
while good 2 is quality salient provided q2 p2 > qp.
    At the price competition stage, we show that the good with the highest quality price
ratio captures the market, provided the costs of quality are not too high.

Lemma 6 Under A.1, pure strategy equilibria under price competition in the choice set CO
satisfy:
         q1        q2
i) if    c1
               >   c2
                      ,   the consumer buys good 1 provided costs are not too high, c1 < q1 1δ .
          q2           q1
ii) if    c2
                   >   c1
                          ,   the consumer buys good 2 provided the costs are not too high. A sufficient
condition for that is c2 < δq2 .
              q1       q2
iii) if       c1
                   =   c2
                          ,   quality and price are equally salient, the consumer buys the good yielding the
highest (rational) surplus qk − ck , if the latter is positive. Prices are p1 = c1 , p2 = c2 .

    We now turn to the endogenous quality case when firms have identical costs. For sim-
plicity, we consider the case of quadratic costs, c(q) = 2c q 2 + F . As before, pure strategy
equilibria entail symmetric quality production, where price and quality are equally salient
(we assume that firms strictly prefer to share the market with zero profits than being out of
the market). Analogously to proposition 2, we derive the equilibrium quality provision q S
as a function of the fixed cost F . Because the quality price ratio is a necessary statistic for
winning the market, proposition 2 carries through in the range of intermediate F ∈ [F , F ]
                                                                   p
where the salience constraint binds. In this range, firms set q S = 2F/c. Participation in
the market requires that q S − c(q S ) ≤ 0, namely F < 1/2c. So the outside option truncates
the symmetric equilibria for F larger than 1/2c, excluding equilibria where quality is over
provided relative to the efficient level. Consider now the range F < F , where in the absence
of the outside option the equilibrium quality provision is q S = δ/c. With an outside option,
there might in principle be profitable deviations from this solution because a firm that cuts


                                                            46
quality slightly in order to minimise its average cost renders its good quality salient, while
rendering its competitor price salient. This stronger salience advantage would push firms to
always minimise average costs. We find:

Lemma 7 When firms have identical cost functions, the unique pure strategy subgame per-
fect equilibrium in the choice set CO is symmetric. Equilibria exists provided costs are not
                1
too high, F ≤   2c
                   .   In equilibrium price and quality are equally salient, firms make no profits,
and quality provision is given by: q2S = q1S = q S ≡ qb(F ).

   Finally, we turn to innovation, where firm 1 has a positive shock to the marginal cost
of quality. Recall that in this case firm 1 always weakly increases quality provision, so that
quality is (weakly) salient. As a consequence, firm 1 captures the market, provided good
1 satisfies the participation constraint q1 > δc1 (q1 ). Because the participation constraint is
                                                                                                1
strictly weaker than in the symmetric case, such innovation equilibria exist for all F ≤        2c
                                                                                                   .
In fact, for the same reason, such equilibria exist even for higher levels of F where quality
is over provided relative to the efficient level. However, such equilibria do not preserve the
interpretation as an innovation relative to the symmetric case.


C.1     Proofs

Proof of Lemma 6.
   From the analysis in the text, we know that the high quality good 1 is quality salient,
and thus is preferred to good 2, if and only if q1 /p1 > q2 /p2 . As in the case without the
outside option, then, in a market equilibrium (where firm 1 sells the good) this condition is
satisfied if and only if q1 /c1 > q2 /c2 . In this case, firm 2 sets price p2 = c2 and firm 1 sets
                             n                          o
price satisfying p1 ≤ min q2 · qc22 , 1δ (q1 − q2 ) + c2 . The market equilibrium exists (namely,
firm 1 sells its good) if and only if good 1 is preferred to the outside option, namely it has
positive valuation, q1 − δp1 > 0. Firm 1 can set a price satisfying this condition whenever
c1 < δq1 . Consider now the case where c1 > δq1 . Firm 1 cannot sell its good and, as
before, we assume it sets price at p1 = c1 . In this case, no good is sold. In particular, under
assumption A.1, firm 2 is also unable to sell its good, regardless of its salience ranking, since
q2 − δc2 < q1 − δc1 < 0.

                                                  47
    A similar analysis carries through if q2 /c2 > q1 /c1 . In this case, in any market equilibrium
firm 1 sets price p1 = c1 while firm 2 sets price p2 ≤ q2 qc11 . In order to sell its good, firm
2’s good must be preferred both to good 1 and to the outside option. Both participation
constraints depend on the salience ranking of good 2 (note that good 1 is always price
salient). A sufficient condition for the market to exist is that good 2 is chosen when it is
price salient, namely c2 < δq2 .


Proof of Lemma 7.
                                                                             p
    Given the discussion in the text, it is sufficient to check that q S =       2F/c is the unique
(symmetric) equilibrium for F < F . We first show that there are profitable deviations from
the two-good symmetric equilibrium quality δ/c in this range. Suppose firm 1 cuts quality
slightly to δ/2c < q1 < δ/c, while firm 2 keeps quality at q2 = δ/c. As a consequence good 1
becomes quality salient while good 2 becomes price salient. This is a profitable move when
firm 1 can sell its good with a positive profit. To see that is the case, note that q1 − δc(q) > 0
                                         2
for F < F and also that q1 − δc(q) > δc − c(δ/c) for any δ < 1. The same logic implies that
      p
q S = 2F/c is an equilibrium for any F < F : deviating from the average-cost minimizing
quality makes the deviating firm’s good price salient while its competitor becomes quality
salient. Therefore, such deviations are never profitable.



D      Asymmetric Equilibria
This appendix characterizes the set of equilibria that arise when firms have different cost
functions. We focus on pure strategy equilibria, and restrict our analysis to the quadratic
cost structure:

                             c1 2                       c2 2
                  c1 (q) =     q + F,        c2 (q) =     q + F,    0 < c1 < c2
                             2                          2

in which the fixed cost of quality F is the same for both firms, but firm 1 has lower marginal
cost than firm 2. We begin by describing general properties of the model for arbitrary fixed
cost of quality F ≥ 0 (Lemmas 1 and 2). We then fully characterize equilibria for the special


                                                 48
case F = 0, and comment on how the results extend to the case F > 0. All proofs are
collected in section D.1.

Lemma 8 In all pure strategy equilibria, firm 1 captures the market.

   Intuitively, firm 1 can always mimic firm 2’s quality provision and exploit its cost ad-
vantage. To identify the equilibria of the model, it is useful to characterize what kind of
deviations may be profitable for firm 2. We find:

Lemma 9 Let firm 1 produce a quality level q1∗ that is a best response to firm 2’s quality q2∗ ,
which can be arbitrary. Then:
   i) firm 2 can never profitably deviate to configuration qb2 where it has a salient quality
advantage, namely qb2 > q1∗ and c2 (b    q2 ≤ c1 (q1∗ )/q1∗ .
                                    q2 )/b
   ii) a price-salient and profitable deviation qb2 (where qb2 < q1∗ and c2 (b    q2 ≤ c1 (q1∗ )/q1∗ )
                                                                             q2 )/b
exists for firm 2 only if firm 1’s quality is sufficiently high, namely q1∗ > δ/c1 .

   Intuitively, if the high cost firm 2 tries to provide more quality than firm 1, it will face
much higher costs. Prices will be salient, and quality improvements will backfire. As a
consequence, optimal deviations by firm 2 consist of salient price cuts. This suggests that
equilibria in the model occur when quality levels (q1∗ , q2∗ ) are optimal for both firms and firm
2 is unable to undercut firm 1.
   In light of these results, we describe the equilibria arising when F = 0. In this case, pure
strategy equilibria can be characterized in the following intuitive way:

Lemma 10 Let F = 0. For any c1 < c2 , there exist equilibria (q1∗ , q2∗ ). Pure strategy
equilibria fall into three cases:
                                                 c1
   i) the cost advantage of firm 1 is large,     c2
                                                       < 12 , equilibria are quality-salient with q1∗ > q2∗ .
                                                      c1
   ii) the cost advantage of firm 1 is small,         c2
                                                           ≥ 12 , equilibria are price-salient with q1∗ < q2∗ .
                                                  c1
   iii) the cost advantage of firm 1 is small,    c2
                                                           ≥ 12 , equilibria feature homogeneous qualities,
q1∗ = q2∗ < δ/c1 . Firm 1 prices at c2 (q2∗ ) and price is salient.

   As in our characterization of equilibria under unilateral cost shocks (Proposition 4),
the low cost firm 1 wins the market by providing salient high quality if its marginal cost

                                                      49
advantage is sufficiently large, namely when c1 < c2 /2. If the cost advantage is small, the
low cost firm 1 wins a price-salient market by undercutting quality relative to its competitor.
This includes case iii) where both firms provide the same quality level, effectively offering
homogeneous goods.23,24
       We conclude this Appendix by briefly discussing how the analysis might extend to a
positive (and common across firms) fixed cost of quality F . Although the analysis is more
complicated, some effects are intuitive. Now the average cost of firm k to produce quality
q becomes Ak (q) = ck · q/2 + F/q. A positive F has two effects: i) it increases the average
costs for both firms and for any quality level, but ii) this effect is particularly large for low
quality levels, so that Ak (q) is U-shaped. The quality minimizing average cost for firm k is
     p
now 2F/ck , which increases with F . This has two implications. First, since cost levels are
higher, it is more likely that a quality salient equilibrium obtains for a given level of c1 , c2 .
Second, it is harder for firm 2 to profitably undercut a given quality provision of firm 1. This
last feature expands the set of possible equilibria, particularly quality salient equilibria. In
particular, price salient equilibria now require not only that firm 1’s cost advantage is small,
c1 /c2 < 1/2, but also that fixed costs are small. In contrast, quality salient equilibria arise
when either firm 1’s cost advantage is large, or when F – and thus cost levels – is high.


D.1        Proofs

Notation. In this section, we denote the equilibrium quality provided by firm k by qk∗ .
When we examine quality deviations by firm k, we denote them by qbk . We let Ak = ck (qk )/qk
denote the average cost of quality qk to firm k. We write A∗k = Ak (qk∗ ) and A
                                                                              bk = Ak (b
                                                                                       qk ).

Proof of Lemma 8. Suppose, by contradiction, that for some quality choice (q1∗ , q2∗ ) firm
2 would capture the market with non-negative profits, p2 ≥ c2 (q2∗ ). Then firm 1 can shift
quality to mimic firm 2 and lower its price to capture the market: q10 = q2∗ and p01 = c2 (q2∗ ).
  23
      In Lemma 10, we consider only equilibria that arise for any δ ∈ [0, 1). More details can be found in the
proof.
   24
      One unappealing aspect of this model is that it features many equilibria. This is because: i) firm 2 is
certain to lose and so it is indifferent between setting several quality levels, and ii) the equilibrium quality that
firm 1 optimally provides sometimes depends on the quality chosen by firm 2. One way to tackle equilibrium
multiplicity would be to provide a refinement criterion. This is beyond the scope of our current analysis,
which simply seeks to characterize the broad properties of asymmetric equilibria as stated in Lemma 10.


                                                         50
Since the good (q10 , −p01 ) offered by firm 1 dominates any good offered by firm 2 at quality
q2∗ , and since it is priced above cost (c1 (q2∗ ) > c2 (q2∗ )), this deviation is profitable for firm 1.
Thus, there is no pure strategy equilibrium where firm 2 captures the market. The same
logic shows that there is no pure strategy equilibrium where both firms share the market.

Proof of Lemma 9. To prove point i) of the Lemma, note that all deviations by firm 2 to a
profitable quality salient configuration qb2 require the competing conditions of providing high
                                                     q2 ) < A1 (q1∗ ). We first show, case by case,
quality qb2 > q1∗ at relatively low average cost A2 (b
that these conditions cannot be simultaneously satisfied. Among deviations to configurations
where firm 2 might have a salient quality advantage, we distinguish between cases where the
participation constraint is binding (denoted QP) or where the salience constraint is binding
(denoted by QS).
   To simplify notation, write A∗k = Ak (qk∗ ) for k = 1, 2. Also, a configuration where quality
is salient and the participation constraint is binding is referred to as a QP configuration,
whereas QS refers to a quality salient configuration where the salience constraint is binding.
Similarly, we use the terms P P and P S to refer to price salient configurations where the
participation constraint, or the salience constraint, is binding.

   • Consider a configuration where firm 1 has a salient quality advantage, and the partic-
      ipation constraint is binding. Then q1∗ =                   1
                                                                 δc1
                                                                       and p∗1 = 1δ (q1∗ − q2∗ ) + c2 (q2∗ ), for some q2∗
      satisfying A∗2 > 1/δ.

         – If A∗1 > 1/δ, firm 2 deviates to a QP configuration, pb2 = 1δ (b
                                                                          q2 − q1∗ ) + c1 (q1∗ ) so
            qb2 =    1
                    δc2
                        .   Then qb2 < q1∗ (since c2 > c1 ), so the quality ranking condition is violated.

         – If A∗1 < 1/δ, firm 2 deviates to a QS configuration, pb2 = qb2 A∗1 so qb2 = c12 A∗1 . Then
           the quality constraint qb2 > q1∗ is F > q1∗2 c2 − 12 c1 , while the salience constraint
                                                                 

            A∗1 <    1
                     δ
                            reads F <     1
                                        2δ 2 c1
                                                .   Inserting q1∗ = 1/δc1 , and using c2 > c1 we find that
            these conditions are incompatible.

   • Consider a configuration where firm 1 has a salient quality advantage and the salience
      constraint is binding. Then q1∗ =              1 ∗
                                                       A
                                                     c1 2
                                                            and p∗1 =      1 ∗2
                                                                             A
                                                                           c1 2
                                                                                  for some q2∗ satisfying A∗2 < 1/δ.


                                                            51
        – We have A∗1 < A∗2 < 1/δ, so firm 2 deviates to a QS configuration, where pb2 = qb2 A∗1
                        1 ∗
           so qb2 =       A.
                        c2 1
                               Then qb2 > q1∗ if and only if       1 ∗
                                                                     A
                                                                   c2 1
                                                                          >   1 ∗
                                                                                A
                                                                              c1 2
                                                                                     which again is incompatible
           with A∗1 < A∗2 , and c2 > c1 .

   • Consider a configuration where firm 1 has a salient price advantage and the salience
      constraint is binding. Then q1∗ =          1 ∗
                                                   A
                                                 c1 2
                                                        and p∗1 =       1 ∗2
                                                                          A ,
                                                                        c1 2
                                                                                where A∗2 > max{A∗1 , δ}.

        – If A∗1 > 1/δ firm 2 deviates to a QP configuration, and we have pb2 = 1δ (b
                                                                                    q2 − q1∗ ) +
                                                                                       c1
           c1 (q1∗ ) and qb2 =     1
                                  δc2
                                      .   Then qb2 > q1∗ if and only if A∗2 <          δc2
                                                                                           ,   which is inconsistent
           with the requirement that A∗2 > A∗1 > 1δ .

        – If A∗1 < 1/δ, firm 2 tries deviates to a QS configuration. This is not profitable, for
           identical reasons to the case above where the ex ante regime was quality salient
           (only difference was ex ante ranking of qualities q1∗ and q2∗ which does not matter
           for the deviation).

   • Consider a configuration where firm 1 has a salient price advantage and the partici-
      pation constraint is binding. Then q1∗ =                δ
                                                             c1
                                                                  and p∗1 = δ(q1∗ − q1∗ ) + c2 (q2∗ ). Moreover,
      A∗2 < δ.

        – We have A∗1 < A∗2 < δ < 1/δ, so firm 2 deviates to a QS configuration. We
           have pb2 = qb2 A∗1 and qb2 =        1 ∗
                                                 A.
                                               c2 1
                                                        However, the salience constraint on A∗1 implies
           qb2 <    δ
                   c2
                        < q1∗ so the quality ranking is violated.

   We now turn to point ii) of the lemma. Since q1∗ is a best response to some q2 , we can
distinguish two cases: either q1∗ = δ/c1 and A2 ≤ δ, or q1∗ = A2 /c1 and A2 > δ. To prove
point ii), therefore, it is sufficient to show that a price-salient and profitable deviation qb2
does not exist for firm 2 if firm 1 sets quality q1∗ = δ/c1 . (As we show below, for higher values
of q1 such profitable deviations do exist for firm 2).
   In this case, since firm 1’s quality setting is optimal, we have A∗1 < A∗2 < δ. As a
consequence, only deviations to price salient configurations where the participation constraint
binds are available to firm 2. Firm 2 thus sets qb2 =               δ
                                                                   c2
                                                                        which satisfies qb2 < q1∗ . However, this
                                                     b2 = δ/2+F c2 /δ and A∗1 = δ/2+F c1 /δ so
move does not satisfy the salience constraint, since A

                                                        52
b2 > A∗ for any positive F . Even for F = 0 the cost structure implies that this move cannot
A     1

                                                                                  q2 − q1∗ ) + c1 (q1∗ ).
be profitable. In fact, the participation constraint on firm 2’s price is pb2 = δ(b
Inserting the values for qb2 and q1∗ it is easy to show that pb2 < c2 (b
                                                                       q2 ).


Proof of Lemma 10.             We proceed in two steps: in the first step, we show that the
conditions on the cost advantage c1 /c2 are necessary for the equilibria. In the second step,
we derive the full equilibrium conditions, including all constraints on qualities and costs.

   • Step 1: necessity of constraints on c1 /c2 .

      I. In equilibrium, firm 1 chooses a high quality strategy only if it satisfies the competing
      constraints of higher quality, q1∗ > q2∗ , and lower average cost, p∗1 /q1∗ < A∗2 when the
      participation constraint is binding. The two constraints are compatible if and only if
      the cost advantage c1 /c2 is sufficiently large, as we now show.

         – Consider equilibria where quality is salient and the participation constraint is
            binding (QP). Then p∗1 = 1δ (q1∗ − q2∗ ) + c2 (q2∗ ) and q1∗ =        1
                                                                                 δc1
                                                                                     .   The higher quality
            constraint implies q2∗ <    1
                                       δc1
                                           .   In turn, the participation constraint is binding if and
            only if A∗2 > 1δ , which reads q2∗ >      2
                                                     δc2
                                                         ,   which requires c1 /c2 < 1/2.

         – Consider now a configuration where quality is salient and the salience constraint is
            binding (QS). In this case, p∗1 = q1∗ A∗2 and q1∗ = c11 A∗2 . The higher quality constraint
                                                               
            reads c11 A∗2 > q2∗ , or equivalently q2∗2 2cc21 − 1 > 0, which again requires c2 > 2c1 .

      II. Firm 1 chooses a low price strategy only if it provides weakly lower quality, q1∗ ≤ q2∗
      and lower average cost.

         – In a configuration where price is salient and the salience constraint is binding
            (PS), we have p∗1 = q1∗ A∗2 and again q1∗ = c11 A∗2 . The lower quality constraint reads
                                                     
             1 ∗    ∗                     ∗2   c2
              A < q2 , or equivalently q2 2c1 − 1 < 0, which now requires c2 < 2c1 .
            c1 2

         – Finally, in a configuration where price is salient and the participation constraint
            is binding (PS), we have p∗1 = δ(q1∗ − q2∗ ) + c2 (q2∗ ) and q1∗ =       δ
                                                                                    c1
                                                                                       .   The lower quality
            constraint implies q2∗ >    δ
                                       c1
                                          .    In turn, the participation constraint is binding if and


                                                     53
       only if A∗2 < δ, which reads q2∗ <     2δ
                                              c2
                                                 .   Compatibility of the two conditions again
       requires c2 < 2c1 .

• Step 2a: equilibrium conditions when c1 /c2 < 1/2. From the previous step, we know
  that any equilibrium must be quality salient. Under what conditions does firm 2 have
  no incentive to deviate? We now show that firm 2 can profitably deviate whenever the
  quality offered by firm 1 (and hence its average cost) is high. However, the equilibrium
  is sustained for lower quality levels, namely when q1∗ < 2δ/c1 and A∗1 < δ, since then
  firm 2’s deviation to a price salient, salience constrained configuration is not profitable.

  Note first that the condition c1 /c2 < 1/2 implies (in fact is equivalent to) the condition
  q2∗ < A∗2 /c1 . This means that firm 1 can set quality at the salience constraint, q1∗ =
  A∗2 /c1 so that q2∗ < q1∗ and a quality salient configuration ensues. Whether the salience
  constraint or the participation constraint binds, and thus the type of equilibrium that
  arises, then depend on the ranking of 1/δc1 relative to q2∗ and A∗2 /c1 . We now examine
  all three possible cases:

    – When q2∗ < 1/δc1 < A∗2 /c1 , the participation constraint binds (QP configuration).
       The participation constraint binds because A∗2 > 1/δ, so firm 1 sets q1∗ = 1/δc1 .
       Moreover, the inequalities above restrict q2∗ to the interval q2∗ ∈ [2/δc2 , 1/δc1 ]. We
       now show that these configurations are equilibria if and only if firm 1’s average
       cost is low, A∗1 < δ (namely, δ 2 > 1/2), and its cost advantage is sufficiently
       large, cc21 < δ22 1 − 2δ12 . To start, note that A∗1 = 1/2δ, so there are two cases for
                                 

       firm 2’s deviations:

         ∗ if A∗1 > δ, namely if the average cost of q1∗ is large (i.e. iff δ 2 < 1/2), firm 2
                                                                                                 A∗1
            can always deviate to a PS configuration. In this case, firm 2 sets qb2 =            c2
                                                                          b2 = A∗ /2 and pb2 =
            which satisfies qb2 < q1 . Moreover, it is easy to check that A     1

              q2 − q1∗ ) + c1 (q1∗ ) satisfies pb2 = 1/4δ 2 c2 > c2 (b
            δ(b                                                      q2 ). By construction, the good
             q2 , −b
            (b     p2 ) is chosen (satisfies the participation constraint) when compared to
            (q1∗ , −c1 (q1∗ )).
         ∗ if A∗1 < δ (namely, δ 2 > 1/2) firm 2 may deviate to a PP configuration,
            setting qb2 = δ/c2 . This satisfies qb2 < q1∗ , as well as A
                                                                       b2 = δ/2 < A∗1 . The

                                              54
                                                                  c1       2               1
                                                                                                 
      profitability condition pb2 > c2 (b
                                        q2 ) reads                c2
                                                                       >   δ2
                                                                                     1−   2δ 2
                                                                                                     . The constraint
      on A∗1 ensures the right hand side is always positive, and ranges from 0 to
      1. So this configuration is an equilibrium only if c1 /c2 is sufficiently low,
      c1    2       1
                        
      c2
         < δ 2 1 − 2δ 2   . This condition requires δ 2 > 1/2, which – as noted above
      – is satisfied exactly when the relevant constraint A∗1 < δ holds.

    ∗ because of Lemma 2 we need not check deviations to quality salient equilibria.
      We need also not check for deviations to homogeneous quality goods, since in
      the price setting stage the low cost firm would always win the competition.

– When q2∗ < A∗2 /c1 < 1/δc1 , the salience constraint binds (QS configuration), be-
                                                                c2 ∗
  cause A∗2 < 1/δ, so firm 1 sets q1∗ = A∗2 /c1 =                  q .
                                                       We now show that such equi-
                                                                2c1 2
                                                            h          q       i
                                           ∗                  2δ 2δ          c1
  libria always exist, and are indexed by q2 in the interval c2 , c1 1 + 1 − c2 .
  To see this, note that A∗1 = A∗2 /2 < 1/2δ, so there are again two cases for firm 2’s
  deviations:

    ∗ if A∗1 > δ, firm 2 can again always deviate to a PS configuration. It sets
              A∗1                                       b2 = A∗ /2 and pb2 = 2c2 (b
      qb2 =   c2
                    which satisfies qb2 < q1 as well as A     1                   q2 ). We
                                A∗2       A∗2
      also check that pb2 =      2
                                4c2
                                      <    2
                                          2c1
                                                < c1 (q1∗ ):

    ∗ A∗1 < δ if and only if A∗2 < 2δ. Firm 2 may deviate to a PP configuration,
                                          b2 < A∗ if and only if A∗ > δ (this condition
      setting qb2 = δ/c2 . This satisfies A     1                 2

      also guarantees qb2 < q1∗ ). The profitability condition pb2 > c2 (b
                                                                         q2 ) then reads
               ∗
                     ∗
                        
      c1    2A      A
      c2
         > δ22 δ − 22 . The constraint on A∗1 ensures the right hand side is always
      positive, and in fact it ranges from 0 to 1. Replacing the A∗2 = c2 q2∗ /2 we find
      that the pricing constraint is satisfied if and only if q2∗ lies outside the interval
       ∗− ∗+                         q          
       q2 , q2 , where q2∗± = 2δ
                               c1
                                    1 ±    1 −  c1
                                                c2
                                                     . Recall, however, that the salience
      constraint requires A∗2 > δ namely q2∗ >                 2δ
                                                               c2
                                                                  .   Since     2δ
                                                                                c2
                                                                                     > q2∗− , we get the result.

– Finally, consider the case where 1/δc1 < q2∗ < A∗2 /c1 . Then, the best response
  of firm 1 featuring a salient quality advantage (namely q1∗ = 1/δc1 ) pushes firm
  1 to a lower quality, while the best response featuring a salient price advantage
  (namely q1∗ = A∗2 /c1 ) pushes firm 1 to a higher quality: firm 1 cannot optimise the
  first order conditions within a strict salience ranking. Instead, it can set q1∗ = q2∗


                                            55
       and p∗1 = c2 (q2∗ ). Because in this case the goods are homogeneous, quality and
       price are equally salient. When is this an equilibrium? If A∗1 > δ, firm 2 can
       deviate, as in the cases above. Consider the case A∗1 < δ, which requires δ 2 > 1/2.
       Then firm 2 deviates to a PP configuration, qb2 = δ/c2 , which trivially satisfies
       qb2 < q1∗ and Ab2 = δ/2 <. Profitability of this deviation requires pb2 > c2 (b q2 ),
                                      ∗
                                         
                      2            c q
       which reads 2cδ 2 > q1∗ δ − 12 1 . The right hand side is maximised at q1∗ ’s lower
       bound 1/δc1 . Then the condition reads cc12 > δ22 1 − 2δ12 . By continuity with the
                                                                 

       QP case above, if this condition holds there exist equilibria with homogeneous
       goods. Such equilibria exist only under some ranges of the model’s parameters:
       it requires both δ 2 > 1/2 and cc12 < δ22 1 − 2δ12 .
                                                         


• Step 2b: equilibrium conditions when c1 /c2 > 1/2. According to step 1 above, any
  equilibrium must be price salient. Under what conditions does firm 2 have no incentive
  to deviate? Similar to the above, we now show that firm 2 can profitably deviate
  whenever the quality provision of firm 1 (and hence its average cost) is large. However,
  the equilibrium is sustained for lower quality levels, when firm 2’s deviation to price
  salient, salience constrained configuration is not profitable.

  Note that the condition c1 /c2 > 1/2 implies (in fact it is equivalent to) the condition
  q2∗ > A∗2 /c1 . Therefore, firm 1 can set quality at the salience constraint, q1∗ = A∗2 /c1 so
  that q1∗ < q2∗ and a price salient configuration ensues. Whether the salience constraint
  or the participation constraint binds then depends on the ranking of δ/c1 relative to
  A∗2 /c1 and q2∗ . We now examine all three possible cases:

  The condition c1 /c2 > 1/2 holds if and only if q2∗ > A∗2 /c1 , so that if salience binds
  firm 1’s best response, then q2∗ > q1∗ . The binding constraints, and thus the type of
  equilibrium that arises, then depend on the ranking of δ/c1 relative to q2∗ and A∗2 /c1 .

    – When δ/c1 < A∗2 /c1 < q2∗ , the salience constraint binds (PS configuration), be-
       cause A∗2 > δ, so firm 1 sets q1∗ = A∗2 /c1 . As before, there are two cases for firm
       2’s deviations:

         ∗ if A∗1 > δ, firm 2 can always deviate to a PS configuration. In fact, firm
                           A∗1
            2 sets qb2 =   c2
                                 which satisfies qb2 < q1 provided c1 /c2 < 1/2. Moreover, it

                                              56
                            b2 = A∗ /2 and pb2 = 2c2 (b
      is easy to check that A                         q2 ). Finally, we check that
                                  1
              A∗2       A∗2
      pb2 =    2
              4c2
                    <    2
                        2c1
                              = c1 (q1∗ ).

    ∗ if A∗1 < δ, firm 2 can never deviate to a PP configuration. Setting qb2 = δ/c2
      satisfies qb2 < q1∗ provided q2∗ > cδ2 · 2cc21 . The profitability condition pb2 > c2 (b
                                                                                             q2 )
                                              
                                2A∗        A∗
      reads, as above, cc12 > δ22 δ − 22 . However, given the lower bound on q2∗
      and thus on the average cost A∗2 > δc1 /c2 , the deviation is never profitable
      while c1 < c2 .

– When A∗2 /c1 < δ/c1 < q2∗ , the participation constraint binds (PP configuration),
  because A∗2 < δ, so firm 1 sets q1∗ = δ/c1 . Lemma 9 shows that in this case no
  profitable deviations exist for firm 2. As a consequence, such equilibria always
  exist.

– Finally, consider the case where A∗2 /c1 < q2∗ < δ/c1 . In this case, firm 1 cannot
  optimise the first order conditions within a strict salience ranking. Instead, it
  can opt for homogeneous goods, q1∗ = q2∗ and p∗1 = c2 (q2∗ ), such that quality and
  price are equally salient. To see that firm 2 has no incentive to deviate, note that
  A∗1 < δ/2. This means that firm 2 tries to deviate to a PP configuration with
  qb2 = δ/c2 . Even assuming that qb2 < q2∗ (which is not guaranteed), we find that
  b2 = δ/2 > A∗ so this move backfires. As a consequence, such equilibria always
  A           1

  exist.




                                             57
