                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION, FINANCIAL CRISES, AND THE EXTERNAL
               PORTFOLIO STRUCTURE OF EMERGING MARKETS

                                        Enrique G. Mendoza
                                        Katherine A. Smith

                                        Working Paper 19072
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19072


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We would like to thank two anonymous referees and the guest editor at the Scandinavian Journal of
Economics, Gita Gopinath, for their helpful comments and suggestions. We also thank Gian Maria
Milesi-Ferretti and Philip Lane for their dataset on foreign asset positions. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Katherine A. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Globalization, Financial Crises, and the External Portfolio Structure of Emerging
Markets
Enrique G. Mendoza and Katherine A. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 19072
May 2013
JEL No. D52,E44,F32,F41

                                               ABSTRACT

We study the short- and long-run effects of financial integration in emerging economies using a two-sector
model with a collateral constraint on external debt and trading costs incurred by foreign investors.
The probability of a financial crisis displays overshooting: It rises sharply initially and then falls sharply
but remains positive in the long run. While equity holdings fall permanently, bond holdings initially
fall but rise after the crisis probability peaks. Conversely, asset returns and asset prices first rise and
then fall. These results are in line with the post-globalization dynamics observed in emerging markets,
and the higher frequency of crises they displayed. Without financial frictions, the model yields a negligible
fall in equity and a large increase in debt. The results also depend critically on supply-side effects
of financial frictions affecting the price of nontradables and dividends from nontradables producers,
and on strong precautionary savings incentives induced by the risk of financial crises.


Enrique G. Mendoza
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
egme@sas.upenn.edu

Katherine A. Smith
United States Naval Academy
Department of Economics
589 McNair Road
Mail Stop 10-D
Annapolis, MD 21402
ksmith@usna.edu
1     Introduction

Financial globalization aected the portfolio structure of net foreign assets (NFA) in emerging


markets in a strikingly dierent manner than in industrial countries.
                                                                                        1 As seen in Figure 1, by


2007, roughly twenty years after the trend for nancial globalization started, the average emerging


economy (weighted by GDP) held a large negative net equity position of nearly -28 percent of GDP,


and a positive net position in debt instruments almost as large in absolute value. In contrast, the


average industrial country was sharply short in debt instruments (-20 percent of GDP) and long


in equity (almost 12 percent GDP). These clear dierences in the NFA portfolio followed from


a transition process during which net debt rose sharply and net equity fell sharply in emerging


markets, and the opposite occurred in industrial economies.


    It is well-known that the accumulation of reserves by many emerging economies has been a


driving force of the surge in their holdings of debt instruments. Figure 2 shows, however, that the


large and persistent portfolio re-balance that took place in emerging markets also had a lot to


do with adjustments in external liabilities. Since the mid 1990s, emerging markets took on much


greater equity liabilities (i.e. purchases of domestic equity by foreign agents) and reduced their debt


liabilities, in addition to increasing debt assets by accumulating foreign reserves.
                                                                                                    2 The fall in debt


liabilities is also reected in the narrowing gap between the total net debt position and holdings of


reserves in Figure 1. Moreover, it is also evident that changes in equity assets played a minor role,


because they remain a very small fraction of total external wealth.


    In the early stages of the transition to nancial globalization, it seemed unlikely that there


would be such large long-run changes in external positions. The Chinn and Ito (2007) nancial


openness measure shows that, while nancial integration across industrial countries started in the


late 1970s, the major shift towards world-wide nancial integration, including emerging markets,


started around 1987 (See Appendix Figure A.1). From then and through the mid 1990s, changes

    1
      We use the terms nancial integration and nancial globalization interchangeably and dene them as the sell-
ing/buying of nancial assets across countries. We use the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006) database to document the
stylized facts of external assets. We dene equity assets and liabilities as the sums of positions in portfolio equity and
FDI, and debt assets as the sum of portfolio debt assets, other investment, and total reserves minus gold
    2
      The surge in debt assets is fully driven by the surge in reserves. Excluding them, debt assets remained fairly
stable around 20 percent of the total of gross external assets and liabilities.



                                                            2
                            Figure 1: External Capital Structures (GDP weighted)




                                                      (a) Emerging Markets


              0.40

              0.30

              0.20

              0.10

              0.00
                     1970     1975       1980             1985          1990          1995      2000   2005
             -0.10

             -0.20

             -0.30




                                                     (b) Industrial Countries
             0.12

             0.07

             0.02

                     1970    1975        1980             1985          1990           1995     2000   2005
            -0.03

            -0.08

            -0.13

            -0.18

            -0.23


                                      Net Debt/GDP         Net Equity/GDP       Reserrves/GDP




Note: Original source Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). Updated through 2007. GDP weights are time varying. Net
calculations refer to assets minus liabilities. Debt assets include portfolio debt, other debt, and reserves minus gold.
Debt liabilities refer to portfolio debt and other debt. Equity assets and liabilities include portfolio equity and foreign
direct investment. See Appendix for a list of included countries.




                                                                  3
in net debt and equity positions in both emerging markets and industrial countries were relatively


small, and thus the gap between net debt and net equity positions in each country group was fairly


stable (see Figure 1).


    The initially slow-paced movements in external assets contrast sharply with the changes that


took place in the aftermath of the emerging markets crises of the 1990s, starting with the Mexican


crisis of 1994-95. These so called Sudden Stop crises were characterized by sharp reversals in capital


inows, deep recessions, and steep collapses in real asset prices.
                                                                           3 After the Sudden Stops, net equity


started to fall at a rapid pace and net debt started to rise in emerging markets, and industrial


countries displayed opposite trends, producing the striking dierences in net external positions that


we observe today.
                      4 Gross positions in emerging markets displayed similar trends. In particular, in


the decade after 1997, equity liabilities surged and debt liabilities fell, driving almost all of the fall


in net equity and more than half of the rise in net debt respectively.


    This paper shows that the marked shift in the external asset positions of emerging markets


post-nancial integration following the Sudden Stops is an equilibrium outcome of the transitional


dynamics of nancial integration with imperfect capital markets, and that these dynamics also


feature substantial overshooting in the likelihood of experiencing Sudden Stops during the transi-


tion. We conduct a quantitative study of the transitional dynamics of nancial integration in an


equilibrium business cycle model with aggregate, non-insurable risk, in which a small open econ-


omy is vulnerable to nancial crises because of two frictions in world capital markets: A Fisherian


collateral constraint that restricts foreign borrowing not to exceed a fraction of the market value of


domestic equity holdings, and asset trading costs incurred by foreign agents in trading equity with


the small open economy. Moreover, the model includes tradable and nontradable goods, and this

   3
      There is some heterogeneity across countries in terms of which macro aggregates were aected most. For instance,
in the 1994 Mexican crisis, real equity prices fell by 29 percent, the current account rose by 5.2 percentage points
of GDP, industrial output fell nearly 10 percent and consumption declined by 6.5 percent. Argentina's 1995 crisis
resulted in collapses in real equity prices and industrial output similar to Mexico's, a current account reversal of 4
percentage points of GDP, and a decline in consumption of 4 percent. In contrast, the Korean and Russian crises
stood out for their large current account reversals of 11 and 9.5 percentage points of GDP respectively, and for the
widespread contagion across world nancial markets. Also, Sudden Stops can occur even without a currency crisis,
as was the case in Hong Kong (1997) and Argentina (1995).
    4
      There is some degree of heterogeneity within countries in each group. In industrial countries, for example, Spain
has a large negative net debt position while Germany does not. In the emerging economies, Turkey has a large negative
net debt position.



                                                          4
 Figure 2: Decomposition of the External Capital Structure (GDP weighted): Emerging Markets




             100%

              90%

              80%

              70%

              60%

              50%

              40%

              30%

              20%

              10%

               0%
                    1986                   1991                       1996                           2001         2006

                                            Debt Assets   Equity Assets   Debt Liabilities   Equity Liabilities




Note: Original source Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2006). Updated through 2007. GDP weights are time varying. Net
calculations refer to assets minus liabilities. Debt assets include portfolio debt, other debt, and reserves minus gold.
Debt liabilities refer to portfolio debt and other debt. Equity assets and liabilities include portfolio equity and foreign
direct investment. See Appendix for a list of included countries.




                                                              5
allows nancial crises to induce important eects on production, dividends and the real exchange


rate, which in turn strengthen the Fisherian nancial amplication mechanism.


    The collateral constraint and the portfolio adjustment costs are crucial for the link between


nancial integration, the probability of crisis and the long-run external capital structure that drives


the model's results.
                        5 The transitional dynamics of nancial integration without these frictions yields


a very small decline in equity holdings and a large increase in debt.


    The transitional dynamics at work in the model operate as follows: Upon opening the nancial


account of the emerging economy, a fall in the real interest rate and the desire to smooth consump-


tion induce agents to borrow from abroad and increase leverage. Equity returns fall because of


the lower risk-free rate and the lower risk premium implied by the improved consumption smooth-


ing (i.e. a lower covariance between consumption and equity returns). Quantitatively, these eects


pushing down on asset returns dominate relatively weaker osetting eects, which are induced by


the incentive agents have to share risk by reducing holdings of assets that co-vary with their own


income (i.e. domestic equity), and by the expectation of sharp increases in expected returns in


future states in which nancial crises could occur. As a result, equity prices rise on impact when


the transitional dynamics of nancial integration start, and domestic agents refrain from reducing


their equity holdings for a few periods.


    Given the initial rise in equity prices and the slow debt buildup from zero initial bond holdings,


nancial integration starts with the economy far from being credit constrained and encouraged


to increase debt and leverage. But rising leverage increases the probability of hitting the credit


constraint, and as this happens risk premia start to rise, exerting downward pressure on equity


prices, which in turn increase leverage further (as debt increases and asset values fall) feeding


back into higher crises probabilities. Higher risk premia and the risk-sharing incentives for reducing


equity holdings eventually strengthen to the point that agents start re-balancing their portfolio by


selling equity. Because buying equity is costly for foreign traders, however, the pressure for equity


prices to fall increases. In turn, with a lower value of equity, the leverage of domestic agents rises

    5
      While nancial frictions are present in both Emerging and Industrialized economies, our assumption is that they
are less severe for the former, because those frictions result from institutional features of credit contracts (e.g. limited
enforcement) and/or informational frictions that are also likely to be less severe.



                                                             6
even more, leaving them exposed to a greater risk of hitting the credit constraint. If this does


happen, the classic Fisherian debt-deation mechanism is set in motion and a full-blown nancial


crisis follows. The crisis is characterized by a re-sale of equity and a sudden reversal in the debt


position and the current account.


    The risk of nancial crises has permanent impacts on the economy's external capital structure,


as agents adjust their portfolios to reduce the probability of crises in the long-run by lowering equity


holdings and increasing their holdings of bonds. As a result, the leverage ratio is signicantly lower


than in an economy where credit frictions are not present and therefore a debt deation crisis is not


a threat. In addition, the magnitude of the trading costs greatly aects the equity price dynamics


and in turn aects the long-term capital structure.


    The strengthened nancial amplication mechanism that results from the introduction of non-


tradable goods is also important for the model's performance. A nancial crisis causes deation


in nontradables prices (i.e. a collapse of the real exchange rate) as the consumption of tradables


drops more than nontradables (due to relative supply elasticities), and this introduces two adverse


eects on equity prices. First, since future dividends from nontradables are valued in units of trad-


ables, the risk of real exchange rate collapse aects equity prices. Second, since nontradable rms


make optimal production plans by choosing demand for variable inputs, a deation of nontradables


prices lowers the value of the marginal product of these inputs, thus reducing demand for inputs


and the production and dividends from nontradables producers. The feedback loop operating in


the Fisherian debt-deation mechanism is strengthened then, because lower asset prices force larger


corrections in tradables consumption, and thus larger deation in nontradables, which then feeds


back into even larger asset price drops.
                                             6


    If nancial integration produces overshooting in the likelihood of nancial crises and leads to


substantially lower equity holdings and higher bond holdings in the long run, a natural follow-


up question arises: Would these eects vary under dierent strategies for nancial opening? In


particular, we explore how strategies that open only debt, only equity, or both debt and equity

    6
      Following Mendoza (2010), we infer that adding an investment decision would likely amplify the impact of the
equity price feedback, because the collapse of investment would shrink collateral more than with an asset in xed
supply. On the other hand, the reduction in the supply of assets can result in a smaller asset price decline.



                                                        7
markets dier. For instance, if a country only opens to equity ows but allows no debt, a debt-


deation crisis cannot occur because the external credit constraints are irrelevant. The downside,


however, is that the economy cannot smooth consumption as well.


     The contribution of this paper is in that it focuses on the link between Sudden Stops, capital


account liberalization, and the dynamics of both the NFA position and the portfolio of external


assets. This is in contrast with the emphasis in a large fraction of the open-economy macro literature


on nancial liberalization, which studies the eects of nancial liberalization on growth (e.g. Kraay


(1998)) and currency crisis (e.g. Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiarche


(1998) and Glick and Hutchinson (2001)).


     This paper is related to the literature aiming to explain the surge in foreign reserves in emerging


economies. A common notion in this literature is that countries choose to build up assets to self-


insure against the risk of future crises. The studies by Aizenman and Lee (2007), Alfaro and


Kanczuk (2006), Caballero and Panageas (2006), Choi et al. (2007), Durdu et al. (2008), Jeanne


and Ranciere (2006), and Jeanne (2007) examine key theoretical and empirical features of this idea.


As we noted, however, Sudden Stops were followed by a large rise in equity liabilities and a fall in


debt liabilities, in addition to the increase in reserves (see Figure 2). While in 1986 equity liabilities


contributed roughly     9%   to the emerging markets external position, by 2007 the contribution rose


to   35%.   Likewise, in 1986 debt liabilities were roughly   70%,   and by 2007 they fell to about   20%.

Thus, understanding the full impact of the eects of globalization and Sudden Stops on external


assets of emerging economies requires modeling both debt and equity instruments. Moreover, the


emphasis on the equity side should be on explaining the surge in equity liabilities, because equity


assets are negligible. In line with these observations, the model proposed in this paper provides


solutions for total NFA and bonds and equity positions, and on the equity side it focuses on equity


liabilities, abstracting from domestic purchases of foreign equity.


     While there is consensus in the Sudden Stops literature in that nancial frictions were an


important propagation mechanism, there are dierent approaches to model them. In much of the


literature, the current account reversal itself is modeled as a large exogenous shock either directly to


external borrowing or indirectly to the world interest rate, rather than as an endogenous outcome




                                                    8
of nancial frictions (see for example Calvo (1998) and Christiano et al. (2000)). Other studies,


as Mendoza (2010) and Mendoza and Smith (2006), use global numerical methods to examine the


quantitative predictions of non-linear models in which nancial crises are an endogenous outcome


produced by nancial amplication in response to productivity shocks identical to those that drive


frictionless real-business-cycle models. The model we propose here is in this vein.


   The model extends the setup in Mendoza and Smith (2006) in three important ways. First,


as explained above, we build a two-sector structure with tradable and nontradable goods, which


amplies the debt deation dynamics and raises the probability of a debt-deation crisis. Second,


while in Mendoza and Smith (2006) production and dividends are unaected by nancial crises, in


the model of this paper production of nontradables and the stream of dividends are aected by the


debt-deation dynamics, which strengthens the nancial amplication mechanism. Third, Mendoza


and Smith (2006) focused on comparing crisis and business cycle dynamics with and without credit


frictions under perfect capital mobility, and this paper focuses instead on studying the transitional


dynamics of nancial integration, particularly the dynamics of bond and equity holdings and the


probability of crisis in the long run and the short run.


   This analysis is also in a similar line as the literature on global imbalances. The theoretical


branch of this literature focuses largely on total current account imbalances or NFA positions,


with only some studies highlighting dierences in portfolio structures. In particular, Mendoza et al.


(2009) shows that nancial integration results in the country with the less developed nancial


markets building a large positive NFA position composed of large positive debt and negative equity


holdings. The model examined in this paper is of more limited scope, in the sense that it focuses


only on a small open economy, and hence it cannot provide a full explanation of global imbalances.


On the other hand, it develops and explanation for the portfolio structure of emerging economies


based on increased risk to a nancial crisis under nancial integration in a setup with aggregate


uncertainty and non-linear debt-deation dynamics.


   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the model. Section 3 represents


the model's equilibrium in recursive form and describes the solution method. Section 4 discusses


the quantitative results. Section 5 compares dierent strategies to open the capital account. Finally,




                                                  9
Section 6 summarizes our main ndings.




2     A Model of Financial Integration with Financial Frictions

The model is a general equilibrium asset-pricing framework with nancial frictions and aggregate


risk similar to Mendoza and Smith (2006) but extended to include tradables and non-tradables,


imported inputs, external assets denominated in units of tradables (i.e. "liability dollarization"),


and dividends and production that are aected by nancial frictions. Domestic agents are modeled


as a risk-averse, representative-agent small open economy subject to non-diversiable productivity


shocks. With full nancial integration, this economy trades bonds and equity with the rest of


the world. The economy's ability to borrow is limited by a collateral constraint, and to make this


constraint nontrivial, there is also a short-selling constraint that imposes a lower bound on domestic


equity holdings. Foreign agents are made of two entities: a set of foreign securities rms specialized


in trading equity of the small open economy, and the usual global credit market of non-state-


contingent, one-period bonds that sets the world's real interest rate via the standard small-open-


economy assumption. Foreign traders face recurrent and per-trade costs in trading equity with the


small open economy.




2.1    Domestic Firms


The tradables output is in the form of an endowment              yT .   The price of tradable goods is the


numeraire, and it is assumed to be set in world markets and equal to 1 for simplicity.


    The nontradables sector consists of a large number of identical rms that use labor                 (Lt )   and


imported intermediate goods       (mt )   as variable factors of production, along with a xed amount of


capital    (K). Firms produce this good using a Cobb-Douglas technology exp(εt )Lψ  ζ 1−ψ−ζ
                                                                                 t mt K                    where


exp(εt )   is a Markov productivity shock. Nontradables output is priced at        pnt ,   which is the relative


price of nontradables to tradables and determines the real exchange rate. Firms choose labor                     Lt

and imported intermediate goods           mt   in order to maximize prots taking wages,      wt ,   intermediate


goods prices,   pm∗
                 t ,   and the price of nontradables as given. Prots are dened as follows:




                                                        10
                                      pnt exp(εt )Lψ  ζ 1−ψ−ζ
                                                   t mt K     − wt Lt − pm∗
                                                                         t mt                                                  (1)



   The assumption that the stock of capital is an exogenous constant is adopted for simplicity.


   Factor demands for            t = 0, ..., ∞   are given by standard marginal productivity conditions:




                                           ψpnt exp(εt )Lψ−1
                                                         t   mζt K 1−ψ−ζ = wt                                                  (2)




                                          ζpnt exp(εt )Lψ  ζ−1 1−ψ−ζ
                                                        t mt  K      = pm∗
                                                                        t                                                      (3)



   Dividend payments for            t = 0, ..., ∞   are thus given by:




                                       dt = (1 − ψ − ζ)pnt exp(εt )Lψ  ζ −ψ−ζ
                                                                    t mt K                                                     (4)




   Productivity shocks follow a two-point, symmetric Markov chain. The shocks take a high or low


value   εH , εL .   Symmetry implies that          εL = −εH .         The long run probabilities of each state satisfy


Π(εL ) = Π(εH ) = 1/2.           Transition probabilities follow the simple persistence rule (Backus et al.


(1989)):     πεi εj = (1 − ϑ)Π(εj ) + ϑIεi εj Iεi εj = 1          if    i = j     and   0    otherwise, for   i, j = L, H .   This


specication minimizes the size of the exogenous state space E without restricting the variance


and rst-order autocorrelation of the shocks. Under these assumptions, the shocks have zero mean,


their variance is     (εH )2 ,   and their autocorrelation coecient is given by                  ϑ.


2.1.1      Households


A large number of identical, innitely-lived households inhabit the small open economy. Their


preferences are represented by the Stationary Cardinal Utility (SCU) function proposed by Epstein


(1983), which features an endogenous rate of time preference:



                                                        ∞             t−1
                                                    "                                       #
                                                        X             X
                                          U =E                exp(−          ν(cτ ))u(ct )                                     (5)
                                                        t=0           τ =0

where   ct   represents a CES composite good of tradable and nontradable goods:



                                                                 11
                                          T −µ                −µ −1/µ
                       c(cTt , cN
                                t ) = [z(ct )  + (1 − z)(cN
                                                          t )   ]     ,            z > 0,    µ ≥ −1                   (6)



    The elasticity of substitution between tradables and nontradables is given by                        1/(1 + µ),   and


the CES weighting factor is given by                 z.   The period utility function    u   is a standard continuously


dierentiable, concave utility function. The time preference function                        ν   must satisfy   ν(∗) > 0,

ν 0 (∗) > 0, ν 00 (∗) < 0,   and   u0 (∗)exp(ν(∗))        non-increasing.


    Preferences with endogenous impatience are useful in stochastic small open economy mod-


els with incomplete insurance markets because foreign asset holdings diverge to innity with the


standard assumption of an exogenous rate of time preference equal to the world's interest rate.


Preferences with a constant rate of impatience support a well-dened stochastic steady state only


if the rate of interest is set lower than the rate of time preference arbitrarily, but in this case


the mean foreign asset position is largely determined by the ad-hoc dierence between the two


rates (see Arellano and Mendoza (2003) for details). In models with credit constraints, endogenous


impatience is also useful for supporting stationary equilibria in which these constraints bind.


    Households maximize SCU subject to the following period budget constraint:




                     cTt + pN  N    T
                            t ct = yt + αt Kdt + wt Lt + qt (αt − αt+1 )K − bt+1 + bt R                               (7)



where   αt   and   αt+1   are beginning- and end-of-period shares of the domestic capital stock owned


by domestic households,            bt   and   bt+1   are holdings of one-period international bonds denominated


in units of tradables,       qt    is the price of equity, and         R   is the gross real interest rate faced by the


small open economy in world credit markets. The supply of labor is assumed to be inelastic and set


to 1 for simplicity. Hence, labor in the model is used only so that endogenous variability in labor


demand in response to shocks and relative price movements induces non-insurable variability in


wages, and thus in household income.


    At equilibrium, the relative price of nontradables aects the households budget constraint di-


rectly and indirectly. Directly, because                  pN
                                                           t   aects the value of the expenditure on non-tradables


consumption in the standard way. Indirectly, because the price of nontradables aects producers




                                                                  12
plans, and thus dividends and wages.


   In addition to the budget constraint, households face a collateral constraint or margin require-


ment, according to which they cannot borrow more than a fraction                             κ   of the value of assets oered


as collateral:




                                                      bt+1 ≥ −κqt αt+1 K                                                       (8)



   Households also face a short-selling constraint                      αt ≥ χ     for   −∞ < χ < 1    and   t = 1, ..., ∞.   The


case in which    χ   is positive can be interpreted as a portfolio requirement, or as a constraint stating


that only a fraction of the capital stock of the emerging economy is tradable in international equity


markets. The constraint          αt ≥ χ   is needed to ensure that the state space of portfolio holdings is


compact and that the collateral constraint is not irrelevant. With unlimited short selling of equity,


domestic agents could always undo the eect of the credit constraint (see Mendoza and Smith


(2006) for further details).


   The rst-order conditions of the household's problem are




                                                          UcTt (·) = λt                                                        (9)




                                                        UcN
                                                          t
                                                            (·) = pN
                                                                   t λt                                                       (10)



                                     qt (λt − ηt κ) = Et [λt+1 (dt+1 + qt+1 )] + υt                                           (11)



                                                      λt − ηt = Et [λt+1 R]                                                   (12)



   UcTt (·)   and   UcN
                      t
                        (·)   denote the lifetime marginal utilities of date-t consumption of tradables and


nontradables respectively (including the eects of consumption changes on the innite stream of


subjective discount rates), and         λt   ,   ηt   , and   υt   are the nonnegative Lagrange multipliers on the


budget constraint, the margin constraint, and the short-selling constraint respectively.


   Given the optimality conditions for                 αt+1   and       bt+1 ,   we can derive the following two key asset


pricing conditions:




                                                                   13
                                                                                            q
                                  q                     ηt (1 − κ) − υt /qt − covt (λt+1 , Rt+1 )
                             Et [Rt+1 − R] =                                                                   (13)
                                                                       Et [λt+1 ]

                                                                          
                                             ∞   i    h       i−1
                                                         q
                                            X    Y
                                   qt = Et         Et Rt+1+j       dt+1+i                                  (14)
                                                  i=0     j=0
                        h            i
                             q
where the sequence          Rt+1+j       is given by equation 13. Equation 13 is the model's equity premium,


and equation 14 represents the forward solution for equity valuation from the perspective of the


small open economy. Notice that this condition can also be expressed in the more familiar form


using stochastic discount factors, adjusted for the shadow values of nancial frictions, to represent


the pricing kernel (see Mendoza and Smith (2006)).




2.1.2     Foreign Securities Firms


Foreign securities rms are modeled in the same way as in Mendoza and Smith (2006). They


maximize the present discounted value of dividends paid to their global shareholders, facing trading


costs that are quadratic in the volume of trades (see Aiyagari and Gertler (1999)) and in a xed


recurrent cost. These costs represent the disadvantaged position from which foreign traders operate


relative to domestic agents, which may result from informational frictions, or from institutional


features or government policies that favor domestic residents. The recurrent cost represents xed


costs for participating in an emerging equity market that foreign traders incur just to be ready to


trade, even if they do not actually trade in a given period.


   Foreign traders choose           αt+1    for   t = 0, ..., ∞    so as to maximize the value of foreign securities


rms per unit of capital:


                                   ∞
                               "                                                              #
                                   X                                        φ
               D/K = E0                  Mt∗ αt∗ (dt + qt ) − qt αt+1
                                                                  ∗
                                                                      − qt       ∗
                                                                               (αt+1 − αt∗ + θ)2               (15)
                                                                            2
                                   t=0


where    M0 = 1   and   Mt∗   for   t = 1, ..., ∞       are the exogenous marginal rates of substitution between


date-t consumption and date-0 consumption for the world's representative consumer. For simplicity,


we set   Mt∗ = Rt−1 . Trading costs are given by qt (φ/2)(αt+1
                                                           ∗ − α∗ + θ)2 . The recurrent cost is θ
                                                                t                                             and   φ



                                                                 14
is an adjustment cost coecient that determines the price elasticity of the foreign trader's demand


for equity, as shown below. Note that    θ   induces an asymmetry in the manner in which trading costs


operate. With   θ = 0,   the total cost of increasing or reducing equity holdings by a given amount is


the same, but with   θ>0     the total cost of reducing equity holdings is higher.


   An important implication of the incompleteness of asset markets is that, despite nancial glob-


alization, the stochastic sequences of
                                          ∗
                                         Mt+1+i    and    Mt+1+i   for   i = 0, .., ∞,      are not equalized. With


complete markets, or under perfect foresight, both sequences are equal to the reciprocal of R


(compounded i periods). Under uncertainty and incomplete markets, however, domestic stochastic


discount factors are endogenous and reect the eects of nancial frictions.


   The rst-order condition of the above problem yields the following "partial adjustment" asset


demand function:                                                   !
                                      ∗           1       qtf
                                     αt+1 − αt∗ =             −1       −θ                                      (16)
                                                  φ       qt
                                                            P∞
                                                 qtf ≡ Et          ∗
                                                                                        
where we dene the "fundamentals price"                       i=0 Mt+1+i dt+1+i . The key implication of

this demand function is that foreigners only buy more domestic equity when the market price falls

                                                    ∗                              qf
suciently below the fundamentals price (i.e.      αt+1 − αt∗ > 0      requires   ( qtt ) > (1 + θφ)).

   The behavior of the "fundamentals" price diers from that in the Mendoza and Smith (2006)


setup because, as explained earlier, in this model the stream of dividends is aected by the en-


dogenous equilibrium dynamics of the nontradables price and output. Because of this, in fact it is


not very appropriate to call it a "fundamentals" price in this model. Intuitively, if dividends fall


when the credit constraint binds because of the adverse eects on nontradables price and output,


the "fundamentals price" also falls, but this means that at equilibrium, the actual equity price has


to fall even more to support a given change in equity holdings than it would if the fundamentals


price were invariant to the nancial frictions.




2.1.3   Asset Pricing Dynamics of Financial Globalization


The asset pricing conditions of the small open economy and the foreign traders' asset demand


function are helpful for providing some intuition about the transitional dynamics of asset prices


triggered by nancial integration.



                                                     15
   First, it is straightforward to infer from eq. 13 that, on impact, nancial openness induces two


eects on the agents of the small open economy that push down on expected equity returns. First,


the risk-free rate drops as agents can now borrow from the innitely-elastic global supply of credit.


Second, the risk premium drops, because the improved ability to smooth consumption by borrowing


from abroad makes the covariance between marginal utility and equity returns "less negative." In


turn, lower expected returns imply lower discount rates on the stream of expected future dividends


and thus higher equity prices.


   There are also indirect eects on the asset valuations of domestic agents operating via the


expected sequence of the price of nontradables,    pN
                                                    t+1+i ,   which are less straightforward. On impact,


the increased consumption of tradables that nancial integration allows agents to access pushes


up the price of nontradables. Producers of nontradables respond to the allocational incentives of


higher prices by demanding more inputs and producing more nontradables, but at equilibrium


tradables consumption rises more than nontradables consumption (since eectively tradable goods


have a higher supply elasticity). The rise in nontradables prices thus increases dividends on impact,


because of both the higher nontradables prices and production, and this also pushes for higher


equity prices.


   In addition to the above eects, there are also important eects due to the risk of nancial


crises. These are present since the rst period in the transitional dynamics of nancial integration,


but they are negligible because the economy's leverage at that point is far from what is needed


to trigger a nancial crisis. As the transition progresses and leverage rises, the risk increases and


becomes a more relevant determinant of asset prices. In a nancial crisis, the binding collateral


constraint induces a jump in expected equity returns because of three eects visible in eq. 13: the


direct eect of the positive shadow value of collateral, the indirect eect because the credit constraint


hampers consumption smoothing and thus makes the covariance term in the equity premium "more


negative," and a second indirect eect because the credit constraint forces consumption to be


postponed, thereby lowering the expected marginal utility of future consumption in the denominator


of the equity premium expression.


   A nancial crisis also contributes to lower asset prices via a deation in the price of nontradables




                                                   16
and its eect on nontradables producers. During a crisis, tradables consumption falls more rapidly,


again because tradable goods are more elastic, and thus the nontradables price falls. Since dividends

                                            exp(εt )Lψ   ζ 1−ψ−ζ
                                                     t mt K
can be expressed as   dt = (1−ψ −ζ)pnt                 K         , it follows that the response of nontradables

producers lowers dividends because of both lower relative prices and lower output. Lower dividends


then contribute to lower equity prices.


   As the transitional dynamics triggered by nancial integration evolves, the increased debt and


leverage of domestic agents endogenously increases the future probability of triggering the collateral


constraint and experiencing a crisis. This in turn strengthens the risk eects described above, and


thus eventually induces agents to re-balance their portfolio and reduce their equity holdings, even


in states in which the constraint is not actually binding. Now the foreign trader's adjustment costs


to selling equity becomes relevant, because they are willing to increase their equity holdings only if


the price falls. This enables the model to generate the boom-bust equity cycle observed in empirical


studies of nancial liberalization (Martell and Stulz (2003)), even in the absence of actual nancial


crises. If there is a crisis, the costs faced by foreign traders are also very important, because they


determine how low prices need to go when domestic agents enter the market to re-sale domestic


assets.




2.1.4     Competitive Equilibrium with Financial Integration


Given the Markov process of productivity shocks and the initial conditions                (b0 , α0 , α0∗ ), a competitive

equilibrium with the small open economy integrated to world capital markets is dened by stochastic

                                                                ∗         ∞                               q ∞
sequences of allocations   [cTt , cN                                                            n
                                   t , dt , mt , bt+1 , αt+1 , αt+1 , Lt ]t=0 and prices [wt , pt , qt , Rt ]t=0 such that:

(a) domestic rms maximize dividends subject to the Cobb-Douglas technology, taking factor and


goods prices as given, (b) households maximize SCU subject to the budget constraint, the collateral


constraint, and the short-selling constraint, taking as given factor prices, goods prices, the world


interest rate and asset prices, (c) foreign securities rms maximize the expected present value of


dividends net of trading costs, taking as given asset prices, and (d) the market-clearing conditions


for equity, labor, and goods markets hold.




                                                          17
3    Recursive equilibrium and solution method

We solve a recursive representation of the model over triples of                    (α, b, ε)   dened in a discrete state


space. The solution method is similar to the method used by Mendoza and Smith (2006). However,


since in this setup the fundamentals price is endogenous (instead of just a function of exogenous


shocks as in their paper, we also adapt the modications introduced by Durdu and Mendoza (2006)


in a model that had a similar feature of an endogenous fundamentals price, but in their case due to


the presence of government funded price guarantees. In particular, we start by using                           Ĝ(α, b, ε)   as


a conjectured fundamentals pricing function, then dene a Bellman equation that solves the model


conditional on this conjecture, and then we iterate to convergence so that the conjecture is accurate


in the nal solution.


    Conditional on a given          Ĝ(α, b, ε), the recursive equilibrium of the domestic economy with nan-

cial integration is represented by the following dynamic programming problem:




                                                        1−σ
                                         "                                                                       #
                                             c(cT , cN )    −1
    V (α, b, ε; Ĝ) =      max                                 + exp(−β[Ln(1 + c(cT , cN ))])E[V (α0 , b0 , ε0 )]       (17)
                        α0 ,b0 ,cT ,cN             1−σ

subject to:

                                                                                                         !
                                                                                       Ĝ(α, b, ε)K
 cT = y T + [ζ + (1 − ψ − ζ)(1 − α)] pn exp(ε)Lψ mζ K 1−ψ−ζ +                                                (α − α0 ) − b0 + bR
                                                                                    1 + φ(α − α0 + θ)

 cN = exp(ε)Lψ mζ K 1−ψ−ζ
                                    1+µ
                          cT
            
  n     1−z
 p =
         z      exp(ε)Lψ mζ K 1−ψ−ζ

pm∗ = ζpn exp(ε)Lψ mζ−1 K 1−ψ−ζ
                              !
   0           Ĝ(α, b, ε)K
  b ≥ −κ                        α0
            1 + a(α − α0 + θ)

    α≥χ


    Assuming that factor demands are given by standard marginal productivity conditions, the




                                                                 18
constraints on this problem are: (1) the resource constraint in tradables, (2) the market-clearing


condition for nontradables, (3) the optimality condition that sets the equilibrium price of non-


tradables equal to the sectoral marginal rate of substitution in consumption, (4) the optimality


condition for demand of imported inputs, (5) the borrowing constraint, and (6) the short selling


constraint (−∞        < χ < 1).     In (1) and (5), we imposed market clearing and used the inverse of the


foreign traders' demand function to replace the equity price. For each                       ε,   each set of pairs (α, α ),
                                                                                                                                  0

     0
(b, b ) in the state space, and given the conjectured            Ĝ(α, b, ε),   we can solve the system of equations


implied by these constraints for recursive functions that determine                  cT , cN , pn , m   as functions of the


state variables      (α, b, ε),

    The solutions of the above problem are represented by the optimal decision rules                              α0 (α, b, ε)   and


b0 (α, b, ε)   and the associated optimal consumption plans. The problem is solved by value function


iteration using an acceleration routine that splits each set of n iterations so that the rst h execute


the maximization step in the right-hand-side of the Bellman equation, and the remainder n-h


simulate the equation forward using the last iteration's decision rules.


    Given      α0 (α, b, ε)
                          b0 (α, b, ε) and the Markov process for ε, we can use the conditions that
                              and


qtf ≡ Et R∗−1−i dt+1+i pnt+1+i and dt = (1 − ψ − ζ)pnt exp(εt )mζt K −ψ−ζ to calculate an "actual"
                               

fundamentals pricing function          G(α, b, ε). Notice this reduces to a simple recursive formula (a "value

function")       because we use      R∗   for the stochastic discount factor of the foreign traders, and since


the stream of dividends can be expressed as the following recursive function                             d(α, b, ε) = (1 −

ψ − ζ)pn (α, b, ε) exp(ε)m(α, b, ε)ζ K −ψ−ζ ,       where   pn (α, b, ε)   and   m(α, b, ε)       are the optimal rules for


nontradables price and imported inputs that follow from                 α0 (α, b, ε)   and   b0 (α, b, ε).   If   Ĝ(α, b, ε)    and


G(α, b, ε) dier by more than a convergence criterion, we update Ĝ(α, b, ε) and solve again the value

function.


    It is important to note that the equilibrium represented by the solution of the above Bell-


man equation does not satisfy all of the competitive equilibrium conditions, because eectively it


represents the allocations and prices chosen by a social planner of the small open economy who


maximizes the utility of domestic agents taking into account the equity demand function of foreign




                                                            19
traders and the eects of the        α0   and   b0   choices on the price at which collateral is valued.
                                                                                                              7 All the


private optimality conditions and market-clearing conditions of the competitive equilibrium hold,


as reected in the constraints of the Bellman equation, but the planner does not act as a price


taker. This is done for computational tractability, since we need to solve the model using a nonlin-


ear global algorithm with two occasionally binding constraints and iterating over full solutions of


the Bellman equation until        G(·)    and   Ĝ(·)   converge.
                                                                  8


    The equilibrium we solve for can also be interpreted as a competitive equilibrium in which


the small open economy's planner implements an optimal macro-prudential policy similar to those


studied by Bianchi (2011) and Bianchi and Mendoza (2012), where a nancial regulator internalizes


the pecuniary externality by which agents fail to take into account the eect of their individual


decisions on the market value of collateral.
                                                         9 In our setup, however, the allocations represent only


a unilateral optimal policy outcome, because the domestic social planner does not internalize the


welfare of foreign traders. The planner maximizes domestic welfare by choosing an equity price


along the foreign trader's demand curve and taking into account how the price of collateral and


the price of nontradables respond to the small open economy's debt and equity choices.


    The above interpretation of the model's solution is also interesting because it is in line with


the observation from the data that the surge in net debt in emerging economies since the Sudden


Stops was due to both a sharp drop in private debt liabilities and to the accumulation of foreign


reserves. In the model's competitive equilibrium, private agents have stronger precautionary savings


incentives than agents in a model with frictionless credit markets, but still weaker than those in the


equilibrium with optimal macro-prudential policy. Hence, the quantitative analysis we conduct here

    7
      The solution of the Bellman equation matches the competitive equilibrium if we remove the collateral constraint
and set φ = 0 (i.e. foreign traders have an innitely elastic demand function at the level of the fundamentals price).
Thus, in states where the constraint is far from binding and since the calibrated value of φ is low, the solution we
compute should be close to the competitive equilibrium.
    8
      In their setup with an exogenous fundamentals price, Mendoza and Smith (2006) showed that, as long as φ is
low, this approach yields solutions quantitatively similar to those of the full competitive equilibrium, which takes
signicantly longer to solve. This is because at low values of φ the demand function of foreign traders becomes highly
elastic around the fundamentals price, and thus the monopolic power implied by the fact that the planner internalizes
their demand function becomes quantitatively negligible.
    9
      In their papers, a nancial regulator who internalizes this externality carries less debt and leverage than private
agents to reduce the risk of crises and make them less severe when they occur. Moreover, the regulator can decen-
tralize its allocations as a competitive equilibrium using a variety of state-contingent taxes, capital requirements, or
constraints on loan to value ratios.



                                                             20
incorporates incentives for portfolio rebalancing that consider both private agents' precautionary


behavior and policy incentives for precautionary accumulation of foreign reserves to manage pecu-


niary ex-ternalities. The drawbacks are that the policy is only unilaterally optimal, as mentioned


above, and that we will not be able to isolate what fraction of the total predicted change in bond


holdings is due to the original precautionary savings incentives of private agents in the competitive


equilibrium and what fraction is due to the fact that the equilibrium we solve for takes into account


pecuniary externalities.




3.1     Transitional Dynamics of Financial Integration


The decision rules and the Markov process of the exogenous shocks can be used in the usual way


to compute the model's stochastic steady state under nancial integration. This steady state is


characterized by the long-run unconditional distribution that results from the xed point of the


following one-step (from t to t+1) law of motion of conditional probabilities of triples in the state


space   (α, b, ε).


                                               X         X                 X             X
                     prt+1 (α0 , b0 , ε0 ) =                                                 prt (α, b, ε)π(ε0 |ε)      (18)
                                               ε {α:α0 =α0 (α,b,ε)} {b:b0 =b0 (α,b,ε)}

    This law of motion induces the t+1 conditional probabilities by combining the decision rules


for bonds and equity with the exogenous Markov process of TFP. Of particular importance for our


analysis are the long-run averages for bonds and equity implied by this distribution, which capture


the eects of nancial integration on the long-run portfolio of external assets.
                                                                                                           10


    To characterize the transitional dynamics induced by nancial integration, we compute forecast


functions of the equilibrium Markov processes of the relevant endogenous variables, conditional on


initial conditions that correspond to those of the economy with a closed capital account (α                          = 1 and

b = 0) and the average state of TFP ε = 0. Thus, we are solving for the transitional dynamics of an

experiment in which nancial opening is done in once-and-for-all, unanticipated fashion as of date


0. The optimal decision rules           α0 (α, b, ε) and b0 (α, b, ε), and the sequence of conditional distributions
   10
      It is critical to use the proposed nonlinear global solution method to solve for the decision rules and the stochastic
steady state because of the precautionary savings eects at work in the model, and because of the potentially strong
nonlinearities that are present when the collateral constraint binds.

                                                                  21
of   (α, b, ε)   generated by the law of motion mentioned above (for the autarky initial conditions


(1,0,0)) are used to generate the forecast functions. These forecast functions trace the projected


dynamics of the variables as they converge to their corresponding averages in the stochastic steady


state under nancial globalization, preserving all the non-linear aspects of the model's stochastic


equilibrium.




4      Quantitative results

This section studies the quantitative predictions of the model regarding the transitional dynamics


of nancial integration. The analysis starts by pinning down the values of the model's parameters


following a calibration applied to Mexican data.




4.1      Functional forms and baseline calibration


The numerical analysis uses these standard functional forms for preferences and technology.




                                   F (K, Lt , mt ) = exp(εt )Lψ  ζ 1−ψ−ζ
                                                              t mt K     ≡ ytN                                 (19)




                                                           [ct ](1−σ) − 1
                                                u(ct ) =                                                       (20)
                                                                1−σ



                                               ν(ct ) = β[Ln(1 + ct )]                                         (21)




                                                      T −µ                −µ −1/µ
                                   c(cTt , cN
                                            t ) = [z(ct )  + (1 − z)(cN
                                                                      t )   ]                                  (22)



     The parameters      ψ, ζ ,   and   (1 − ψ − ζ)   are the factor shares in production of nontradables for


labor, imported inputs, and capital respectively.            σ   is the coecient of relative risk aversion,    β   is


the semi-elasticity of the rate of time preference.             0<β ≤σ      is required to satisfy the conditions


identied by Epstein (1983) to ensure that SCU yields well-behaved dynamics.                 µ   sets the elasticity


of substitution between tradables and nontradables, which is equal to 1/(1+mu), and                   z   represents



                                                           22
the CES weighting factor.


     The calibration follows closely Mendoza (2002), which calibrates a model with tradables and


nontradables for Mexico using sectoral data. Table 1 lists all of the parameter values. On the


production side of the model, the steady-state (with globalization) relative price of nontradables,


the world price of intermediate goods and total GDP in units of tradables are normalized to         pn = 1,

pm = 1 and y T + pN y N − pm m = 1. Hence, the steady-state     allocations can be interpreted as ratios


relative to total GDP in units of tradables. We use the same elasticity of substitution parameter as


Mendoza (2002) and Durdu et al. (2008),      µ = 0.316,   which corresponds to an estimate for Mexico


obtained by Ostry and Reinhart (1992).


     The share of imported input costs to gross output of nontradables is   ζ = 0.2. In the deterministic

steady state, this factor share yields a ratio of imported inputs to total GDP of   13%, which matches

the ratio for Mexico reported in Mendoza (2006). Given Durdu et al. (2008) estimates of the sectoral


consumption-GDP ratios in Mexican data, it follows that       z = 0.341.

     The Markov process of productivity shocks for the nontradables sector is set so that the standard


deviation and rst-order autocorrelation of GDP match the standard deviation and rst-order


autocorrelation of the HP-ltered quarterly cyclical component of Mexico's average GDP reported


in Mendoza (2006). In terms of the simple persistence, this requires       εH = 0.01785   and   ϑ = 0.683.

     The calibration is set to yield a deterministic stationary state that replicates Mexico's 1970-95


average GDP shares of private consumption, net exports, investment, and government expenditures


at current prices. For the model to mimic the consumption and net export shares in the Mexican


data, it is necessary to make adjustments for investment and government expenditures. This is done


by adding an autonomous (time and state invariant) level of private expenditures which is set equal


to   0.328. The capital stock is normalized at K = 1 without loss of generality. Mexican data from the

System of National Accounts yield an average labor income share for the period 1988-96 of 0.341.


Consistent with estimates from many countries however, we adopted a labor share of               ψ = 0.65.

Steady-state consumption is then calculated using steady-state output and the requirement that


the consumption-GDP ratio matches the average from Mexican data (0.684). The coecient of


relative risk aversion and the gross real interest rate are set to standard RBC values:         σ = 2.0   and




                                                   23
R = (1.059)1/4 .    Finally, given   c,   the value of the time preference elasticity   β   is derived from the


steady-state Euler equation for bonds, which implies          β = Ln(R)/Ln(1 + c) = 0.187.

     While there is a unique solution for aggregate savings in the deterministic steady state, the


portfolio decision over equity and bonds is indeterminate (in the stochastic model it is not because


the assets are dierent in risk and return properties). This makes the calibration of the nancial


frictions challenging. For the baseline economy with nancial frictions we set              φ = 0.2, θ = 0.0001,

and   κ = 0.15. Consistent with Mendoza and Smith (2006) we choose an adjustment cost parameter

of   φ = 0.2,   which implies a relatively high price elasticity of foreigner traders demand at 5, and


therefore helps reduce the approximation error due to the assumption that the domestic social


planner has monopolic power in the global market for the domestic equity.               θ = 0.0001   was chosen


to insure that the xed cost of trading was less than            0.1%   of the steady state equity price. In


the model without the collateral constraint the highest debt to equity ratio is roughly 20 percent.


Therefore, we chose     κ = 0.15,    constraining the leverage ratio to just under 15 percent. Households


face a short-selling constraint     αt ≥ χ. χ = 0.75   can be interpreted as a constraint stating that only


a fraction of the capital stock of the emerging economy is tradable in international equity markets.


Because these nancial frictions are dicult to measure, we use sensitivity analysis to evaluate the


relative importance of each friction for the main results.


                        Table 1: Parameter Values in Baseline Calibration




Notation                               Parameter/Variable                                               Value
      β                                Rate of time preference elasticity                                0.187
      σ                                Coecient of relative risk aversion                               2.000
      µ                                Elasticity exponent in CES Preferences                            0.316
      z                                CES weight of tradable consumption                                0.341
      κ                                Collateral coecient                                              0.150
      ψ                                Share of labor in gross output                                    0.650
      ζ                                Share of imported inputs                                          0.200
     R                                 Gross world interest rate                                         1.059
     pm                                Price of imported inputs                                          1.000
     AT                                Lump-sum absorption of tradables                                  0.043
     AN                                Lump-sum absorption of nontradables                               0.176
      φ                                Portfolio adjustment cost coecient                               0.200
      θ                                Fixed trading costs                                              0.0001




                                                        24
4.2       Baseline Transitional Dynamics


Figure 3 shows the transitional dynamics of the key endogenous variables of the model following the


unanticipated opening of the capital account at date 0 (initially zero net debt and domestic equity


owned solely by domestic agents). These dynamics describe the average evolution of the variables


as they go from the initial conditions under nancial autarky to their new long-run averages under


nancial integration. The eects described earlier intuitively using the model's optimality conditions


are evident in these plots. Note, however, that these dynamics do not show the dynamics of a


nancial crisis, because crisis dynamics correspond to the forecast functions conditional on an


initial state in which the collateral constraint binds and the reversal in net exports is suciently


large to correspond to a Sudden Stop (instead of the nancial autarky steady state). Crisis states


are included in Figure 3 as we take averages at each date of the transition, if the crisis probability


is positive on that date, but they are averaged together with non-crises states which have much


higher probability.
                      11


      The dynamics of nancial integration are characterized by a tilting of the consumption prole,


with consumption rising on impact relative to the nancial autarky average, in response to the


new borrowing ability of the economy, but falling to a lower long-run average at the end of the


transition. This occurs because the reduced external savings of the economy imply that in the long


run the trade balance must be in surplus on average, and also because preferences in the model


feature an endogenous rate of time preference that is an increasing function of consumption. As the


risk-free rate drops, the long-run rate of time preference falls, which requires a fall in consumption.

12


      The lowering of R that results from nancial integration gives agents an incentive to borrow


in order to smooth tradables consumption, and because of the CES consumption aggregator this


pushes for increased consumption of nontradables as well. Hence, on impact,                 c, cT ,   and   cN   all rise


relative to their former steady states (see Panel (A)). Moreover, the consumption proles are tilted

     11
      Mendoza and Smith (2006), Durdu et al. (2008), and Mendoza (2010) show quantitative results for crisis dynamics
produced by collateral constraints similar to the one present in this paper.
   12
      This impatience eect is quantitatively small and is not necessary for consumption tilting. Even with standard
preferences, under incomplete markets a fall in the risk-free rate reduces precautionary savings, leading to higher
average debt and lower average consumption.


                                                         25
in favor of initial consumption, because the lower R means that in the long run                             cT   must converge


to a lower average than under nancial autarky, since a long-run trade surplus is required to service


the debt accumulated during the transition (see Panel F). In turn, the larger long-run average debt


under nancial integration results from two eects: First, the long-run endogenous rate of time


preference falls as R falls, and this implies that long-run                          c   has to fall, which is attained partly


by lowering long-run                    cT   and increasing debt. Second, under uncertainty, precautionary savings


incentives are weakened when the rate of interest falls, and thus the economy converges to higher


debt as R falls.
                        13


      The tilted consumption prole also implies that in the long run the relative price of nontradables


falls. The movements in                      cT   are larger than those in     cN   because the supply of the latter is less


elastic. Hence, on impact                    cT   rises more than   cN ,   which leads to an initial increase in the price of


nontradables and a real appreciation, while in the long run the economy converges to a lower average


of   cT   than   cN ,   and hence a lower price of nontradables and a depreciated real exchange rate (see


Panels (A) and (B)). These eects are not as strong as they would be in a two-sector endowment


economy, because producers of nontradables demand more intermediate goods and increase supply


as the price rises. The lower nontradables price yields a lower long-run equity price, as it drives


dividends from the nontradables sector to a lower long-run average.


      The dynamics of the equity price in Panel (C) also reect the eects described in the previous


Section. On impact,                 q   rises because of (a) the reduction in projected asset returns driven by the


lowering of the risk-free rate and the reduction in the risk premium, as the covariance between asset


returns and marginal utility becomes less negative due to increased ability to smooth consumption;


and (b) higher projected dividends from the nontradables sector, because of the direct and indirect


eects of higher             pN .   This also explains why on impact, and for about 15 periods in the initial


transition, domestic agents hold on, on average, to 100 percent of domestic equity (see Panel (D)),


since during this period they actually would like to hold more equity, but the fact that foreign

     13
     The rst eect is due to the preferences with endogenous rate of time preference and hence would be present
even without uncertainty, although uncertainty weakens it because of precautionary savings. In contrast, the second
eect would still be at work even with standard preferences, because lowering R further away from a constant rate
of time preference also strengthens precautionary savings and leads to lower average bond holdings, as is typical in
incomplete markets models.



                                                                      26
                                                                          Figure 3: Transitional Dynamics for Key Macro Variables




                                                                        (A.) Consumption                                                                    (B.) Price of Non-Tradeables to Tradeables
                                                                                                                   1.07E+00
                                          1.04
                                                                                                                   1.06E+00
               RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                          1.02                                                    Total            1.05E+00
                                                                                                  Non-Tradeables   1.04E+00
                                                1
                                                                                                  Tradeables       1.03E+00
                                          0.98                                                                     1.02E+00
                                                                                                                   1.01E+00
                                          0.96
                                                                                                                   1.00E+00
                                          0.94                                                                     9.90E-01
                                          0.92                                                                     9.80E-01
                                                                                                                   9.70E-01
                                           0.9                                                                     9.60E-01
                                                        3 7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                                 3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                       Years After Liberalization                                                                            Years After Liberalization


                                                                         (C.) Equity Price                                                                        (D.) Domestic Equity Ownership

                                         1.03                                                                                                   1.02
                                         1.02
                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                      RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS
             RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                         1.01
                                         1.00                                                                                                   0.98
                                         0.99
                                                                                                                                                0.96
                                         0.98
                                         0.97                                                                                                   0.94
                                         0.96
                                                                                                                                                0.92
                                         0.95
                                         0.94                                                                                                    0.9
                                         0.93                                                                                                           3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                        3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                                             Years After Liberalization
                                                                          Years After Liberalization



                                                                                                                                                                          (F.) Debt Position
                                                                   (E.) Current Account

                                                                                                                                                0.00
                                          0                                                                                                             3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                    3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
             -0.001                                                                                                                             -0.05

             -0.002
                                                                                                                                                -0.10
SHARE OF Y




                                                                                                                   SHARE OF Y




             -0.003
                                                                                                                                                -0.15
             -0.004

             -0.005                                                                                                                             -0.20

             -0.006                                                                                                                             -0.25

             -0.007
                                                                       Years After Liberalization                                               -0.30
                                                                                                                                                                           Years After Liberalization


                                                             (G.) Probability Margin Constraint Binds                                                                 (H.) Debt to Equity Ratio

             45%
                                                                                                                                           16.0%
             40%
             35%                                                                                                                           14.0%

             30%                                                                                                                           12.0%

             25%                                                                                                                           10.0%
             20%                                                                                                                                8.0%
             15%
                                                                                                                                                6.0%
             10%
                                                                                                                                                4.0%
                    5%
                                                                                                                                                2.0%
                    0%
                                                3   7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                           0.0%
                                                                                                                                                        3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                     Years after Liberalization                                                                            Years After Liberalization




                                                                                                                   27
traders are not allowed to go short prevents it. Hence, the fundamentals price and the market price


move together to clear the equity market so that the foreign traders' demand function also yields


a constant equity position.


   The equity price declines after the initial rise and over the long run converges to a lower price.


This occurs in part because of the eect of the higher risk resulting from the increased probability of


nancial crises (Panel (G)), and also because of the lower            pN ,   which reduces projected dividends.


Moreover, the lower long-run asset price is in fact pinned down by the foreign traders' demand


function, which predicts that their asset holdings settle at their average when the average price is


q = q f /(φθ + 1),   where   qf   falls together with the nontradables price as explained earlier.


   As the riskiness of domestic equity due to the rising probability of crises increases suciently, and


projected nontradables dividends fall with falling nontradables prices suciently, the economy starts


re-balancing its portfolio. Hence, after about the 15th period, it starts reducing equity holdings and


increasing bond holdings (i.e. reducing foreign debt). This puts further downward pressure on equity


prices, because foreign traders are only able to buy the equity gradually, because of trading costs,


and they do so only if the price falls suciently below        qf .   Moreover,    qf   itself is falling as   pN   falls,


which implies that the actual equity price needs to fall further in order for foreign traders to be


willing to buy the equity the domestic economy is selling.


   As described above, the dynamics of the crisis probability play a central role in determining the


riskiness of domestic equity and the evolution of the portfolio choice and asset prices. Panel (G)


shows that, since the economy starts with zero debt and 100 percent equity holdings, it also has zero


leverage, and hence the probability of crisis starts at zero. Leverage builds gradually and hence the


probability of hitting states where the collateral constraint binds takes about 10 periods to become


positive. By then, debt is still building up but asset prices are declining and equity holdings are


only marginally changing, so leverage continues to grow, and hence the probability continues to rise.


This process peaks at about 25 periods after nancial integration occurred, with a crisis probability


of about 40 percent. Thus, the probability of a nancial crisis overshoots signicantly its long-run


level of about 15 percent during the transition from nancial autarky to nancial openness.


   After the peak of the crisis probability the portfolio re-balancing kicks in, the leverage ratio




                                                       28
starts declining (despite a continued fall in asset prices), and the probability of hitting the collateral


constraint starts to fall. In the long run, trading o the cost of precautionary savings against the


benet of reducing the risk of a nancial crisis probability, the probability converges to about 15


percent. By then, portfolio re-balancing leads to a decline of nearly 10 percentage points in equity


holdings, and a debt position of about 1/5th of GDP.


    We can use Figure 3 to compare the model's predicted changes in the external asset portfolio


with the emerging markets' GDP-weighted averages reviewed in Section 1.
                                                                                       14 It is important to note


that the positions in the data are in dollar values (i.e. the product of price and position expressed


as a percent of GDP). Measured in this way, the GDP-weighted average decline in the equity


position since the onset of the 1990s Sudden Stops was about 17 percentage points, very similar


to the model measured from the date when the crisis probability peaked. The model does not do


as well in matching the rise in holdings of bonds, because these increased by about 29 percentage


points on average (GDP-weighted) across the emerging markets, compared with 3 percentage points


in the model.
                 15 Still, both adjustments are qualitatively consistent with the data dynamics in


predicting that emerging markets would re-balance their external asset portfolios sharply after the


1990s Sudden Stops. In terms of capturing the increased probability of nancial crisis post nancial


globalization, the model suggests the most likely time for a crisis during transition is in year twelve.


This matches quite closely the timing of the Sudden Stops that occurred within a decade of nancial


integration for the most part. (See the Appendix for a plot of the nancial integration index for


the emerging markets.)


    The empirical literature on the asset pricing implications of nancial integration documents


two important stylized facts that are in line with the model's quantitative predictions about the


transitional evolution of asset prices and leverage. First, equity prices tend to rise post-liberalization.


Using event study analysis, both Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000) show that equity


prices rise dramatically post-liberalization. Five years after an emerging market has liberalized, the

  14
      While model is calibrated to a particular emerging market, Mexico, our intent is not to attempt to match the
particular way in which Mexico globalized. Instead, we compare our model to the average response to all the emerging
markets in order to generalize our results.
   15
      In the data, bonds are also aected by valuation changes in the price of bonds and in exchange rates, which are
absent from our model because the price of bonds is always 1/R.



                                                         29
                                                                                              Figure 4: One vs. Two Good Model




                                                                     (A.) Consumption
                                                                                                                                                                       (B.) Price of Non-Tradeables to Tradeables
                                                                       one good        two good                  1.07E+00
                                                                                                                 1.06E+00
                                       1.02
                                                                                                                 1.05E+00
                                       1.01
                                                                                                                 1.04E+00
             RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                         1                                                                       1.03E+00
                                       0.99                                                                      1.02E+00
                                                                                                                 1.01E+00
                                       0.98
                                                                                                                 1.00E+00
                                       0.97                                                                      9.90E-01
                                       0.96                                                                      9.80E-01
                                       0.95
                                                                                                                 9.70E-01
                                                                                                                 9.60E-01
                                       0.94
                                              3       7    11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                                                                                                                  3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                     Years After Liberalization                                                                                     Years After Liberalization


                                                                      (C.) Equity Price
                                                                                                                                                                           (D.) Domestic Equity Ownership

                                       1.04
                                                                                                                                                       1.01

                                       1.02                                                                                                            0.99
             RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                                                                                                             RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS
                                                                                                                                                       0.97
                                       1.00
                                                                                                                                                       0.95

                                       0.98                                                                                                            0.93

                                                                                                                                                       0.91
                                       0.96
                                                                                                                                                       0.89
                                       0.94                                                                                                            0.87

                                                                                                                                                       0.85
                                       0.92
                                                                                                                                                                  3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                  3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                                                                                                                                    Years After Liberalization
                                                                      Years After Liberalization



                                                                 (E.) Current Account                                                                                            (F.) Debt Position

                      0.00E+00                                                                                                                   0.00E+00
                                                      3     7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                                          3   7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                    -1.00E-03
                                                                                                                                               -5.00E-02
                    -2.00E-03
SHARE OF Y




                                                                                                                                               -1.00E-01
                    -3.00E-03
                                                                                                                SHARE OF Y




                    -4.00E-03                                                                                                                  -1.50E-01

                    -5.00E-03
                                                                                                                                               -2.00E-01
                    -6.00E-03
                                                                                                                                               -2.50E-01
                    -7.00E-03
                                                                      Years After Liberalization                                               -3.00E-01
                                                                                                                                                                                     Years After Liberalization


                                                             (G.) Probability Margin Constraint Binds                                                                        (H.) Debt to Equity Ratio

                                       45%
                                                                                                                                  16.0%
                                       40%
                                       35%                                                                                        14.0%

                                       30%                                                                                        12.0%

                                       25%                                                                                        10.0%
                                       20%                                                                                                     8.0%
                                       15%
                                                                                                                                               6.0%
                                       10%
                                                                                                                                               4.0%
                                        5%
                                                                                                                                               2.0%
                                        0%
                                              3           7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                    0.0%
                                                                                                                                                              3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                     Years after Liberalization                                                                                  Years After Liberalization



                                                                                                                30
cumulative excess return using liberalization dates from Bekaert and Harvey (2000) is        491%   and


546%   based on Henry (2000). While their estimates vary, both cite declines in the cost of capital


that lead to large increases in equity prices. The second stylized fact, as documented by Martell


and Stulz (2003), is that the initial rise in equity prices, like rm IPOs, is followed by a subsequent


decline, suggesting an equity price boom-bust cycle post-liberalization. Martell and Stulz (2003)


show that equity markets in countries liberalizing outperform those of other countries by more than


50%   in the rst year, but underperform by more than    20%   in the fth year after liberalization.


   The model is consistent with the boom-bust equity cycle that Martell and Stulz (2003) nd in


their empirical examination of equity returns in liberalized economies. The decline in equity prices


occurs at much slower pace than the rapid rise in prices immediately after liberalization (see Figure


3), but it is clear that they are falling prior to the rise in the crisis probability. Panel (D) shows


that equity ownership holds steady until the crisis probability starts to increase, while Panel (H)


shows a rapid increase in foreign debt before the rise in the crisis probability. Hence, since asset


prices are falling, debt rising, and equity holding steady, the leverage ratio is rising and increasing


the risk of hitting the critical level at which the constraint binds.


   Financial frictions and the two-sector structure of the model play a key role in the results.


To illustrate this, we conduct two sets of comparisons. First, we compare the baseline transitional


dynamics induced by nancial integration with those of a one-sector model (Figure 4 ). Second, we


do a similar comparison but relative to an economy without nancial frictions (Figure 5).


   Figure 4 shows that the stronger nancial amplication mechanism with nontradable goods


results in larger eects of nancial globalization on the external asset portfolio than in a one-


sector model, resulting in a signicantly larger long-run decline in equity holdings. Debt increases


less because the higher volatility and more severe crises of the two-sector model provide stronger


incentives for precautionary savings. Moreover, the overshooting in the probability of crisis during


the transition is much stronger in the two-sector model.


   The transitional dynamics in the one-good economy are signicantly dierent. The one-good


economy is identical to the one studied in Mendoza and Smith (2006). A key dierence is that


in their model nancial frictions cannot aect production, dividends and the fundamentals price.




                                                  31
As Figure 4 shows, this results in very dierent implications for equity prices, equity and debt


positions, and the probability of hitting the collateral constraint.


   The asset price rises on impact driven by the same eects of lower projected returns due to


lower risk-free-rate and lower risk premium. But with dividends unaected by nancial frictions,


and absent the adverse asset pricing eects of a lower long-run nontradables price, the long-run asset


price remains higher than the pre-nancial-integration level. The eect of increased risk of nancial


crisis does eventually kick in, with the crisis probability beginning to increase later in the transition,


but the probability rises much less than in the two-sector model and its overshooting is much less


pronounced. Equity adjusts less and at a much more gradual pace, and it converges to a long-


run position about 500 basis points higher than in the two sector model. Debt grows less initially


and displays a much smaller upward correction in response to increased nancial crisis risk. Thus,


without the two-sector specication, and its implied link between nancial risk and production, the


model cannot produce a boom-bust equity cycle and overshooting in the probability of crisis, and


its re-balancing dynamics are much weaker.


   Consider next the comparison of our baseline case versus a scenario without the credit constraint.


Figure 5 shows that the consumption paths are still tilted towards the early part of the transition.


This is because we still have the tilting eects induced by the lower rate of time preference and


diminished precautionary savings incentives that result from the fall in R under nancial integration.


The related eects on the nontradables price and asset prices are therefore also still there. Moreover,


since forecast functions show conditional averages, and in these averages the probability of crisis is


relatively small, the consumption paths, price of nontradables and asset price are similar with and


without frictions. The long run external portfolios, however, are very dierent. Without collateral


constraints the economy converges monotonically to a much lower debt position, and the correction


in equity holdings is less than 200 basis points. Thus, the risk of nancial crises does matter for


the long-run asset market structure. In fact, the emerging economy alters it precisely so that it can


manage the impact of the crisis risk on the average macro dynamics.




                                                   32
                                                            Figure 5: Comparison to Economy Without Collateral Constraints




                                                               (A.) Consumption
                                                              With Frictions      Nearly Frictionless                                                    (B.) Price of Non-Tradeables to Tradeables
                                   1.03                                                                         1.07E+00

                                                                                                                1.06E+00
        RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                   1.02
                                                                                                                1.05E+00
                                   1.01
                                                                                                                1.04E+00
                                       1
                                                                                                                1.03E+00
                                   0.99                                                                         1.02E+00
                                   0.98                                                                         1.01E+00

                                   0.97                                                                         1.00E+00

                                                                                                                      9.90E-01
                                   0.96
                                                                                                                                                         3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                               3     7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                                                                                                                          Years After Liberalization
                                                                  Years After Liberalization

                                                                (C.) Equity Price
                                                                                                                                                               (D.) Domestic Equity Ownership
                                  1.03
                                                                                                                                       1.02
                                  1.02
       RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                             RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS



                                  1.01

                                                                                                                                       0.98
                                  1.00

                                  0.99                                                                                                 0.96

                                  0.98                                                                                                 0.94

                                  0.97                                                                                                 0.92

                                  0.96                                                                                                   0.9
                                               3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                                3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                                 Years After Liberalization                                                                             Years After Liberalization


                                                             (E.) Current Account                                                                                     (F.) Debt Position

                                       0                                                                                               0.00
                                               3     7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                               3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                 -0.001                                                                                                -0.05

                                 -0.002
                                                                                                                                       -0.10
SHARE OF Y




                                                                                                         SHARE OF Y




                                 -0.003
                                                                                                                                       -0.15
                                 -0.004
                                                                                                                                       -0.20
                                 -0.005
                                                                                                                                       -0.25
                                 -0.006
                                                                                                                                       -0.30
                                 -0.007
                                                                Years After Liberalization                                             -0.35
                                                                                                                                                                       Years After Liberalization

                                                      (G.) Probability Margin Constraint Binds                                                                     (H.) Debt to Equity Ratio

                            45%                                                                                                        25%
                            40%

                            35%                                                                                                        20%

                            30%
                                                                                                                                       15%
                            25%
                            20%
                                                                                                                                       10%
                            15%
                            10%                                                                                                        5%
                                  5%
                                  0%                                                                                                   0%
                                           3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                             3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                              Years after Liberalization                                                                               Years After Liberalization


                                                                                                                  33
4.3   Sensitivity Analysis


Table 2 compares the long-run averages of the debt-to-GDP ratio and debt-to-equity ratio under four


parameter specications: The nancial frictions baseline, the model without collateral constraints,


and variations of the baseline with lower (φ    = 0.15   )and higher (φ    = 0.25)   adjustment costs.


   The emerging economy takes on the largest debt position and the largest debt-equity ratio in


the environment where there is no crisis risk and hence the precautionary savings incentives are


the weakest. In contrast, in the baseline calibration the debt ratio and the debt-equity ratio fall to


13.1 and 8.9 percent respectively, and relative to this baseline, higher (lower) adjustment costs on


foreign traders results in a higher (lower) debt and debt-equity ratios. Thus, as long as the collateral


constraint is at risk of becoming binding, the economy converges to a lower debt ratio and a lower


debt-equity ratio in the long run. The size of the adjustment cost matters because the long-run


price is higher at lower cost parameters (recall that, from the foreign traders' demand function, the


average price in the long run must satisfy    q = q f /(φθ + 1)),   and thus at lower adjustment costs the


domestic agents hold on to larger equity positions.


   Table 2: Long Run Means of External Capital Structure Post-Financial Account
                                             Liberalization




                                             Net Debt Position                    Net Debt Position
                                              as a % of GDP                   as a % of Equity Position
Without Collateral Constraints                      16.0%                                  10.4%
Financial Frictions Baseline                        13.1%                                   8.9%
Lower portfolio adjustment costs                    11.6%                                   8.1%
Higher portfolio adjustment costs                   14.0%                                   9.2%



   We also conduct sensitivity analysis to evaluate the robustness of the result that there is over-


shooting of the probability of crisis during the transition (which implies also overshooting in lever-


age). Figure 6 shows the transitional dynamics of the probability of hitting the collateral constraint


comparing the baseline results with four alternative specications: lower adjustment costs on for-


eign traders (φ   = 0.15),   higher recurrent costs on foreign traders (θ     = 0.001)),   a lower collateral


coecient (κ   = 0.2),   and a higher coecient of relative risk aversion (σ    = 2.5).



                                                    34
   The results show that the overshooting of the crisis probability is a feature of all the parameter


variations. Signicant overshooting remains with the lower adjustment costs (Panel (B)) and lower


collateral coecient (Panel (D)). In the case with lower adjustment costs, the crisis probability


peaks at a much lower level than in the baseline,      25%   in the 25th year after liberalization. This


occurs because lower adjustment costs make it less costly for the foreign traders to buy equity,


reducing the equity price volatility, and because the long-run price is higher at lower adjustment


costs. Similarly, the weaker credit constraint with the lower collateral coecient becomes binding


with lower probability, so the probability peaks at a lower maximum.


   With the higher recurrent trading cost (Panel (C)), the crisis probability climbs signicantly


higher during the transition, but it also converges to a higher long-run value, and thus the over-


shooting is signicantly smaller. In this scenario, the long-run asset price converges to a lower level,


which explains the higher long-run crisis probability, and the transitional peak is higher also be-


cause the higher recurrent trading cost makes it harder for foreign traders to buy the equity that


domestic agents re sale when the collateral constraint binds.


   With higher risk aversion (Panel (E))the probability peaks at about half the value as in the


baseline, but the overshooting is still signicant (although the probability of crisis declines at a


much lower pace than in the baseline). With a higher risk aversion parameter, domestic agents are


likely to want to move less consumption forward and more concerned with precautionary savings,


forcing the debt to equity ratio lower.


   In short, both Table 2 and Figure 6 show that the main results about portfolio re-balancing and


overshooting of the crisis probability are qualitatively robust to several parameter modications.


However, the quantitative characteristics of these results, including the timing at which crisis can


occur and/or the probability of hitting the credit constraint peaks, are aected by parameter values.


This nding can be important for explaining the heterogeneity in the timing of nancial crises across


various emerging markets. Sudden Stops varied a lot in their timing relative to the date of nancial


liberalizations and some countries liberalized without a major crisis following later on.




                                                  35
                                                                         Figure 6: Sensitivity Analysis




                                                                            (A.) Baseline
                                          60%

                                          50%

                                          40%

                                          30%

                                          20%

                                          10%

                                           0%
                                                0 2 5 7 10 12 15 17 20 22 25 27 30 32 35 37 40 42 45 47 51          56   61    66    71
                                                                                Years after Liberalization




              (B.) Lower Portfolio Adjustment Costs (0.15)                                                                    (C.) Higher Recurrent Trading Costs
                                                                                                                                            (0.001)
60%

                                                                                                              60%
50%
                                                                                                              50%
40%
                                                                                                              40%
30%
                                                                                                              30%
20%
                                                                                                              20%
10%
                                                                                                              10%
0%
                                                                                                               0%
      0   2   5   7 10 12 15 17 20 22 25 27 30 32 35 37 40 42 45 47 51     56      61     66     71
                                                                                                                    0 2 5 7 10 12 15 17 20 22 25 27 30 32 35 37 40 42 45 47 51   56    61    66    71
                                          Years after Liberalization
                                                                                                                                                  Years after Liberalization




                   (D.) Lower Collateral Constraint (0.8)                                                                           (E.) Higher Risk Aversion (2.5)
60%                                                                                                          60%


50%                                                                                                          50%


40%                                                                                                          40%


30%                                                                                                          30%


20%                                                                                                          20%


10%                                                                                                          10%


0%                                                                                                           0%
      0 2 5       7 10 12 15 17 20 22 25 27 30 32 35 37 40 42 45 47 51    56      61     66     71                 0 2 5 7 10 12 15 17 20 22 25 27 30 32 35 37 40 42 45 47 51     56    61    66    71

                                          Years after Liberalization                                                                              Years after Liberalization




                                                                                                        36
5        Comparing Alternative Financial Integration Strategies

The results reported in the previous Section showing that nancial integration in the presence of


nancial frictions leads to overshooting of the crisis probability, which peaks in the early stages of


transition, pose a natural follow-up question: Is it possible to address this overshooting problem by


opening only partially the capital account (e.g. by allowing only trade in equity)?


     In the baseline results we considered an economy that liberalized all international asset trading,


in bonds and equity, in an unanticipated, once-and-for-all fashion.
                                                                                    16 In contrast, Figure 7 and


Table 3 compare the results for transitional dynamics and long-run moments under three nancial


integration strategies: opening only the bond market, only the equity market, or both markets


simultaneously (which is the baseline assumption).


     As Figure 7 shows, the nancial opening strategy obviously has signicant eects on the external


asset portfolio, in the direction one would expect: Relative to the baseline, the debt position with


bonds trading only declines more and does not display re-balancing, and with equity trading only the


fall in the equity position is signicantly more pronounced. Consumption and the current account,


however, display smaller dierences. Interestingly, with bonds trading only, there is no overshooting


in the likelihood of crises. Moreover, the crisis probability is lower than in the baseline for the rst


30 periods, but converges to a signicantly higher long-run probability. Thus, this approach to


nancial integration is less likely to yield a nancial crisis in the early stages of nancial integration


than full opening of the capital account, but more likely to do so in the long run.
                                                                                                      17 In contrast,


if we only allow equity trading, by construction the probability of a crisis is zero in the model,


because there is no way to borrow and build leverage in credit markets.


     Table 3 compares how the method of liberalization of the nancial account impacts the long run


moments of the data. In terms of the means of the data, the liberalization policies deliver similar


eects on consumption and equity prices, yet have diering eects on the portfolio composition

    16
      Interestingly, in the case of Mexico, the country we calibrated the model to, nancial integration was a gradual
process. According to Aspe (1993), while domestic equity in Mexico was ostensibly sold to foreigners as far back as
1972, it was not until supplemental legislation was passed in 1989 that portfolio equity trading and FDI actually
began.
   17
      In this case, the borrowing constraint is for a fraction of the value of 100 percent ownership of equity holdings,
because the emerging economy cannot trade equity with foreign traders, but domestic equity holdings are still useful
as collateral in bond markets.


                                                          37
                                                                       Figure 7: Comparing Ways To Liberalize




                                                         (A.) Consumption                                                                       (B.) Domestic Equity Ownership

                                             OPEN BOTH         OPEN EQUITY            OPEN BONDS                             1.05

                           1.02
                                                                                                                               1
                           1.01
RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS




                                                                                                   RELATIVE TO PREVIOUS SS
                                                                                                                             0.95
                               1

                           0.99                                                                                               0.9

                           0.98
                                                                                                                             0.85
                           0.97

                           0.96                                                                                               0.8

                           0.95                                                                                              0.75
                                                                                                                                      3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                           0.94
                                       3   7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                                      Years After Liberalization

                                                                                                                                                        (D.) Debt Position
                                                  (C.) Current Account

                                                                                                                              0.00
                               0                                                                                                          3    7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                                       3   7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72
                          -0.001                                                                                              -0.05

                          -0.002                                                                                              -0.10
                          -0.003
SHARE OF Y




                                                                                                               SHARE OF Y




                                                                                                                              -0.15
                          -0.004
                                                                                                                              -0.20
                          -0.005

                          -0.006                                                                                              -0.25

                          -0.007                                                                                              -0.30
                          -0.008
                                                                                                                              -0.35


                                                                                                                                                          (F.) Debt to Equity Ratio
                                           (E.) Probability Margin Constraint Binds                                          16%


                45%                                                                                                          14%

                40%                                                                                                          12%
                35%
                                                                                                                             10%
                30%

                25%                                                                                                           8%

                20%                                                                                                           6%
                15%
                                                                                                                              4%
                10%
                                                                                                                              2%
                          5%

                          0%                                                                                                  0%
                                   3   7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72                                              3       7 11 15 19 23 27 31 35 39 43 47 52 56 60 64 68 72




                                                                                                    38
                                     Table 3: Long Run Business Cycle Moments




                                                  standard          standard      correlation   first-order
                                       mean       deviation         deviation        with           auto
                                                     (%)        relative to GDP      GDP        correlation

I. Liberalize Just Bonds
GDP                                    1.115       0.998            1.000           1.000         0.693
consumption                            0.363       1.841            1.845           0.999         0.708
    tradeables                         0.265       0.516            0.517           0.936         0.830
    non-tradeables                     0.432       2.661            2.667           1.000         0.693
equity price                           1.958       0.204            0.204           -0.976        0.617
price of non-tradeables/tradeables      1.014      2.876            2.883           -0.996        0.661
current account - GDP ratio            0.0000      0.088            0.088           0.726         0.522
foreign debt - GDP ratio               0.252       0.515            0.517           0.896         0.873

II. Liberalize Just Equity
GDP                                    1.115       0.979            1.000            1.000        0.692
consumption                            0.359       1.778            1.817           0.996         0.709
    tradeables                         0.260       0.553            0.565           0.672         0.929
    non-tradeables                     0.430       2.621            2.678           1.000         0.692
equity price                           1.921       0.355            0.362           -0.269        0.909
price of non-tradeables/tradeables      0.999      3.009            3.075           -0.984        0.671
current account - GDP ratio            0.0001      0.178            0.182           0.960         0.667

III. Liberalize Both
GDP                                    1.115       0.961            1.000           1.000         0.699
consumption                            0.359       1.707            1.776           0.994         0.726
   tradeables                          0.260       0.565            0.588           0.443         0.945
   non-tradeables                      0.430       2.574            2.678           1.000         0.699
equity price                           1.922       0.332            0.346           -0.301        0.871
price of non-tradeables/tradeables     0.999       3.130            3.256           -0.977        0.661
current account - GDP ratio            0.000       0.235            0.244           0.860         0.642
debt - GDP ratio                       0.131       7.629            7.936           0.109         0.999
debt - equity ratio                    0.089       4.917            5.115           0.045         0.999




                                                           39
as would be expected. Liberalization policies greatly impact the probability of a crisis and the


volatility of consumption, measured by the standard deviation. Opening just equity, eliminates


the probability of a debt-deation crisis but increases consumption volatility substantially more to


1.777,   versus   1.810   in the model where both equity and debt are liberalized.




6    Conclusions

This paper shows that nancial integration in the presence of nancial frictions, as undertaken in


emerging markets, causes overshooting in the probability of nancial crisis during the transition,


and leads to a long-run external asset portfolio characterized by a sharp decline in holdings of


domestic equity and a rise in bond holdings after the crisis probability peaks. In the absence of


nancial frictions, the model predicts that nancial integration would have produced a very small


decline in equity holdings and a large increase in debt.


    The overshooting in the crisis probability implies that the economy is more prone to nancial


crises at the point of the transition in which increases in borrowing and leverage increase the


likelihood of hitting a collateral constraint, which triggers the Fisherian debt-deation amplication


mechanism. The subsequent decline in the crisis probability is the result of portfolio re-balancing,


which leads the economy to reduce its holdings of domestic equity and also to reduce its debt (i.e.


increase its holdings of risk free assets). Thus, the positive eects of nancial liberalization in terms


of reduced borrowing costs, reduced risk premia and improved consumption smoothing, are shared


with the negative eects in terms on vulnerability to nancial crises.


    These results are in line with the observed higher frequency of crises a decade after emerging


markets began to open their capital accounts, the substantial decline in their external net equity po-


sitions, and the evidence from empirical studies on a boom-bust equity cycle in emerging economies


following nancial liberalization. The model also predicts a rise in net holdings of riskless bonds


after the crisis probability peaks, but the size of this increase is smaller than what is observed in


the data.


    The analysis also shows that the results hinge on allowing nancial frictions to have signicant


eects on dividends (i.e. "supply-side" eects). In the model, these eects follow from the fact that



                                                      40
a binding collateral constraint reduces tradables consumption and lowers the price of nontradable


goods, leading rms in this sector to reduce production. In turn, reduced dividends contribute to


enlarge the decline in asset prices caused by asset re sales when the collateral constraint binds,


which in turn tightens access to credit further and feeds back into larger declines in the price of


nontradables. A one-sector version of the model, in which this mechanism is absent, predicts a


signicantly smaller decline in equity holdings, and a lower peak in the probability of crisis during


the transition, with almost no overshooting.


   The portfolio of external assets in industrial countries followed a very dierent path in their


post-nancial integration transition, with a sharp increase in net equity holdings and a sharp drop


in net debt. The 2008 crisis and the recent turmoil in Europe could imply, however, that nancial


frictions in industrial countries may be more relevant than anticipated, and if so, our analysis would


predict a slow-moving but clear pattern of portfolio re-balancing for these countries in the future.




                                                 41
7     References

Aiyagari, S. Rao, and Mark Gertler. 1999.  `Overreacion' of Asset Prices in General Equilibrium.


    Review of Economic Dynamics 2(1), pp. 335.



Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. 2007. International Reserves: Precautionary versus Mercan-


    tilist Views, Theory and Evidence. Open Economies .



Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk. 2006.     Optimal Reserve Management and Soverign Debt.


    Working paper.



Arellano, Cristina, and Enrique G. Mendoza. 2003. Credit Frictions and `Sudden Stops' in Small


    Open Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises. In


    Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis: Theory and Policy in General Equilibrium, eds. Sumru Altug,


    Jagjit S. Chadha, and Charles Nolan, chap. 7. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, pp.


    335405.



Aspe, Pedro. 1993. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.



Backus, David K., Allan W. Gregory, and Stanley E. Zin. 1989.       Risk Premiums in the Term


    Structure: Evidence from Articial Economies.    Journal of Monetary Economics 24, pp. 371


    400.



Bekaert, Geert, and Campbell R. Harvey. 2000.        Capital Flows and the Behavior of Emerging


    Market Equity Returns. In Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies: Theory, Evidence, and


    Controversies, ed. Sebastian Edwards, chap. 6. NBER Conference Report, Chicago: University


    of Chicago Press, pp. 159194.



Caballero, Ricardo J., and Stavros Panageas. 2006.      Hedging Sudden Stops and Precautionary


    Contractions. Journal of Development Economics .



Calvo, Guillermo A. 1998. Capital Flows and Capital Market Crises: The Simple Economics of


    Sudden Stops. Journal of Applied Economics 1(1), pp. 3554.




                                               42
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2007. A New Measure of Financial Openness. Working paper,


  University of Wisconsin.



Choi, Woon Gyu, Sunil Sharma, and Maria Stromqvist. 2007. Capital Flows, Intergration, and


  International Reserve Holdings: The Recent Experience Experience of Emerging Markets and


  Advance Economies. Working paper, IMF, Washington, DC.



Christiano, Lawrence J., Christopher Gust, and Jorge Roldos. 2000. Monetary Policy in a Financial


  Crisis. Unpublished manuscript.



Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiarche. 1998.      Financial Liberalization and Financial


  Fragility. International Monetary Fund Working Paper no 98/83.



Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, and Enrique Mendoza. 2006. Are asset price guraantees useful for prevent-


  ing Sudden Stops?: A Quantitative Analysis of Globalization Hazard-Moral Hazard Tradeo.


  Journal of International Economics .



Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, Enrique Mendoza, and Marco Terrones. 2008. Precautionary Demand for


  Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New Merchantilism. Journal


  of Development Economics .



Epstein, Larry G. 1983.   Stationary Cardinal Utility and Cardinal Growth under Uncertainty.


  Journal of Economic Theory 31(1), pp. 133152.



Glick, Reuven, and Michael Hutchinson. 2001. Banking and Currency Crisis: How Common are


  Twins?   In Financial Crises in Emerging Markets, eds. Reuven Glick, Ramon Moreno, and


  Mark M. Spiegel. Conference at the Center for Pacic Basin Monetary and Economic Studies


  at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Sept. 23-24, 1999, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge


  University Press.



Henry, Peter Blair. 2000. Stock market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market


  Equity Prices. Journal of Monetary Economics 55(2), pp. 529564.




                                               43
Jeanne, Olivier. 2007.   International Reserves in Emerging Marketss Countries: Too Much of a


  Good Thing? BPEA .



Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Ranciere. 2006.    The Optimal Level of International Reserves for


  Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications. WP 06/229, IMF.



Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. The Twin Crises: The Cause of Banking


  and BalanceofPayments Problems. The American Economic Review 89(3), pp. 473500.



Kraay, Art. 1998. In Search of Macroecconomic Eects of Capital Account Liberalization. World


  Bank, Development Research Group, Washington, DC.



Lane, Philip R., and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. 2006. The External Wealth of Nations Mark II:


  Revised and Extended Estimates of Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2004. Tech. rep., IMF.



Martell, Rodolfo, and Rene Stulz. 2003. Equity-Market Liberalizations as Country IPO's.   The


  American Economic Review 93(2), pp. 97101.



Mendoza, Enrique G. 2002. Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop.


  In Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, eds. Sebastian Edwards, and Jerey A.


  Frankel, chap. 7. NBER Conference Report, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 335383.



Mendoza, Enrique G. 2006. Endogenous Sudden Stops in a Business Cycle Model with Collateral


  Constraints: A Fisherian Deation of Tobin's Q.   Working Paper 12564, National Bureau of


  Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.



Mendoza, Enrique G. 2010. Sudden Stops, Financial Crises and Leverage.    The American Eco-


  nomic Review 100(5), pp. 194166.



Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and Jose-Victor Rios-Rull. 2009. Financial Integration,


  Financial Development,and Global Imbalances. Journal of Political Economy 117(3).



Mendoza, Enrique G., and Katherine A. Smith. 2006. Quantitative Implications of a Debt-Deation


  Theory of Sudden Stops and Asset Prices. Journal of International Economics 70, pp. 82114.




                                               44
Ostry, J., and C. Reinhart. 1992. Private saving and terms of trade shocks: Evidence from devel-


  oping countries. Imf sta papers.




                                               45
8    Appendix

Industrial countries:


Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada , Denmark, Finland, France,Germany, Greece,Ireland, Italy,


Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United King-


dom, and United States




Emerging Market Economies:


Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Czech


Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Hong Kong , Hungary , India, Indonesia, Israel, Saudi Ara-


bia, Kuwait, Libya, Iran, Jordan, Korea, Latvia,Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria,


Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, Singapore, Slovak Republic, Slovenia,South


Africa, Thailand , Turkey, Uruguay, and Venezuela.




The data on countries external capital structure used in Figures 1 and        2 comes from Lane and


Milesi-Ferretti (2006), updated through 2007. GDP weights are time varying. Net calculations refer


to assets minus liabilities. Debt assets include portfolio debt, other debt, and reserves minus gold.


Debt liabilities refer to portfolio debt and other debt. Equity assets and liabilities include portfolio


equity and foreign direct investment.


    The data for Figure A.1 on measures of nancial integration comes from Chinn and Ito (2007),


updated through 2009. These integration measures are averaged by country type using a simple


average versus a weighted average.




                                                  46
                                 Figure A.1: Financial Integration Measures




          1.000                                                                                            3.000



          0.800

                                                                                                           2.500

          0.600



          0.400                                                                                            2.000



          0.200

                                                                                                           1.500

          0.000
                  1970    1975        1980      1985            1990        1995          2000   2005


         -0.200                                                                                            1.000



         -0.400

                                                                                                           0.500

         -0.600



         -0.800                                                                                            0.000


                                              Emerging Markets(LHS)    Industrials(RHS)




Note: Original source Chinn and Ito (2007) but since updated through 2009. See Appendix for a list of included
countries.




                                                       47
