                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     THE TOP 1 PERCENT IN INTERNATIONAL AND HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

                                         Facundo Alvaredo
                                        Anthony B. Atkinson
                                          Thomas Piketty
                                          Emmanuel Saez

                                        Working Paper 19075
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19075


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




This paper is in preparation for the Journal of Economic Perspectives. We are grateful to the editor,
David Autor, the Managing Editor, Timothy Taylor, and Co-editors, Chang-Tai Hsieh and Ulrike Malmendier
for most helpful comments. Financial support from the MacArthur foundation, the Center for Equitable
Growth at UC Berkeley, the Institute for New Economic Thinking at the Oxford Martin School, and
the ESRC-DFID Joint Fund is thankfully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Facundo Alvaredo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Top 1 Percent in International and Historical Perspective
Facundo Alvaredo, Anthony B. Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 19075
May 2013, Revised June 2013
JEL No. H2

                                               ABSTRACT

The top 1 percent income share has more than doubled in the United States over the last thirty years,
drawing much public attention in recent years. While other English speaking countries have also experienced
sharp increases in the top 1 percent income share, many highincome countries such as Japan, France,
or Germany have seen much less increase in top income shares. Hence, the explanation cannot rely
solely on forces common to advanced countries, such as the impact of new technologies and globalization
on the supply and demand for skills. Moreover, the explanations have to accommodate the falls in
top income shares earlier in the twentieth century experienced in virtually all highincome countries.
We highlight four main factors. The first is the impact of tax policy, which has varied over time and
differs across countries. Top tax rates have moved in the opposite direction from top income shares.
The effects of top rate cuts can operate in conjunction with other mechanisms. The second factor is
indeed a richer view of the labor market, where we contrast the standard supply-side model with one
where pay is determined by bargaining and the reactions to top rate cuts may lead simply to a redistribution
of surplus. Indeed, top rate cuts may lead managerial energies to be diverted to increasing their remuneration
at the expense of enterprise growth and employment. The third factor is capital income. Overall, private
wealth (relative to income) has followed a U-shaped path over time, particularly in Europe, where
inherited wealth is, in Europe if not in the United States, making a return. The fourth, little investigated,
element is the correlation between earned income and capital income, which has substantially increased
in recent decades in the United States.


Facundo Alvaredo                                      Thomas Piketty
Nuffield College and EMod                             Paris School of Economics
University of Oxford                                  48 Boulevard Jourdan
Eagle House                                           75014 Paris, France
Walton Well Road                                      piketty@ens.fr
OX2 6ED Oxford
UK                                                    Emmanuel Saez
alvaredo@gmail.com                                    Department of Economics
                                                      University of California, Berkeley
Anthony B. Atkinson                                   530 Evans Hall #3880
Dept. of Economics                                    Berkeley, CA 94720
Oxford Unviersity                                     and NBER
Manor Road Building, Manor Rd.                        saez@econ.berkeley.edu
Oxford, OX1 3BJ, United Kingdom
tony.atkinson@nuffield.ox.ac.uk
               For	  three	  decades	  the	  debate	  about	  rising	  income	  inequality	  in	  the	  United	  States	  has	  centered	  
on	   the	   dispersion	   of	   wages	   and	   the	   increased	   premium	   for	   skilled/educated	   workers,	   attributed	   in	  
varying	  proportions	  to	  skill-­‐biased	  technological	  change	  and	  to	  globalization	  (for	  example,	  see	  Katz	  and	  
Autor,	   1999	   for	   a	   survey).	   In	   recent	   years,	   however,	   there	   has	   been	   growing	   realization	   that	   most	   of	   the	  
action	  has	  been	  at	  the	  very	  top.	  This	  has	  attracted	  a	  great	  deal	  of	  public	  attention	  (as	  witnessed	  by	  the	  
number	   of	   visits	   to	   and	   press	   citations	   of	   our	   World	   Top	   Incomes	   Database	   at	  
http://topincomes.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/),	   and	   has	   represented	   a	   challenge	   to	   the	   economics	  
profession.	  Stories	  based	  on	  the	  supply	  and	  demand	  for	  skills	  are	  not	  enough	  to	  explain	  the	  extreme	  top	  
tail	  of	  the	  earnings	  distribution;	  nor	  is	  it	  enough	  to	  look	  only	  at	  earned	  incomes.	  Different	  approaches	  
are	   necessary	   to	   explain	   what	   has	   happened	   in	   the	   United	   States	   over	   the	   past	   century,	   and	   also	   to	  
explain	   the	   differing	   experience	   in	   other	  high-­‐income	   countries	   over	   recent	   decades.	   We	   begin	   with	   the	  
international	   comparison	   in	   the	   first	   section,	   and	   then	   turn	   to	   the	   causes	   and	   implications	   of	   the	  
evolution	  of	  top	  income	  shares.	  

              We	   should	   start	   by	   emphasizing	  the	   factual	   importance	   of	   the	   top	   1	   percent.	   It	   is	   tempting	   to	  
dismiss	  the	  study	  of	  this	  group	  as	  a	  passing	  political	  fad,	  due	  to	  the	  slogans	  of	  Occupy	  Movement	  or	  as	  
the	   academic	   equivalent	   of	   reality	   TV.	   But	   the	   magnitudes	   are	   truly	   substantial.	   Based	   on	   pre-­‐tax	   and	  
pre-­‐transfer	   market	   income	   (excluding	   non-­‐taxable	   fringe	   benefits	   such	   as	   health	   insurance	   but	  
including	   realized	   capital	   gains)	   per	   family	   reported	   on	   tax	   returns,	   the	   share	   of	   total	   annual	   income	  
received	   by	   the	   top	   1	   percent	   has	   more	   than	   doubled	   from	   9	   percent	   in	   1976	   to	   20	   percent	   in	   2011	  
(Piketty	  and	  Saez,	  2003,	  and	  updated	  tables).	  	  There	  have	  been	  rises	  for	  other	  top	  shares,	  but	  these	  have	  
been	  much	  smaller:	  during	  the	  same	  period,	  the	  share	  of	  the	  group	  from	  95th	  to	  99th	  percentile	  rose	  
only	  by	  3	  percentage	  points.	  	  The	  rise	  in	  the	  share	  of	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  has	  had	  a	  noticeable	  effect	  on	  
overall	  income	  inequality	  in	  the	  US	  (Atkinson,	  Piketty	  and	  Saez,	  2011,	  Section	  2.2).	  	  

             	  

The	  United	  States	  Top	  1	  Percent	  in	  International	  Perspective	  	  

	            Figure	   1	   depicts	   the	   US	   top	   1	   percent	   income	   share	   since	   1913.	   	   Kuznets	   (1955)	   famously	  
hypothesized	   that	   economic	   growth	   would	   first	   be	   accompanied	   by	   a	   rise	   in	   inequality,	   and	   then	   by	   a	  
decline	  in	  inequality.	  At	  first	  glance,	  it	  is	  tempting	  to	  conclude	  from	  Figure	  1	  that	  the	  Kuznets	  curve	  has	  
been	  turned	  upside-­‐down.	  But	  this	  suggestion	  is	  too	  facile.	  After	  all,	  the	  interwar	  period	  did	  not	  exhibit	  a	  
secular	  downward	  trend	  in	  shares	  of	  top	  incomes.	  Apart	  from	  the	  bubble	  of	  the	  late	  1920s,	  the	  US	  top	  1	  
percent	  share	  was	  between	  15	  and	  20	  percent	  throughout	  this	  time.	  At	  the	  time	  of	  Pearl	  Harbor	  in	  1941,	  
the	  share	  of	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  was	  essentially	  the	  same	  as	  in	  1918.	  The	  downward	  trend	  in	  top	  shares	  
started	  at	  the	  time	  of	  World	  War	  II	  and	  continued	  until	  the	  end	  of	  the	  1960s.	  There	  was	  then	  a	  sharp	  
reversal,	  so	  that	  the	  top	  share	  is	  today	  back	  in	  the	  same	  range	  as	  in	  the	  1920s.	  Interestingly,	  the	  Great	  
Recession	   of	   2008-­‐2009	   does	   not	   seem	   to	   have	   reversed	   the	   upward	   trend.	   There	   was	   a	   fall	   in	   the	   top	   1	  
per	  cent	  share	  in	  2008-­‐2009,	  but	  a	  rebound	  in	  2010.	  This	  would	  be	  consistent	  with	  the	  experience	  of	  the	  
previous	  economic	  downturn:	  top	  income	  shares	  fell	  in	  2001-­‐2002,	  but	  quickly	  recovered	  and	  returned	  
to	  the	  previous	  trend	  in	  2003-­‐2007.	  Another	  piece	  of	  evidence	  that	  is	  consistent	  with	  this	  interpretation	  



                                                                                                                                                                                   2	  
	  
is	   the	   smaller	   cyclical	   variation	   in	   the	   series	   excluding	   capital	   gains	   (shown	   by	   the	   hollow	   symbols	   in	  
Figure	  1).	  	  

                Has	  the	  US	  experience	  been	  reproduced	  in	  other	  high-­‐income	  countries?	  	  The	  evolution	  of	  the	  
shares	   of	   the	   top	   1	   percent	   is	   shown	   for	   four	   Anglo-­‐Saxon	   countries	   in	   Figure	   2A	   and	   for	   France,	  
Germany,	   Sweden,	   and	   Japan	   in	   Figure	   2B	   (it	   should	   be	   noted	   that	   the	   estimates	   for	   France	   and	   the	  
United	   Kingdom	   do	   not	   include	   capital	   gains,	   the	   estimates	   for	   Canada,	   Germany	   and	   Sweden	   include	  
realized	   capital	   gains	   after	   the	   year	   therein	   shown,	   and	   the	   estimates	   for	   Australia	   include	   them	   only	  
partially	   and	   at	   varying	   degrees	   over	   time).	   The	   other	   Anglo-­‐Saxon	   countries,	   Australia,	   Canada,	   and	   the	  
United	  Kingdom	  all	  show	  a	  strong	  asymmetric	  U-­‐shape.	  However,	  the	  rises	  were	  less	  marked	  in	  two	  of	  
these	   countries.	   Over	   the	   period	   1980	   to	   2007,	   when	   the	   top	   1	   percent	   share	   rose	   by	   some	   135	   percent	  
in	   the	   US	   and	   the	   UK,	   it	   rose	   by	   some	   105	   percent	   in	   Australia	   and	   76	   percent	   in	   Canada	   (and	   by	   39	  
percent	   in	   New	   Zealand,	   not	   shown).	   The	   experience	   is	   markedly	   different	   in	   continental	   Europe	   and	  
Japan,	  where	  the	  long	  pattern	  of	  income	  inequality	  is	  much	  closer	  to	  an	  L-­‐shaped	  than	  to	  a	  U-­‐shaped	  
curve.	   (Sweden	   and	   other	   Scandinavian	   countries	  such	   as	   Norway	   (not	   shown)	   are	   intermediate	   cases.)1	  
There	   has	   been	   some	   rise	   in	   recent	   years	   in	   the	   top	   shares	   in	   these	   countries,	   but	   the	   top	   1	   percent	  
shares	   are	   not	   far	   today	   from	   their	   levels	   in	   the	   late	   1940s,	   whereas	   in	   the	   US	   the	   share	   is	   higher	   by	  
more	  than	  a	  half.	  

                To	   us,	   the	   fact	   that	   high-­‐income	   countries	   with	   similar	   technological	   and	   productivity	  
developments	  have	  gone	  through	  different	  patterns	  of	  income	  inequality	  at	  the	  very	  top	  supports	  the	  
view	   that	   institutional	   and	   policy	   differences	   play	   a	   key	   role	   in	   these	   transformations.	   Purely	  
technological	   stories	   based	   solely	   upon	   supply	   and	   demand	   of	   skills	   can	   hardly	   explain	   such	   diverging	  
patterns.	   What	   is	   more,	   within	   countries,	   we	   have	   to	   explain	   not	   only	   why	   top	   shares	   rose	   (in	   the	   U-­‐
shaped	  countries)	  but	  also	  why	  they	  fell	  for	  a	  sustained	  period	  of	  time	  earlier	  in	  the	  twentieth	  century.	  
The	  most	  obvious	  policy	  difference	  –	  between	  countries	  and	  over	  time	  –	  is	  that	  regarding	  taxation,	  and	  
it	  is	  with	  this	  that	  we	  begin.	  

	  

Taxes	  and	  Top	  Shares	  

               During	   the	   twentieth	   century,	   top	   income	   tax	   rates	   have	   followed	   an	   inverse	   U-­‐shaped	   time-­‐
path	   in	   many	   countries,	   as	   illustrated	   in	   Figure	   3.	   In	   the	   United	   States,	   top	   income	   tax	   rates	   were	  
consistently	   above	   60	   percent	   from	   1932	   to	   1981	   and,	   at	   the	   start	   of	   the	   1920s,	   they	   were	   above	   70	  
percent	  (of	  course,	  varying	  proportions	  of	  taxpayers	  were	  subject	  to	  the	  top	  rate).	  High	  income	  tax	  rates	  
are	   not	   just	   a	   feature	   of	   the	   post-­‐World	   War	   II	   period,	   and	   their	   cumulative	   effect	   contributed	   to	   the	  
earlier	   decline	   in	   top	   income	   shares.	  While	  many	  countries	  have	  cut	  top	  tax	  rates	  in	  recent	  decades,	  the	  
depth	  of	  these	  cuts	  has	  varied	  considerably.	  For	  example,	  the	  top	  tax	  rate	  in	  France	  in	  2010	  was	  only	  10	  
percentage	   points	   lower	   than	   in	   1950,	   whereas	   the	   top	   tax	   rate	   in	   the	   US	   was	   less	   than	   half	   its	   1950	  
value.	   Figure	   4	   plots	   the	   changes	   in	   top	   marginal	   income	   tax	   rates	   (combining	   both	   central	   and	   local	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1
 	  The	  Swedish	  top	  1	  percent	  share	  was	  very	  high	  during	  World	  War	  One.	  The	  same	  is	  observed	  in	  Denmark	  –	  see	  
the	  discussion	  in	  Atkinson	  and	  Søgaard	  (2013).	  	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3	  
	  
government	  income	  taxes)	  since	  the	  early	  1960s,	  against	  the	  changes	  over	  that	  period	  in	  top	  1	  percent	  
income	  shares	  for	  18	  high-­‐income	  countries	  in	  the	  World	  Top	  Incomes	  Database.	  It	  shows	  that	  there	  is	  a	  
strong	   correlation	   between	   the	   reductions	   in	   top	   tax	   rates	   and	   the	   increases	   in	   top	   1	   percent	   pre-­‐tax	  
income	  shares.	  For	  example,	  the	  United	  States	  experienced	  a	  47	  percentage	  points	  reduction	  in	  its	  top	  
income	   tax	   rate	   and	   a	   10	   percentage	   point	   increase	   in	   its	   top	   1	   percent	   pre-­‐tax	   income	   share.	   By	  
contrast,	   countries	   such	   as	   Germany,	   Spain,	   or	   Switzerland,	   which	   did	   not	   experience	   any	  significant	   top	  
rate	  tax	  cut,	  did	  not	  show	  increases	  in	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  income	  share.	  Hence,	  the	  evolution	  of	  top	  tax	  
rates	  is	  strongly	  negatively	  correlated	  with	  changes	  in	  pre-­‐tax	  income	  concentration.	  	  

               This	   negative	   correlation	   can	   be	   explained	   in	   a	   variety	   of	   ways.	   As	   pointed	   out	   originally	   by	  
Slemrod	  (1996),	  it	  is	  possible	  that	  the	  rise	  in	  top	  US	  income	  shares	  occurred	  because	  when	  top	  tax	  rates	  
declined,	  those	  with	  high	  incomes	  had	  less	  reason	  to	  seek	  out	  tax	  avoidance	  strategies.	  This	  argument	  
has	   more	   recently	   been	   used	   to	   deny	   that	   any	   real	   increase	   in	   income	   concentration	   actually	   took	   place	  
–	  that	  it	  is	  a	  pure	  statistical	  artifact.	  Under	  this	  scenario,	  the	  real	  US	  top	  income	  shares	  were	  as	  high	  in	  
the	  1960s	  as	  they	  are	  today,	  but	  a	  smaller	  fraction	  of	  top	  incomes	  was	  reported	  on	  tax	  returns.	  While	  
this	  factor	  may	  have	  affected	  the	  pattern	  of	  the	  data	  at	  certain	  times—for	  example,	  the	  jump	  in	  top	  US	  
income	  shares	  following	  the	  1986	  Tax	  Reform	  Act—closer	  examination	  of	  the	  US	  case	  suggests	  that	  the	  
tax	  avoidance	  response	  cannot	  account	  for	  a	  significant	  fraction	  of	  the	  long-­‐run	  surge	  in	  top	  incomes.	  
Top	   income	   shares	   based	   on	   a	   broader	   definition	   of	   income	   that	   includes	   realized	   capital	   gains,	   and	  
hence	   a	   major	   part	   of	   avoidance	   channels,	   have	   increased	   virtually	   as	   much	   as	   top	   income	   shares	   based	  
on	   a	   narrower	   definition	   of	   income	   subject	   to	   the	   progressive	   tax	   schedule	   (See	   Figure	   1	   and	   Piketty,	  
Saez	  and	  Stantcheva	  2011	  for	  a	  detailed	  analysis).	  

              The	   explanation	   that	   changes	   in	   tax	   rates	   in	   the	   top	   tax	   brackets	   do	   lead	   to	   substantive	  
behavioral	  change	  has	  indeed	  received	  some	  support.	  After	  noting	  that	  top	  US	  incomes	  surged	  following	  
the	   large	   top	   marginal	   tax	   rate	   cuts	   of	   the	   1980s,	   Lindsey	   (1987)	   and	   Feldstein	   (1995)	   proposed	   a	  
standard	   supply-­‐side	   story	   whereby	   lower	   tax	   rates	   stimulate	   economic	   activity	   among	   top	   earners	  
involving	  more	  work,	  greater	  entrepreneurship,	  and	  the	  like.	  In	  this	  scenario,	  lower	  top	  tax	  rates	  would	  
lead	  to	  more	  economic	  activity	  by	  the	  rich	  and	  hence	  more	  economic	  growth.	  	  

              Behavioral	   change	   is	   at	   the	   heart	   of	   the	   optimal	   income	   tax	   analysis	   pioneered	   by	   Mirrlees	  
(1971),	   publicly	   evoked	   in	   the	   debate	   about	   top	   tax	   rates	   in	   the	   UK,	   where	   the	   Chancellor	   of	   the	  
Exchequer	  has	  argued	  that	  reducing	  the	  top	  tax	  rate	  below	  50	  per	  cent	  (for	  broadly	  the	  top	  1	  percent)	  
will	  not	  reduce	  revenue.	  The	  standard	  optimal	  tax	  formula	  (Diamond	  and	  Saez,	  2011)	  implies,	  with	  an	  
elasticity	   of	   taxable	   income	   of	   0.5,	   that	   the	   revenue-­‐maximizing	   top	   tax	   rate	   would	   be	   57	   percent.2	  
When	   allowance	   is	   made	   for	   other	   taxes	   levied	   in	   the	   UK,	   such	   as	   the	   payroll	   tax,	   this	   implies	   a	   top	  
income	  tax	  rate	  in	  the	  UK	  of	  some	  40	  percent	  (Atkinson,	  2012).	  

	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2
 	  The	  revenue	  maximizing	  top	  tax	  rate	  formula	  takes	  the	  form	  τ=1/(1+a·∙e)	  where	  a	  is	  the	  Pareto	  parameter	  of	  the	  
top	  tail	  of	  the	  income	  distribution,	  and	  e	  is	  the	  elasticity	  of	  pre-­‐tax	  income	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  net-­‐of-­‐tax	  rate	  1-­‐τ.	  
With	  e=0.5	  (as	  estimated	  from	  Figure	  4)	  and	  a=1.5	  (the	  current	  Pareto	  parameter	  of	  the	  US	  income	  distribution),	  
we	  get	  τ=1/(1+0.5·∙1.5)=57	  percent.	  	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4	  
	  
Richer	  models	  of	  pay	  determination	  

	            The	   optimal	   tax	   literature	   has,	   however,	   remained	   rooted	   in	   an	   over-­‐simplified	   model	   of	   pay	  
determination	  that	  takes	  no	  account	  of	  developments	  in	  labor	  economics,	  and	  the	  same	  applies	  to	  the	  
explanations	   of	   changing	   top	   income	   shares.	   Changes	   in	   the	   pay	   of	   a	   worker	   are	   assumed	   to	   have	   no	  
impact	   on	   either	   the	   other	   side	   of	   the	   labor	   market	   or	   on	   other	   workers.	   The	   worker	   generates	   more	  
output	  and	  pay	  adjusts	  by	  the	  same	  amount.	  Each	  person	  is	  an	  island.	  However,	  in	  the	  –	  now	  standard	  –	  
models	   of	   job-­‐matching,	   a	   job	   emerges	   as	   the	   result	   of	   the	   costly	   creation	   of	   a	   vacancy	   by	   the	   employer	  
and	  of	  job	  search	  by	  the	  employee.	  A	  match	  creates	  a	  positive	  surplus	  and	  there	  is	  Nash	  bargaining	  over	  
the	   division	   of	   the	   surplus,	   leading	   to	   a	   proportion	   β	   going	   to	   the	   worker	   and	   (1-­‐β)	   to	   the	   employer.	  	  
Typically,	   β	   is	   assumed	   fixed,	   but	   it	   is	   possible	   that	   what	   we	   have	   observed,	   at	   least	   at	   the	   top,	   is	   an	  
increase	  in	  β,	  which	  can	  lead	  to	  changes	  in	  the	  distribution	  of	  income.3	  

           Why	  should	  β	  have	  increased?	  	  The	  extent	  to	  which	  top	  earners	  exercised	  bargaining	  power	  may	  
have	  interacted	  with	  the	  changes	  in	  the	  tax	  system.	  When	  top	  marginal	  tax	  rates	  were	  very	  high,	  the	  net	  
reward	   to	   a	   highly	   paid	   executive	   for	   bargaining	   for	   more	   compensation	   was	   modest.	   When	   top	  
marginal	   tax	   rates	   fell,	   high	   earners	   started	   bargaining	   more	   aggressively	   to	   increase	   their	  
compensation.	   In	   this	   scenario,	   cuts	   in	   top	   tax	   rates	   can	   increase	   top	   income	   shares	   –	   consistent	   with	  
the	  observed	  trend	  in	  Figure	  1	  –	  but	  the	  increases	  in	  top	  1	  percent	  incomes	  now	  come	  at	  the	  expense	  of	  
the	  remaining	  99	  percent.	  	  

                 One	  can	  also	  weave	  this	  notion	  of	  greater	  incentives	  for	  bargaining	  into	  a	  broader	  scenario,	  in	  
which	  the	  improved	  information	  and	  communications	  technology	  and	  globalization	  were	  increasing	  the	  
demand	   for	   high-­‐skilled	   labor,	   and	   deregulation	   of	   finance	   and	   other	   industries	   was	   both	   raising	   the	  
demand	  for	  skill	  at	  the	  top	  and	  changing	  the	  rules	  under	  which	  compensation	  had	  been	  calculated	  in	  the	  
past.	   In	   this	   perspective,	   high	   marginal	   tax	   rates	   had	   served	   as	   a	   brake	   on	   the	   level	   of	   surplus	   extraction	  
in	  the	  past,	  but	  then	  this	  brake	  was	  released	  at	  the	  same	  time	  that	  economic	  and	  institutional	  conditions	  
allowed	   for	   higher	   compensation	   at	   the	   top	   of	   the	   income	   distribution	   (Piketty,	   Saez	   and	   Stantcheva	  
2011).	  	  

	            In	  this	  scenario,	  the	  higher	  share	  of	  income	  going	  to	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  does	  not	  reflect	  higher	  
economic	   growth—which	   is	   a	   key	   difference	   with	   the	   supply-­‐side	   scenario.	   It	   is	   even	   possible	   that	  
reductions	  in	  top	  marginal	  tax	  rates	  may	  have	  adverse	  effects	  on	  growth,	  as	  may	  be	  seen	  if	  we	  go	  back	  
to	  the	  theories	  of	  managerial	  firms	  and	  the	  separation	  of	  ownership	  and	  control	  developed	  by	  William	  
Baumol,	  Robin	  Marris	  and	  Oliver	  Williamson	  in	  the	  1960s	  and	  1970s	  (see	  Solow,	  1971).	  In	  these	  models,	  
managers	   are	   concerned	   with	   their	   remuneration	   (both	   monetary	   and	   non-­‐monetary)	   but	   also	   with	  
other	   dimensions	   such	   as	   the	   scale	   or	   rate	   of	   growth	   of	   their	   firms,	   and	   allocate	   their	   effort	   accordingly.	  
Where	  top	  tax	  rates	  were	  high,	  there	  was	  a	  low	  return	  to	  effort	  spent	  on	  negotiating	  higher	  pay.	  Top	  
corporate	   executives	   may	   have	   concentrated	   on	   securing	   alternative	   sources	   of	   utility,	   such	   as	  
unproductive	   corporate	   expenses,	   but	   they	   may	   also	   have	   ploughed	   back	   profits	   into	   securing	   faster	  
expansion	  than	  in	  the	  traditional	  stock	  market	  valuation	  maximizing	  firm.	  Cuts	  in	  top	  tax	  rates,	  however,	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3
 	  Kleven	  et	  al.	  (2013)	  find	  evidence	  of	  such	  bargaining	  effects	  in	  the	  pay	  determination	  of	  high	  earners,	  using	  the	  
Danish	  preferential	  tax	  scheme	  for	  highly	  paid	  immigrants.	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5	  
	  
meant	  that	  top	  executives	  switched	  efforts	  back	  to	  securing	  a	  larger	  share	  of	  the	  profits,	  in	  which	  case	  
increases	  in	  remuneration,	  or	  bonuses,	  may	  have	  come	  at	  the	  expense	  of	  employment	  and	  growth.	  

               The	   correlation	   shown	   in	   Figure	   4	   between	   top	   marginal	   tax	   rates	   and	   changes	   in	   top	   income	  
shares	   may	   of	   course	   reflect	   in	   part	   coincidence	   rather	   than	   causality.	   The	   political	   factors	   that	   led	   to	  
top	   tax	   rate	   cuts	   –	   such	   as	   those	   by	   Reagan	   and	   Thatcher	   in	   the	   1980s	   in	   the	   United	   States	   and	   the	  
United	  Kingdom	  –were	  accompanied	  by	  other	  legislative	  changes,	  such	  as	  deregulation,	  which	  may	  have	  
caused	  top	  incomes	  to	  rise,	  not	  least	  on	  account	  of	  the	  impetus	  they	   gave	   to	   the	   growth	   of	   the	   financial	  
services	  (Philippon	  and	  Reshef,	  2012)	  and	  legal	  services	  sectors.	  More	  generally,	  the	  effects	  of	  taxation	  
may	  interact	  with	  other	  changes,	  such	  as	  those	  in	  remuneration	  practices.	  Where	  there	  is	  a	  surplus	  to	  be	  
shared,	  the	  division	  may	  reflect	  relative	  bargaining	  strength,	  as	  above,	  but	  it	  may	  also	  be	  influenced	  by	  
social	   norms.	   Notions	   of	   fairness,	   or	   a	   “pay	   code”,	   may	   come	   into	   play	   to	   remove	   the	   indeterminacy	  
where	   “individual	   incentives	   are	   not	   by	   themselves	   …	   sufficient	   to	   determine	   a	   unique	   equilibrium”	  
(MacLeod	   and	   Malcomson	   1998,	   p.	   400).	   A	   “pay	   code”	   limits	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   earnings	   are	  
individually	  determined,	  a	  situation	  that	  both	  workers	  and	  employers	  accept	  on	  reputational	  grounds.	  
As	  argued	  in	  Atkinson	  (2008),	  there	  may	  be	  a	  tipping-­‐point	  where	  there	  is	  a	  switch	  from	  a	  high	  level	  of	  
adherence	   to	   such	   a	   code	   to	   a	   situation	   where	   pay	   becomes	   largely	   individually	   determined.	   This	   has	  
been	  documented	  in	  the	  case	  of	  the	  US	  by	  Lemieux,	  MacLeod	  and	  Parent	  (2009),	  who	  find	  an	  increase	  in	  
the	   proportion	   of	   performance-­‐pay	   jobs	   over	   the	   period	   1976	   to	   1998.	   As	   they	   note,	   the	   increased	  
extent	   of	   performance-­‐pay	   may	   be	   a	   channel	   by	   which	   other	   factors	   are	   expressed	   in	   greater	   wage	  
dispersion,	  and	  they	  stress	  the	  impact	  at	  the	  top	  end	  of	  the	  wage	  distribution.	  	  

             	  

Top	  Tax	  Rates	  and	  Growth	  

                If	  we	  look	  at	  the	  aggregate	  outcomes,	  we	  find	  no	  apparent	  correlation	  between	  cuts	  in	  top	  tax	  
rates	  and	  growth	  rates	  in	  real	  per	  capita	  GDP	  (Piketty,	  Saez	  and	  Stantcheva,	  2011).	  	  Countries	  that	  made	  
large	   cuts	   in	   top	   tax	   rates	   such	   as	   the	   United	   Kingdom	   or	   the	   United	   States	   have	   not	   grown	   significantly	  
faster	   than	   countries	   that	   did	   not,	   such	   as	   Germany	   or	   Denmark.	   	   This	   lack	   of	   correlation	   is	   more	  
consistent	  with	  a	  story	  that	  the	  response	  of	  pre-­‐tax	  top	  incomes	  to	  top	  tax	  rates	  documented	  in	  Figure	  4	  
is	   due	   to	   increased	   bargaining	   power	   or	   more	   individualized	   pay	   at	   the	   top,	   rather	   than	   increased	  
productive	  effort.	  Naturally,	  cross-­‐country	  comparisons	  are	  bound	  to	  be	  fragile;	  exact	  results	  vary	  with	  
the	  specification,	  years,	  and	  countries.	  However,	  the	  regression	  analysis	  by	  Piketty,	  Saez,	  and	  Stantcheva	  
(2011)	  using	  the	  complete	  time-­‐series	  data	  since	  1960,	  shows	  that	  the	  absence	  of	  correlation	  between	  
economic	  growth	  and	  top	  tax	  rates	  is	  quite	  robust.	  By	  and	  large,	  the	  bottom	  line	  is	  that	  rich	  countries	  
have	   all	   grown	   at	   roughly	   the	   same	   rate	   over	   the	   past	   40	   years	   –	   in	   spite	   of	   huge	   variations	   in	   tax	  
policies.	  	  

            More	   specifically,	   international	   evidence	   shows	   that	   current	   pay	   levels	   for	   chief	   executive	  
officers	  across	  countries	  are	  strongly	  negatively	  correlated	  with	  top	  tax	  rates	  even	  controlling	  for	  firm's	  
characteristics	   and	   performance,	   and	   that	   this	   correlation	   is	   stronger	   in	   firms	   with	   poor	   governance	  



                                                                                                                                                                                   6	  
	  
(Piketty,	  Saez	  and	  Stantcheva,	  2011).4	  This	  finding	  also	  suggests	  that	  the	  link	  between	  top	  tax	  rates	  and	  
pay	   of	   chief	   executive	   officers	   does	   not	   run	   through	   firm	   performance	   but	   is	   likely	   to	   be	   due	   to	  
bargaining	  effects.	  	  

              Such	   findings	   have	   strong	   implications	   for	   top	   tax	   rate	   policies.	   The	   optimal	   top	   tax	   rate	   rises	  
dramatically	  if	  a	  substantial	  fraction	  of	  the	  effect	  of	  top	  tax	  rates	  on	  pre-­‐tax	  top	  incomes	  documented	  in	  
Figure	   4	   above	   is	   due	   to	   wage-­‐bargaining	   effects,	   instead	   of	   supply-­‐side	   effects.	   Using	   mid-­‐range	  
parameter	  values	  where	  the	  response	  of	  top	  earners	  to	  top	  tax	  rate	  cuts	  is	  due	  in	  part	  (three-­‐fifths)	  to	  
increased	   bargaining	   behavior	   and	   in	   part	   (two-­‐fifths)	   to	   increased	   productive	   work,	   Piketty,	   Saez	   and	  
Stantcheva	  (2011)	  find	  that	  the	  top	  tax	  rate	  could	  potentially	  be	  set	  as	  high	  as	  83	  percent	  –	  as	  opposed	  
to	  57	  percent	  in	  the	  pure	  supply-­‐side	  model.5	  

	  

Capital	  income	  and	  inheritance	  	  

            The	   analysis	   just	   cited	   focused	   –	   like	   much	   of	   the	   literature	   –	   on	   what	   is	   commonly	   called	  
“earned	   incomes,”	   referring	   to	   income	   received	   in	   response	   for	   work.	   But	   capital	   income	   is	   also	   an	  
important	   part	   of	   the	   story.	   Of	   course,	   the	   distinction	   between	   the	   two	   types	   of	   income	   can	   become	  
blurry	   in	   some	   cases—notably,	   entrepreneurial	   income	   can	   have	   elements	   of	   both	   compensation	   for	  
work	  and	  a	  return	  to	  capital	  investment.	  Here,	  we	  define	  “capital	  income”	  as	  rents,	  dividends,	  interest,	  
and	  realized	  capital	  gains.	  The	  decline	  of	  top	  capital	  incomes	  is	  the	  main	  driver	  of	  the	  falls	  in	  top	  income	  
shares	  found	  in	  many	  countries	  in	  the	  early	  twentieth	  century.	  For	  example,	  from	  1916	  to	  1939,	  capital	  
income	  represented	  50	  percent	  of	  US	  top	  1	  percent	  incomes,	  whereas	  by	  the	  end	  of	  the	  century	  from	  
1987	  to	  2010,	  the	  share	  had	  fallen	  to	  a	  third	  (Piketty	  and	  Saez,	  2003,	  Tables	  A7	  and	  A8).	  In	  the	  UK,	  the	  
corresponding	   share	   fell	   from	   60	   percent	   in	   1937	   to	   under	   20	   percent	   by	   the	   end	   of	   the	   century	  
(Atkinson,	   2007,	   Figure	   4.11).	   At	   the	   same	   time,	   it	   should	   be	   borne	   in	   mind	   that	   these	   calculations	  
depend	  on	  the	  definition	  of	  taxable	  incomes.	  In	  times	  past,	  a	  number	  of	  income	  tax	  systems	  like	  those	  in	  
France	   and	   the	   United	   Kingdom	   included	   imputed	   rents	   of	   homeowners	   in	   the	   income	   tax	   base,	   but	  
today	   imputed	   rents	   are	   typically	   excluded.	  	   Where	   the	   tax	   base	   has	   been	   extended,	   this	   has	   in	   some	  
cases	   taken	   the	   form	   of	   separate	   taxation	   (as	   with	  realized	   capital	   gains	   in	   the	   UK),	   so	   that	   this	   element	  
of	   capital	   income	   is	   not	   covered	   in	   the	   income	   tax	   data.	   As	   a	   result	   of	   these	   developments,	   the	   share	   of	  
capital	  income	  that	  is	  reportable	  on	  income	  tax	  returns	  has	  often	  significantly	  decreased	  over	  time.	  

	          Earlier	   we	   referred	   to	   the	   cumulative	   effect	   of	   progressive	   taxation.	   A	   long	   period	   of	   high	   top	  
rates	   of	   income	   taxation,	   coupled	   with	   high	   top	   rates	   of	   taxation	   on	   the	   transmission	   of	   wealth	   by	  
inheritance	  and	  gift,	  reduced	  the	  capacity	  of	  large	  wealth-­‐holders	  to	  sustain	  their	  pre-­‐eminence.	  The	  key	  
factor	   in	   determining	   the	   capacity	   to	   transmit	   wealth	   is	   the	   difference	   between	   the	   “internal	   rate	   of	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4
  	   Governance	   is	   measured	   with	   an	   index	   that	   combines	   various	   governance	   measures:	   insider	   ownership,	  
institutional	  ownership,	  the	  ratio	  of	  independent	  board	  directors,	  whether	  the	  CEO	  is	  also	  chairman	  of	  the	  board,	  
the	  average	  number	  of	  board	  positions	  held	  by	  board	  members.	  
5
  	   With	   wage-­‐bargaining	   effects,	   the	   optimal	   top	   tax	   rate	   formula	   becomes	   τ=(1+s·∙a·∙e)/(1+a·∙e)	   where	   s	   is	   the	  
fraction	   of	   the	   total	   behavioral	   elasticity	   due	   to	   bargaining	   effects.	   With	   a=1.5,	   e=0.5	   (as	   above),	   and	   s=3/5,	   we	  
obtain	  τ	  =	  83%.	  In	  the	  standard	  model	  with	  no	  wage-­‐bargaining	  effects,	  we	  had	  s=0	  and	  τ	  =	  57%.	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7	  
	  
accumulation”	   (the	   savings	   rate	   times	   the	   rate	   of	   return	   net	   of	   taxes)	   and	   the	   rate	   of	   growth	   of	   the	  
economy.	   This	   means	   that	   the	   taxation	   of	   income	   and	   wealth	   transfers	   can	   cause	   the	   share	   of	   top	  
wealth-­‐holders	  to	  fall,	  as	  in	  the	  United	  Kingdom	  over	  the	  first	  three-­‐quarters	  of	  the	  twentieth	  century	  
(Atkinson	  and	  Harrison,	  1978),	  contributing	  to	  the	  downward	  trajectory	  of	  top	  income	  shares.	  Alongside	  
this	  was	  the	  growth	  of	  “popular	  wealth”	  owned	  by	  the	  bottom	  99	  per	  cent.	  Back	  in	  1908	  in	  the	  United	  
Kingdom,	   the	   17th	   Earl	   of	   Derby	   had	   a	   rent	   roll	   of	   some	   £100,000,	   which	   was	   more	   than	   a	   thousand	  
times	  the	  average	  income	  at	  the	  time.	  Many	  of	  these	  houses	  are	  now	  owned	  by	  their	  occupiers.	  

	          In	   recent	   decades,	   however,	   the	   relation	   between	   the	   internal	   rate	   of	   accumulation	  of	   wealth	  
holdings	   and	   the	   rate	   of	   growth	   of	   capital	   has	   now	   been	   reversed	   as	   a	   result	   of	   the	   cuts	   in	   capital	  
taxation	   and	   the	   decline	   in	   the	   macroeconomic	   growth	   rate	   (Piketty,	   2011).	   As	   a	   result,	   a	   number	   of	  
countries	   are	   witnessing	   a	   return	   of	   inheritance	   as	   a	   major	   factor.	   Figure	   5	   shows	   the	   estimates	   of	  
Piketty	  (2011)	  for	  France	  for	  the	  period	  1820	  to	  2008	  of	  the	  annual	  inheritance	  flow	  (the	  amount	  passed	  
on	   through	   bequests	   and	   gifts	   inter	   vivos),	   expressed	   as	   percentage	   of	   disposable	   income.6	   Two	  
methods	   are	   employed:	   a	   constructive	   calculation	   from	   national	   wealth	   figures,	   mortality	   rates	   and	  
observed	   age-­‐wealth	   profiles,	   and	   an	   estimate	   based	   on	   the	   estate	   and	   gift	   tax	   records.	   The	   two	  
methods	  differ	  in	  levels	  (the	  fiscal	  flows	  are	  lower),	  but	  the	  time-­‐paths	  are	  very	  similar.	  

           The	   inheritance	   flow	   in	   France	   was	   relatively	   stable	   around	   20–25	   percent	   of	   disposable	   income	  
throughout	  the	  1820–1910	  period	  (with	  a	  slight	  upward	  trend),	  before	  being	  divided	  by	  a	  factor	  of	  about	  
5–6	   between	   1910	   and	   the	   1950s.	   Since	   then,	   it	   has	   been	   rising	   regularly,	   with	   an	   acceleration	   of	   the	  
trend	   during	   the	   past	   30	   years.	   These	   truly	   enormous	   historical	   variations	   bring	   France	   back	   to	   a	  
situation	  similar	  to	  that	  of	  100	  years	  ago.	  An	  annual	  inheritance	  flow	  around	  20	  percent	  of	  disposable	  
income	  is	  very	  large.	  It	  is	  typically	  much	  larger	  than	  the	  annual	  flow	   of	  new	  savings,	  and	  almost	  as	  big	  as	  
the	   annual	   flow	   of	   capital	   income.	   This	   implies	   that	   inheritance	   is	   becoming	   again	   a	   very	   important	  
factor	  of	  lifetime	  economic	  inequality.	  As	  shown	  in	  Piketty	  and	  Saez	  (2012),	  in	  a	  world	  where	  inheritance	  
is	   quantitatively	   significant,	   those	   receiving	   no	   bequests	   will	   leave	   smaller-­‐than-­‐average	   bequests	  
themselves,	   and	   hence	   should	   support	   shifting	   labor	   taxation	   toward	   bequest	   taxation.	   In	   this	   situation,	  
inheritance	  taxation	  (and	  more	  generally	  capital	  taxation,	  given	  capital	  market	  imperfections)	  becomes	  
a	  powerful	  and	  desirable	  tool	  for	  redistribution	  toward	  those	  receiving	  no	  inheritance.	  

               The	   return	   of	   inherited	   wealth	   may	   well	   differ	   in	   magnitude	   across	   countries.	   The	   historical	  
series	  available	  so	  far	  regarding	  the	  inheritance	  flow	  are	  too	  scarce	  to	  reach	  firm	  conclusions.	  Existing	  
estimates	  suggest	  that	  the	  French	  U-­‐shaped	  pattern	  also	  applies	  to	  Germany,	  and	  to	  a	  lesser	  extent	  to	  
the	   UK	   and	   the	   US.7	   Such	   variations	   could	   be	   due	   to	   differences	   in	   pension	   systems	   and	   the	   share	   of	  
private	  wealth	  that	  is	  annuitized	  (and	  therefore	  non	  transmissible).	  From	  a	  theoretical	  perspective,	  it	  is	  
unclear	   however	   why	   there	   should	   be	   much	   crowding	   out	   between	   lifecycle	   wealth	   and	   transmissible	  
wealth	  in	  an	  open	  economy	  (i.e.	  the	  fact	  that	  individuals	  save	  more	  for	  their	  pension	  should	  not	  make	  
them	  save	  less	  for	  their	  children;	  the	  extra	  pension	  wealth	  coming	  from	  the	  lifecycle	  motive	  should	  be	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
6
  	  It	  is	  critical	  to	  include	  both	  bequests	  (wealth	  transmitted	  at	  death)	  and	  gifts	  (wealth	  transmitted	  inter	  vivos)	  in	  
our	   definition	   of	   inheritance,	   first	   because	   gifts	   have	   always	   represented	   a	   large	   fraction	   of	   total	   wealth	  
transmission,	  and	  second	  because	  this	  fraction	  has	  changed	  a	  lot	  over	  time.	  
7
  	  See	  Atkinson	  (2013)	  and	  Schinke	  (2012).	  See	  Piketty	  and	  Zucman	  (2013b)	  for	  a	  survey.	  	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8	  
	  
invested	  abroad,	  without	  reducing	  the	  return).	  It	  could	  be	  that	  there	  are	  differences	  in	  tastes	  for	  wealth	  
transmission.	  Maybe	  wealthy	  individuals	  in	  the	  UK	  and	  in	  the	  US	  have	  less	  taste	  for	  bequest	  than	  their	  
French	   and	   German	   counterparts.	   However	   it	   should	   be	   kept	   in	   mind	   that	   there	   are	   important	   data	  
problems	  (in	  particular,	  wealth	  surveys	  tend	  to	  vastly	  underestimate	  inheritance	  receipts),	  which	  could	  
partly	   explain	   why	   the	   rise	   of	   inheritance	   flows	   in	   the	   recent	   period	   appears	   to	   be	   more	   limited	   in	   some	  
countries	  than	  in	  others.8	  

               Another	   source	   of	   difference	   between	   countries	   could	   come	   from	   variations	   in	   the	   total	  
magnitude	  of	  wealth	  accumulation.	  There	  may	  in	  this	  respect	  be	  an	  important	  difference	  between	  the	  
US	   and	   Europe,	   as	   is	   indeed	   suggested	   when	   we	   look	   at	   total	   private	   wealth	   (expressed	   as	   a	   ratio	   to	  
national	   income),	   shown	   in	   Figure	   6	   (see	   Piketty	   and	   Zucman,	   2013a,	   for	   a	   discussion	   on	   the	   differences	  
between	   private	   and	   national	   wealth).	   	   As	   may	   be	   seen	   from	   Figure	   6,	   the	   twentieth	   century	   has	   seen	   a	  
U-­‐shaped	   time-­‐path	   in	   the	   ratio	   of	   private	   wealth	   to	   national	   income	   that	   is	   more	   marked	   in	   Europe	  
than	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  	  Private	  wealth	  in	  Europe	  was	  around	  six	  times	  national	  income	  in	  1910,	  and	  
then	   fell	   after	   the	   World	   Wars	   to	   less	   than	   2½	   times	   in	   1950.	   In	   the	   past	   60	   years,	   it	   has	   risen	   sharply	   to	  
reach	  more	  than	  five	  times	  national	  income.	  This	  suggests	  that	  capital	  is	  “back”	  and	  that	  the	  low	  wealth-­‐
income	  ratios	  observed	  in	  Europe	  from	  the	  1950s-­‐1970s	  were	  an	  anomaly.	  This	  can	  be	  well	  accounted	  
for	   by	   the	   long-­‐run	   wealth	   accumulation	   formula	   β=s/g,	   where	   β	   is	   the	   Harrod-­‐Domar-­‐Solow	  
wealth/income	   ratio,	   s	   is	   the	   saving	   rate,	   and	   g	   is	   the	   growth	   rate	   including	   both	   real	   per	   capita	   and	  
population	   growth.	   For	   a	   given	   saving	   rate	   (say	   s=10%),	   you	   accumulate	   a	   lot	   more	   wealth	   relative	   to	  
income	   in	   the	   long	   run	   when	   the	   growth	   rate	   is	   g=1.5%-­‐2%	   than	   if	   the	   growth	   rate	   is	   g=2.5%-­‐3%.	   	   Given	  
the	  large	  and	  continuing	  difference	  in	  population	  growth	  rates	  between	  Old	  Europe	  and	  the	  New	  World,	  
this	  can	  explain	  not	  only	  the	  long	  run	  changes	  but	  also	  the	  difference	  in	  levels	  between	  Europe	  and	  the	  
US	  	  (Piketty,	  2011;	  Piketty	  and	  Zucman,	  2013a).9	  

            On	   the	   other	   hand,	   it	   should	   be	   noted	   that	   wealth	   concentration	   is	   significantly	   larger	   in	   the	   US,	  
where	  the	  top	  1%	  owns	  about	  35%	  of	  aggregate	  wealth	  (vs.	  about	  20%-­‐25%	  in	  Europe).	  So	  far,	  existing	  
studies	   have	   found	   that	   the	   increase	   in	   U.S.	   wealth	   concentration	   since	   the	   1970s-­‐1980s	   has	   been	  
relatively	   moderate	   in	   contrast	   to	   the	   huge	   increase	   in	   US	   income	   concentration	   documented	   above	  
(Kennickell,	   2009;	   Kopczuk	   and	   Saez,	   2004).	   However,	   we	   should	   be	   modest	   about	   our	   ability	   to	  


	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
8
  	  In	  particular,	  the	  smaller	  rise	  of	  the	  UK	  inheritance	  flow	  (as	  compared	  to	  France	  and	  Germany)	  is	  entirely	  due	  to	  
the	   much	   smaller	   rise	   of	   recorded	   inter	   vivos	   gifts,	   which	   according	   to	   fiscal	   data	   barely	   rose	   in	   the	   UK	   during	  
recent	  decades,	  while	  they	  have	  become	  almost	  as	  large	  as	  bequests	  in	  France	  and	  Germany.	  This	  might	  simply	  be	  
due	  to	  the	  fact	  that	  gifts	  are	  not	  properly	  recorded	  by	  the	  UK	  tax	  administration	  (see	  Atkinson	  2013).	  In	  the	  US,	  
due	  to	  the	  limitations	  of	  federal	  fiscal	  data	  on	  bequests	  and	  gifts,	  scholars	  often	  use	  retrospective	  wealth	  survey	  
data.	   The	   problem	   is	   that	   in	   countries	   where	   there	   exists	   exhaustive	   administrative	   data	   on	   bequests	   and	   gifts	  
(such	   as	   France,	   and	   to	   some	   extent	   Germany),	   survey-­‐based	   self-­‐reported	   flows	   appear	   to	   be	   less	   than	   50%	   of	  
fiscal	   flows.	   This	   probably	   contributes	   to	   explain	   the	   low	   level	   of	   inheritance	   receipts	   found	   in	   a	   number	   of	   US	  
studies	   (see	   e.g.	   Wolff	   and	   Gittleman,	   2011;	   one	   additional	   bias	   in	   this	   study	   is	   that	   inherited	   assets	   are	   valued	  
using	  asset	  prices	  at	  the	  time	  these	  assets	  were	  transmitted:	  no	  capital	  gain	  or	  income	  is	  included).	  
9
  	  In	  a	  way,	  this	  is	  equivalent	  to	  the	  explanation	  based	  upon	  lower	  bequest	  taste:	  with	  higher	  population	  growth	  
and	  the	  same	  bequest	  taste	  (per	  children),	  the	  US	  should	  save	  more.	  However	  a	  significant	  part	  of	  US	  population	  
growth	  historically	  comes	  from	  migration,	  so	  this	  interpretation	  is	  not	  fully	  accurate.	  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9	  
	  
measure	   the	   trends	   in	   top	   billionaire	   wealth.	   With	   low	   and	   diminishing	   growth	   rates	   and	   high	   global	  
returns	  to	  capital,	  the	  potential	  for	  divergence	  of	  the	  wealth	  distribution	  is	  naturally	  quite	  large.	  

              	  

Joint	  distribution	  of	  earned	  and	  capital	  income	  

	                We	   have	   discussed	   earned	   income	   and	   capital	   income.	  The	   last	   piece	   of	   the	   puzzle	   concerns	   the	  
joint	   distribution	   of	   earned	   and	   capital	   incomes	   –	   an	   aspect	   that	   is	   rarely	   given	   explicit	   consideration.	  	  
Yet	  it	  is	  important	  to	  know	  whether	  the	  same	  people	  are	  at	  the	  top	  of	  both	  the	  distribution	  of	  capital	  
income	  and	  the	  distribution	  of	  earned	  income.	  Suppose	  that	  we	  imagine	  asking	  the	  population	  first	  to	  
line	  up	  along	  one	  side	  of	  a	  room	  in	  increasing	  order	  of	  their	  earned	  income	  and	  then	  to	  go	  to	  the	  other	  
side	   of	   the	   room	   and	   line	   up	   in	   increasing	   order	   of	   their	   capital	   income.	   How	   much	   will	   they	   cross	   over?	  
In	  the	  Ricardian	  class	  model,	  the	  crossing	  is	  complete:	  the	  capitalists	  come	  top	  in	  one	  case	  and	  bottom	  
in	   the	   other.	   	   Has	   a	   negative	   correlation	   in	   the	   nineteenth	   century	   been	   replaced	   today	   by	   a	   zero	  
correlation?	   Or	   is	   there	   a	   perfect	   correlation,	   so	   that	   people	   cross	   straight	   over?	   The	   pattern	   of	   crossing	  
is	  given	  by	  the	  copula,	  which	  represents	  the	  joint	  distribution	  in	  terms	  of	  a	  function	  of	  the	  ranks	  in	  the	  
two	  distributions	  of	  earnings	  and	  capital	  income.	  Because	  the	  copula	  compares	  ranks,	  it	  is	  not	  affected	  
by	  whether	  the	  distributions	  themselves	  are	  widening	  or	  narrowing.	  	  

	              What	   can	   be	   learned	   by	   considering	   the	   copula?	   Table	   1	   shows	   results	   for	   the	   US	   in	   2000	   and	   in	  
1980	   based	   on	   tax	   return	   data	   analysis	   from	   Aaberge	   et	   al.,	   2013.	   	   Three	   conclusions	   may	   be	   drawn.	  
First,	  the	  joint	  distribution	  is	  asymmetric.	  In	  2000,	  of	  those	  in	  the	  top	  1	  per	  cent	  of	  capital	  income,	  61	  
percent	  were	   in	  the	  top	  20	  percent	  of	  earned	  income.	  However,	  turning	  things	  round,	  of	  those	  in	  the	  
top	   1	   percent	   of	   earned	   income,	   a	   larger	   proportion	   of	   80	   percent	   were	   in	   the	   top	   20	   percent	   of	   capital	  
income.	  In	  fact,	  63	  percent	  of	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  of	  earners	  were	  in	  the	  top	   10	  percent	  of	  capital	  income.	  
Such	  asymmetry	  could	  easily	  be	  missed	  by	  the	  use	  of	  a	  measure	  such	  as	  the	  correlation	  coefficient	  or	  a	  
parametric	   form	   for	   the	   copula	   function.	   Second,	   the	   degree	   of	   association	   appears	   strong.	   Even	   for	  
capital	  income,	  over	  half	  of	  the	  top	  1	  per	  cent	  find	  themselves	  in	  the	  top	  tenth	  of	  earners.	  A	  quarter	  are	  
in	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  for	  both.	  Thirdly,	  the	  numbers	  for	  1980	  are	  all	  smaller	  than	  their	  counterparts	  for	  
2000.	   The	   degree	   of	   association	   increased	   between	   1980	   and	   2000:	   in	   1980	   only	   17	   percent	   were	   in	   the	  
top	  1	  per	  cent	  for	  both.	  	  The	  proportion	  of	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  of	  earners	  who	  were	  in	  the	  top	  5	  percent	  of	  
capital	  income	  rose	  from	  a	  third	  to	  a	  half,	  and	  the	  reverse	  proportion	  rose	  from	  27	  to	  45	  percent.	  	  

	             To	   understand	   the	   changing	   relationship	   between	   earned	   and	   capital	   incomes,	   we	   need	   to	  
consider	  the	  mechanisms	  that	  link	  the	  two	  sources.	  In	  one	  direction,	  there	  is	  the	  accumulation	  of	  wealth	  
out	   of	   earned	   income.	   Here	   the	   opportunities	   have	   changed	   in	   Anglo-­‐Saxon	   countries.	   A	   third	   of	   a	  
century	  ago,	  Kay	  and	  King	  (1980,	  p.	  59)	  described	  the	  hypothetical	  position	  of	  a	  senior	  executive	  with	  a	  
large	   corporation	   in	   the	   UK	   who	   had	   saved	   a	   quarter	   of	   his	   after-­‐tax	   earnings:	   “feeling	   …	   that	   he	   has	  
been	   unusually	   fortunate	   in	   his	   career	   and	   unusually	   thrifty	   …	   he	   may	   be	   somewhat	   surprised	   to	  
discover	  that	  there	  are	  in	  Britain	  at	  least	  100,000	  people	  richer	  than	  he	  is.”	  Today,	  a	  CEO	  may	  be	  both	  
better	   paid	   and	   more	   able	   to	   accumulate.	   In	   the	   other	   direction,	   there	   is	   the	   effect	   of	   large	   family	  
wealth	   on	   earnings.	   In	   the	   past,	   the	   link	   may	   have	   been	   negative,	   whereas	   today	   it	   may	   be	   socially	  
unacceptable	   to	   live	   purely	   off	   unearned	   income.	   Wealth/family	   connections	   may	   provide	   access	   to	  

                                                                                                                                                                                    10	  
	  
high-­‐paying	  employment	  (to	  assess	  this,	  it	  is	  necessary	  to	  investigate	  the	  cross-­‐generation	  correlation	  of	  
all	  income,	  not	  just	  earnings).	  	  

	  

	  

Conclusions	  

	            The	  rise	  in	  top	  income	  shares	  in	  the	  US	  is	  dramatic.	  In	  seeking	  explanations,	  however,	  it	  would	  
be	  misleading	  to	  focus	  just	  on	  the	  doubling	  of	  the	  share	  of	  income	  going	  to	  the	  top	  1	  percent	  of	  the	  US	  
distribution	  over	  the	  past	  40	  years.	  We	  also	  have	  to	  account	  for	  the	  fact	  that	  a	  number	  of	  high-­‐income	  
countries	   have	   seen	   more	   modest	   or	   little	   increase	   in	   top	   shares.	   Hence,	   the	   explanation	   cannot	   rely	  
solely	  on	  forces	  common	  to	  advanced	  countries,	  like	  the	  impact	  of	  new	  technologies	  and	  globalization	  
on	  the	  supply	  and	  demand	  for	  skills.	  	  Moreover,	  the	  explanations	  have	  to	  accommodate	  the	  falls	  in	  top	  
income	  shares	  earlier	  in	  the	  twentieth	  century	  that	  characterize	  the	  countries	  discussed	  here.	  

	         In	   this	   paper,	   we	   have	   highlighted	   four	   main	   factors	   that	   have	   contributed	   to	   the	   growing	  
income	   shares	   at	   the	   very	   top	   of	   the	   income	   distribution,	   noting	   that	   they	   may	   operate	   to	   differing	  
extents	   in	   the	   US	   and	   other	   countries,	   particularly	   Continental	   Europe.	   The	   first	   is	   tax	   policy:	   top	   tax	  
rates	  have	  moved	  in	  the	  opposite	  direction	  from	  top	  pre-­‐tax	  income	  shares.	  The	  second	  factor	  is	  a	  richer	  
view	   of	   the	   labor	   market,	   where	   we	   have	   contrasted	   the	   standard	   supply-­‐side	   model	   with	   the	  
alternative	   possibility	   that	   there	   may	   have	   been	   changes	   to	   bargaining	   power	   and	   greater	  
individualization	   of	   pay.	   Tax	   cuts	   may	   have	   led	   managerial	   energies	   to	   be	   diverted	   to	   increasing	   their	  
remuneration	  at	  the	  expense	  of	  enterprise	  growth	  and	  employment.	  The	  third	  factor	  is	  capital	  income.	  	  
In	  Europe	  –	  but	  less	  so	  in	  the	  US	  -­‐	  private	  wealth	  (relative	  to	  national	  income)	  has	  followed	  a	  spectacular	  
U-­‐shaped	   path	   over	   time,	   and	   inherited	   wealth	   may	   there	   be	   making	   a	   return,	   implying	   that	   inheritance	  
and	  capital	  income	  taxation	  will	  become	  again	  central	  policy	  tools	  for	  curbing	  inequality.	  The	  final,	  little	  
investigated,	   element	   is	   the	   correlation	   between	   earned	   income	   and	   capital	   income,	   which	   have	  
become	  more	  closely	  associated	  in	  the	  United	  States.	  

	  

Acknowledgements	  
	  

We	  are	  grateful	  to	  the	  editor,	  David	  Autor,	  the	  Managing	  Editor,	  Timothy	  Taylor,	  and	  Co-­‐editors,	  Chang-­‐Tai	  Hseih	  
and	  Ulrike	  Malmendier	  for	  most	  helpful	  comments.	  Financial	  support	  from	  the	  MacArthur	  foundation,	  the	  Center	  
for	  Equitable	  Growth	  at	  UC	  Berkeley,	  the	  Institute	  for	  New	  Economic	  Thinking	  at	  the	  Oxford	  Martin	  School,	  and	  the	  
ESRC-­‐DFID	  Joint	  Fund	  is	  thankfully	  acknowledged.	  

	  
References	  
Aaberge,	  Rolf,	  Anthony	  B.	  Atkinson,	  Sebastian	  Königs,	  and	  Christoph	  Lakner,	  2013.	  “Wages,	  capital	  and	  
top	  incomes,”	  Working	  paper	  forthcoming.	  

                                                                                                                                                                      11	  
	  
Alvaredo,	   Facundo,	   Anthony	   B.	   Atkinson,	   Thomas	   Piketty,	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez,	   2011.	   The	   World	   Top	  
Incomes	  Database,	  online	  at	  http://topincomes.g-­‐mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/,	  15	  May	  2013.	  

Atkinson,	  Anthony	  B.,	  2007.	  “The	  Distribution	  of	  Top	  Incomes	  in	  the	  United	  Kingdom	  1908-­‐2000”	  in	  A.	  B.	  
Atkinson	  and	  T.	  Piketty	  (eds.),	  Top	  Incomes	  over	  the	  Twentieth	  Century	  -­‐	  A	  Contrast	  between	  Continental	  
European	  and	  English-­‐Speaking	  Countries	  (Volume	  1),	  Oxford	  University	  Press:	  82-­‐140.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.,	   2008.	   The	   Changing	   Distribution	   of	   Earnings	   in	   OECD	   Countries,	   Oxford:	   Oxford	  
University	  Press,	  506	  pp.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.,	   2012.	   “The	   Mirrlees	   Review	   and	   the	   State	   of	   Public	   Economics,”	   Journal	   of	  
Economic	  Literature,	  50(3):	  770-­‐80.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.,	   2013.	   "Wealth	   and	   Inheritance	   in	   Britain	   from	   1896	   to	   the	   Present",	   working	  
paper	  forthcoming.	  

Atkinson,	  Anthony	  B.	  and	  Allan	  J.	  Harrison,	  1978.	  Distribution	  of	  Personal	  Wealth	  in	  Britain,	  Cambridge:	  
Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.	   and	   Thomas	   Piketty.	   2007.	   Top	   Incomes	   over	   the	   Twentieth	   Century	   -­‐	  A	   Contrast	  
between	   Continental	   European	   and	   English-­‐Speaking	   Countries	   (Volume	   1),	   Oxford:	   Oxford	   University	  
Press:	  585	  pp.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.	   and	   Thomas	   Piketty.	   2010.	   Top	   Incomes	   -­‐	   A	   Global	   Perspective	   (Volume	   2),	   Oxford:	  
Oxford	  University	  Press:	  776	  pp.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.,	   Thomas	   Piketty,	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez,	   2011.	   “Top	   Incomes	   in	   the	   Long	   Run	   of	  
History,”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Literature,	  49(1),	  3-­‐71.	  

Atkinson,	   Anthony	   B.	   and	   Jakob	   E.	   Søgaard,	   2013.	   “The	   long-­‐run	   history	   of	   income	   inequality	   in	  
Denmark:	  Top	  incomes	  from	  1870	  to	  2010”,	  EPRU	  working	  paper	  2013-­‐01.	  

Diamond,	   Peter	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez,	   2011	   “The	   Case	   for	   a	   Progressive	   Tax:	   From	   Basic	   Research	   to	  
Policy	  Recommendations,”	  Journal	  of	  Economic	  Perspectives,	  25(4),	  165-­‐90.	  

Feldstein,	  Martin.	  1995.	  “The	  Effect	  of	  Marginal	  Tax	  Rates	  on	  Taxable	  Income:	  A	  Panel	  Study	  of	  the	  1986	  
Tax	  Reform	  Act.”	  Journal	  of	  Political	  Economy,	  103(3):	  551-­‐572.	  

Katz,	  Lawrence	  F.,	  and	  David	  H.	  Autor.	  1999.	  “Changes	  in	  the	  Wage	  Structure	  and	  Earnings	  Inequality,”	  
in	   O.	   Ashenfelter	   and	   D.	   Card	   (eds.)	   Handbook	   of	   Labor	   Economics,	   volume	   3A.	   Amsterdam:	   North-­‐
Holland.	  	  

Kay,	  John	  A.,	  and	  Mervyn	  A.	  King	  1980.	  The	  British	  Tax	  System,	  Oxford:	  Oxford	  University	  Press.	  

Kennickell,	  Arthur	  B.	  2009.	  "Ponds	  and	  Streams:	  Wealth	  and	  Income	  in	  the	  U.S.,	  1989	  to	  2007,"	  Finance	  
and	  Economics	  Discussion	  Series	  2009-­‐13.	  Board	  of	  Governors	  of	  the	  Federal	  Reserve	  System.	  


                                                                                                                                                                  12	  
	  
Kleven,	  Henrik,	  Camille	  Landais,	  Emmanuel	  Saez,	  and	  Esben	  Schultz.	  2013.	  “Migration	  and	  Wage	  Effects	  
of	   Taxing	   Top	   Earners:	   Evidence	   from	   the	   Foreigners'	   Tax	   Scheme	   in	   Denmark”,	   NBER	   Working	   Paper,	  
No.	  18885.	  

Kopczuk,	   Wojciech	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez.	   2004.	   “Top	   Wealth	   Shares	   in	   the	   United	   States,	   1916-­‐2000:	  
Evidence	  from	  Estate	  Tax	  Returns”,	  National	  Tax	  Journal,	  57(2),	  Part	  2,	  445-­‐487.	  

Kuznets,	  Simon.	  1955.	  Economic	  Growth	  and	  Income	  Inequality.	  American	  Economic	  Review	  45	  (March):	  
1–28.	  

Lemieux,	   Thomas,	   W	   Bentley	   MacLeod,	   and	   Daniel	   Parent,	   2009.	   “Performance	   Pay	   and	   Wage	  
Inequality”,	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  124(1):	  1-­‐49.	  	  

Lindsey,	   Lawrence.	   1987.	   “Individual	   Taxpayer	   Response	   to	   Tax	   Cuts:	   1982-­‐1984,	   with	   Implications	   for	  
the	  Revenue	  Maximizing	  Tax	  Rate,”	  Journal	  of	  Public	  Economics	  33:	  173-­‐206.	  

MacLeod,	  Bentley	  and	  Malcomson,	  James,	  1998.	  "Motivation	  and	  Markets,"	  American	  Economic	  Review,	  
88(3):	  388-­‐411.	  

Mirrlees,	   J.	   A.	   1971.	   An	   Exploration	   in	   the	   Theory	   of	   Optimum	   Income	   Taxation,	   Review	   of	   Economic	  
Studies,	  38(2):	  175-­‐208.	  

Philippon,	   Thomas	   and	   Ariell	   Reshef,	   2012.	   “Wages	   and	   Human	   Capital	   in	   the	   U.S.	   Financial	   Industry:	  
1909-­‐2006”,	  Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics	  127(4):	  1551–1609.	  

Piketty,	  Thomas,	  2011.	  “On	  the	  Long-­‐run	  Evolution	  of	  Inheritance:	  France	  1820-­‐2050,”	  Quarterly	  Journal	  
of	  Economics,	  126(3):	  1071-­‐1131.	  

Piketty,	   Thomas,	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez.	   2003.	   “Income	   inequality	   in	   the	   United	   States,	   1913-­‐1998,”	  
Quarterly	  Journal	  of	  Economics,	  118(1):	  1-­‐39,	  series	  updated	  to	  2011	  in	  January	  2013.	  

Piketty,	   Thomas,	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez,	   2012.	   “A	   Theory	   of	   Optimal	   Inheritance	   Taxation,”	   CEPR	  
Discussion	  Paper	  No.	  9241,	  forthcoming	  Econometrica.	  

Piketty,	   Thomas,	   and	   Emmanuel	   Saez.	   2013.	   "Optimal	   Labor	   Income	   Taxation",	   forthcoming	   in	   A.	  
Auerbach,	  R.	  Chetty,	  M.	  Feldstein,	  and	  E.	  Saez	  (eds.)	  Handbook	  of	  Public	  Economics,	  Volume	  5,	  Elsevier-­‐
North	  Holland,	  forthcoming.	  

Piketty,	   Thomas,	   Emmanuel	   Saez,	   and	   Stefanie	   Stantcheva.	   2011.	   “Optimal	   Taxation	   of	   Top	   Labor	  
Incomes:	  A	  Tale	  of	  Three	  Elasticities,”	  NBER	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  17616,	  forthcoming	   American	  Economic	  
Journal:	  Economic	  Policy.	  

Piketty,	  Thomas,	  and	  Gabriel	  Zucman,	  2013a.	  “Capital	  is	  Back:	  Wealth-­‐Income	  Ratios	  in	  Rich	  Countries,	  
1700-­‐2010,”	  PSE	  Working	  Paper.	  




                                                                                                                                                            13	  
	  
Piketty,	   Thomas,	   and	   Gabriel	   Zucman,	   2013b.	   “Wealth	   and	   Inheritance	   in	   the	   Long	   Run",	   forthcoming	   in	  
A.	   Atkinson	   and	   F.	   Bourguignon	   (eds.)	   Handbook	   of	   Income	   Distribution,	   Volume	   2,	   Elsevier-­‐North	  
Holland.	  

Schinke,	  Christoph.	  2012.	  “Inheritance	  in	  Germany	  1911	  to	  2009.	  A	  Mortality	  Multiplier	  Approach.”	  DIW-­‐
Berlin	  SOEP	  Paper	  n.	  462.	  

Slemrod,	   Joel.	   1996.	   “High	   Income	   Families	   and	   the	   Tax	   Changes	   of	   the	   1980s:	   The	   Anatomy	   of	  
Behavioral	   Response.”	   In	   Empirical	   Foundations	   of	   Household	   Taxation,	   eds.	   Martin	   Feldstein	   and	   James	  
Poterba,	  University	  of	  Chicago.	  

Solow,	  Robert,	  1971.	  “Some	  Implications	  of	  Alternative	  Criteria	  for	  the	  Firm”,	  in	  R.	  Marris	  and	  A.	  Wood	  
(eds.),	  The	  Corporate	  Economy,	  Macmillan,	  pp.	  318-­‐342.	  

Wolff,	   Edward	   and	   Maury	   Gittleman.	   2011.	   “Inheritances	   and	   the	   Distribution	   of	   Wealth	   Or	   Whatever	  
Happened	  to	  the	  Great	  Inheritance	  Boom?”,	  Bureau	  of	  Labor	  Statistics	  Working	  Paper	  No.	  445.	  




                                                                                                                                                           14	  
	  
Table 1. Relation between Top Labor Incomes and Top Capital Incomes
                         in the United States
                                                      Year
                                              2000                           1980

A. Percent of top 1% capital incomes in various top labor income groups
Labor income groups
Top 1%                                        27%                            17%
Top 5%                                        45%                            27%
Top 10%                                       52%                            32%
Top 20%                                       61%                            38%

B. Percent of top 1% labor incomes in various top capital income groups
Capital income groups
Top 1%                                        27%                            17%
Top 5%                                        50%                            36%
Top 10%                                       63%                            47%
Top 20%                                       80%                            68%


Note: Source is Aaberge et al. (2013). Panel A reports the percent of top 1% capital
income earners in various top labor income groups in 2000 (column 1) and 1980 (column
2). In 2000, 27% of top 1% capital income earners were also in the top 1% of labor
incomes, 45% were in the top 5% of labor incomes, etc. Panel B reports the percent of
top 1% labor income earners in various top capital income groups in 2000 (column 1) and
1980 (column 2). The computations are based on the public use US tax return micro-
datafiles (see Aaberge et al., 2013, for complete details).
 25%



 20%



 15%



 10%



   5%
                     Top 1% income share excluding capital gains

                     Top 1% income share including capital gains
   0%
           1913


                    1920


                              1927


                                       1934


                                                 1941


                                                           1948


                                                                    1955


                                                                              1962


                                                                                        1969


                                                                                                 1976


                                                                                                           1983


                                                                                                                     1990


                                                                                                                              1997


                                                                                                                                        2004


                                                                                                                                                  2011
Figure	  1.	  Top	  1%	  Income	  Share	  in	  the	  United	  States
Notes: Source is Piketty and Saez (2003) and The World Top Incomes Database. The figure reports the share of total income earned by top 1% families in the
United States from 1913 to 2010. Income is defined as pre-tax market income, it excludes government transfers and non-taxable fringe benefits. The figure
reports series including realized capital gains (in full squares) and series excluding realized capital gains (in empty squares).
                     A. Top 1% income shares in English-speaking countries (U-shape)
 25%
                                                                    United States-including capital gains
                                                                    Australia
                                                                    Canada-including capital gains from 1972
 20%
                                                                    United Kingdom-families
                                                                    United Kingdom-adults

 15%


 10%


   5%


   0%
           1910

                  1915

                         1920

                                1925

                                       1930

                                              1935

                                                     1940

                                                            1945

                                                                   1950

                                                                          1955

                                                                                 1960

                                                                                        1965

                                                                                               1970

                                                                                                      1975

                                                                                                             1980

                                                                                                                    1985

                                                                                                                           1990

                                                                                                                                  1995

                                                                                                                                         2000

                                                                                                                                                2005

                                                                                                                                                       2010
                  B. Top 1% income shares in continental Europe and Japan (L-shape)
 25%
                                                                                    France

                                                                                    Germany-including capital gains from 1950
 20%
                                                                                    Japan-including capital gains from 1947

                                                                                    Sweden-including capital gains
 15%


 10%


   5%


   0%
          1910

                  1915

                         1920

                                1925

                                       1930

                                              1935

                                                     1940

                                                            1945

                                                                   1950

                                                                          1955

                                                                                 1960

                                                                                        1965

                                                                                               1970

                                                                                                      1975

                                                                                                             1980

                                                                                                                    1985

                                                                                                                           1990

                                                                                                                                  1995

                                                                                                                                         2000

                                                                                                                                                2005

                                                                                                                                                       2010




Figure	  2.	  Top	  1%	  Income	  Shares	  in	  OECD	  Countries
Notes: Source is The World Top Incomes Database. The figure reports the share of total income earned by the top 1% in four English speaking countries in
Panel A, and in four other OECD countries (Japan and three continental European countries) in Panel B. Income is defined as pre-tax market income. The
estimates for Australia include realized capital gains partially and at varying degrees over time.
100%

 90%

 80%

 70%

 60%

 50%

 40%                                                                                 U.S.

 30%                                                                                 U.K.

                                                                                     France
 20%
                                                                                     Germany
 10%

   0%
           1900



                        1910



                                    1920



                                                 1930



                                                             1940



                                                                          1950



                                                                                      1960



                                                                                                   1970



                                                                                                               1980



                                                                                                                            1990



                                                                                                                                        2000



Figure	  3.	  Top	  Marginal	  Income	  Tax	  Rates,	  1900-­‐2011                                                                            2010
Notes: Source is Piketty and Saez (2013), Figure 1. The figure depicts the top marginal individual income tax rate in the US, UK, France, Germany since 1900.
The tax rate includes only the top statutory individual income tax rate applying to ordinary income with no tax preference. State income taxes are not included
in the case of the United States. For France, we include both the progressive individual income tax and the flat rate tax “Contribution Sociale Generalisée”.
                     10




                                            US
                                                                            Elasticity= .47 (.11)
  Change in Top 1% Income Share (points)
                                    8




                                           UK
                            6




                                                                   Ireland

                                                                      Norway
                     4




                                                       Portugal       Canada

                                                                    Italy
                                                                                    Australia
              2




                                                                               NZ                                Spain
                                                                  Japan                   Sweden     Denmark
      0




                                                                                      France
                                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                                   Finland
                                                                                                              Switzerland
                                                                                    Netherlands

                                                 −40          −30         −20         −10                    0              10
                                                          Change in Top Marginal Tax Rate (points)

Figure 4. Changes in Top Income Shares and Top Marginal Tax Rates
since 1960
Notes: Source is Piketty, Saez and Stantcheva (2011), revised October 2012, Figure 3. Source for top income shares is
the World Top Incomes Database. Source for top income tax rates is OECD and country specific sources. The figure
depicts the change in the top 1% income share against the change in the top income tax rate from 1960-64 to 2005-
2009 for 18 OECD countries. If the country does not have top income share data for those years, we select the first
available five years after 1960 and the most recent 5 years. For the following five countries, the data start after 1960:
Denmark (1980), Ireland (1975), Italy (1974), Portugal (1976), Spain (1981). For Switzerland, the data end in 1995
(they end in 2005 or afterwards for all the other countries). Top tax rates include both the central and local government
top tax rates. The correlation between those changes is very strong. The elasticity estimates of the OLS regression of
∆log(top 1% share) on ∆log(1-MTR) based on the depicted dots is 0.47 (0.11).
      40%
      36%                             Economic flow (computed from national wealth estimates, mortality
                                      tables and observed age-wealth profiles)
      32%
                                      Fiscal flow (computed from observed bequest and gift tax data,
      28%                             including tax exempt assets)

      24%
      20%
      16%
      12%
        8%
        4%
        0%
                1820



                             1840



                                           1860



                                                         1880



                                                                      1900



                                                                                    1920



                                                                                                  1940



                                                                                                               1960



                                                                                                                             1980



                                                                                                                                           2000


Figure 5. Annual Inheritance Flow as a Fraction of Disposable Income, France 1820-2008
Notes: Source is Piketty (2011). The annual inheritance flow is defined as the total market value of all assets (tangible and financial assets, net of
financial liabilities) transmitted at death or through inter vivos gifts. Disposable income was as high as 90%-95% of national income during the
19th century and early 20th century (when taxes and transfers were almost non existent), while it is now about 70% of national income.
    800%


    700%

                                                                                           United States
    600%
                                                                                           Europe

    500%


    400%


    300%


    200%


    100%
        1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010


Figure 6. Private wealth / national income ratios, 1870-2010
Notes: Source is Piketty and Zucman (2013a). Europe is the (unweighted) average of France, Germany, and the United Kingdom.
Private wealth is defined as the sum of non-financial assets, financial assets, minus financial liabilities in the household and non-profit
sectors.
