                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW PUBLIC PENSION AFFECTS ELDERLY LABOR SUPPLY AND WELL-BEING:
                         EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                             Neeraj Kaushal

                                         Working Paper 19088
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19088


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Neeraj Kaushal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
How Public Pension affects Elderly Labor Supply and Well-being: ¸˛Evidence from India
Neeraj Kaushal
NBER Working Paper No. 19088
May 2013
JEL No. I3

                                            ABSTRACT

We study the effect of a recent expansion in India’s National Old Age Pension Scheme on elderly
well-being. Estimates suggest that public pension has a modestly negative effect on the employment
of elderly/near elderly men with a primary or lower education but no effect of the employment of similar
women. Pension raised family expenditures, lowering poverty, and the effect was smaller on families
headed by illiterate persons suggesting lower pension coverage of this most disadvantaged group.
Further, households spent most of the pension income on medical care and education. We find some
weak evidence that pension raised longevity.


Neeraj Kaushal
Columbia University
School of Social Work
1255 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
nk464@columbia.edu
Introduction

       Industrialized countries have been experiencing a gradual aging of populations for

several decades. In developing countries, aging is a more recent phenomenon that is outpacing

the rise in elderly population in the rich world. The trend is projected to continue such that in 50

years 80 percent of the elderly will be living in developing countries. If this trend is a guide,

developing countries are likely to have less time to prepare and adjust to the consequences of

aging than did industrialized countries (United Nations, 2010). Yet, there is limited research on

how non-contributory programs for the elderly poor affect wellbeing in large developing

countries.

       The objective of this paper is to investigate the effects of India’s Old Age Pension

Scheme on a range of outcomes capturing the well-being of the elderly, namely, employment,

monthly expenditure and composition, living arrangements, and longevity. India has the second

largest population of elderly persons in the world. Although not a relatively large proportion of

the nation’s population, at 100 million in 2011, as per the provisional 2011 Census estimates, the

elderly in India would constitute the 12th largest nation in the world (Ramakrishnan, 2012).

       Until recently, social security was non-existent for a vast majority of India’s elderly, who

predominantly work in the informal sector where there is no mandatory retirement. In the

absence of adequate savings and pension plans, most people in the informal sector work past the

conventional retirement age (Mathew and Rajan, 2008, World Bank, 2001). Family is the

primary mode of social security for those who cannot work or are engaged in unpaid domestic

chores. Rapid economic and social changes in recent years, including migration and urbanization

of non-elderly adults, however, have weakened the foundations of the joint family system,

leaving the elderly in vulnerable economic conditions (Rajan, 2007; Pal and Palacios, 2011).



                                                                                                       3
           In response, in 1995, the Indian government launched the National Old-Age Pension

Scheme (NOAPS) providing a modest monthly pension of Rs 75 ($8 in 2006 purchasing power

parity) to persons aged 65 or above with no regular income or family support with the objective

of covering half the elderly poor in the country.1 In 2006, the government increased monthly

public pension to Rs 200 ($22 in 2006 PPP). Further, the program was expanded to cover all

elderly persons living in households with incomes below the poverty line set by the federal

government, thereby almost doubling the coverage. In the same year, several state governments

supplemented federal pension by raising state pension amounts such that in 2006-2007 total

pension for the elderly poor ranged from Rs 200 to Rs 1000 ($22 to $108 in PPP) across states.

As we document below, the increases in pension amounts across states are unrelated to long-term

demographic trends such as trends in dependency ratio, life expectancy at birth and at 60, or

employment trends. Further, due to differences in age eligibility for pension across states, the

2006 pension increases varied across age-state categories.

           What has been the impact of NOAPS on the employment, monthly expenditure and

composition, living arrangements, and longevity of the elderly poor persons? The answer to this

question is important to determine the efficacy of the policy and its long term sustainability.

Expenditure on NOAPS was raised from Rs 10 billion ($1.1 billion in 2006 PPP) in 2004-2005

to Rs 28 billion ($ 3.1 billion in PPP) in 2007-2008, and further to Rs 52 billion ($5.8 billion in

PPP) in 2010-2011. The number of beneficiaries correspondingly increased from 8 million in

2004-2005 to 14 million in 2007-2008. Further, in recent months the government has proposed to

expand the program to cover all elderly persons (Ali, 2012; Kaushal, 2012). Such large scale

expansion of public pension would not be not justified if it did not improve the wellbeing of the

elderly.
1
    PPP exchange rate is $1 =Rs 9.2 in 2006 (World Bank, 2006)

                                                                                                      4
         The program’s long-term viability is also linked to its impacts. India’s elderly population

is projected to triple by 2050, a rise greater in proportion than the projected increase in elderly

population in the rest of the world (Nayar, 2008; United Nations, 2010). Population aging is

imposing unprecedented fiscal challenges in the rich world. In many industrialized countries,

social security programs create incentives for early retirement raising social security costs and

lowering long term productivity (Gruber and Wise, 2004). To minimize these effects, in recent

years, several western governments have cut social security benefits and raised minimum age

eligibility (OECD, 2011). Given the experience of the rich world and India’s demographic

projections, the long term fiscal impact of any social security program is likely to be nontrivial,

making it imperative to investigate its full range of impacts.

         To briefly review the results, we find that the public pension program in India has had

only a modest effect on elderly employment, but a large positive effect on household

expenditures, thereby lowering poverty, and most of the increase in expenditure has been in

education and medical care. This is in contrast to the documented large negative employment

effects of social security and universal pension programs in rich and middle income countries

(Gruber and Wise, 2002, 2004; de Carvalho Filho, 2008). We also find some weak evidence that

public pension for the elderly poor in India increased longevity. Finally, there is some evidence

that illiterate elderly persons were more likely to be left out of pension coverage.

Background and Policy Context

         Previous research documents high incidence of poverty and other forms of deprivation

(e.g. basic services, social networks) among the elderly in developing countries (Deaton &

Paxson, 1997; Barrientos, Gorman, & Heslop, 2003; Jeyalakshmi, Chakrabarti & Gupta, 2011).2


2
 Pal and Palacios (2011), on the other hand, find that elderly persons do not necessarily have higher poverty than
non-elderly persons, and they attribute this to “survivorship bias” due to lower survival rate of elderly in poor

                                                                                                                     5
Rapid demographic transition and concerns about the vulnerability of the elderly have led to a

steady increase in the number of countries with public pension schemes: in 1940, only 33

countries had a public pension program, by 2000, the number had risen to 165 (Kinsella and

Phillips, 2005).

        A rich body of research has grown around how public pension affects the employment

and retirement decisions and incomes of older workers in the industrialized world. In a study of

14 OECD countries, Gruber and Wise (2002) document a strong association between pension

eligibility age and retirement decisions. In another study of 12 rich countries, Gruber and Wise

(2004) find that social security reforms that delay benefit eligibility by three years would reduce

the proportion of men aged 56-65 out of the labor force by between 23 and 36 percent. Similarly,

de Carvalho Filho (2008) investigate increase in pension and reduction in minimum eligibility

age for workers in rural occupations in Brazil and find that old age benefits raised retirement by

38 percentage points. Bloom et al. (2007), who study 51 low and high income countries,

however, find the employment effect of pension to be much more modest. They conclude that

the introduction of a fully funded pension system will reduce old-age labor supply by around 5

percent. Their study is based on aggregate macro data. There is relatively limited research based

on micro-level data on the effects of non-contributory pension schemes on employment and

consumption patterns of the poor elderly populations in developing countries and there is no

empirical study of the impacts of the NOAPS on the employment, expenditures, living

arrangements, and longevity of the elderly in India, the focus of this study.3


families. Similarly, Drèze and Srinivasan (1997) do not find any association between widowhood and poverty in
rural India.
3
  Researchers have studied the effect of pension in South Africa on elderly living arrangements (Edmonds, Mammen,
and Miller, 2005), on the redistributive and behavioral aspects of transfers (Case and Deaton, 1998; Duflo, 2000),
and labor supply of prime-age adults (Ardington, Case, and Hogegood, 2009; Bertrand, Mullainathan and Miller,
2003; Psel, Fairburn, and Lund, 2006). Fan (2010) has investigated the effect of Farmer’s Pension Program in
Taiwan on private transfers, Glomm et al. (2005) studied the effect of public pension in Brazil on capital

                                                                                                                6
        Banerjee and Duflo (2007) create a proxy measure of longevity – the probability that an

adult’s mother and father are alive and find that mothers of the non-poor are more likely to be

alive than mothers of the poor, inferring thereby that poverty kills. Pal and Palacios (2011) find

elderly poverty rate in India to be lower in districts with lower average per capita expenditure,

which they attribute to “survivorship bias” – meaning that the elderly have lower survival in high

poverty districts. However, neither of these studies is able to establish the direction of causality,

i.e. whether the elderly are poor because they have poor health which would result in a higher

probability of death, or whether they are in poor health because of low incomes. To establish the

direction of causality, we would need a sudden change in income that is unrelated to health

status. The increase in pension amount under NOAPS in 2006 that varied between states

provides an exogenous change in income that we use to test whether income affects elderly

living arrangements and to draw inferences about whether income is association with longevity.

India’s Old Age Pension Scheme

        Traditionally, elderly people in India have lived with their children or grandchildren.

Such living arrangements are usually mutually beneficial with the elderly providing childcare

and other forms of support in domestic work to their families and receiving emotional and

economic support and old age care in return. Public pension, for a vast majority of the nation’s

population, had been modest or non-existent (Rajan, 2007). While workers in the formal sector,

including those working for the state or federal governments, have certain forms of pension from




accumulation, and Juarez (2010) studied the effect of pension in Mexico on the employment of prime age elderly
members. Using survey data for 18 Latin American countries, Dethier et al. (2011) found that a universal pension
would substantially reduce poverty among the elderly in many countries.

                                                                                                                   7
their employers, only 10% of the working age population in the country works in the formal

sector. For the remaining 90%, family is the primary support in old age.4

        Historically, several state governments have provided a modest pension benefit to the

elderly with no income and family support. Starting in the mid-1990s, the federal government

initiated a number of policies with the objective of improving the wellbeing of the elderly. In

1995, the National Old-Age pension Scheme (NOAPS) was launched to provide a monthly

pension of Rs 75 to persons aged 65 or above with little or no regular income or financial support

from family members or other sources (Ministry of Rural Development, 2007). The NOAPS

imposed a ceiling on the number of beneficiaries, covering half the elderly poor population in

each state with an emphasis on covering all elderly persons with no income or family support

(Alam, 2004, Planning Commission, 2008). In 1999, the government also began allocating 10 kg

of free food grains (rice or wheat) via the Public Distribution System to elderly persons without

any family support or income. Seven years later, in 2006, the federal pension amount under

NOAPS was raised to Rs 200 per month and eligibility was extended to all persons aged 65 or

above in households with incomes below the poverty line determined by the Government of

India. This resulted in a 75 percent increase in number of beneficiaries during 2004-2005 to

2007-2008 (Ministry of Rural development, 2008). Further, the federal government requested

state governments to provide a matching Rs 200 monthly pension.

        Response to federal government’s request has varied across states: in 2007, 12

states/union territories did not provide any additional amount over the federal pension; 10

states/union territories provided an additional pension ranging from Rs. 35 to Rs 175 per month;

eight states/union territories had raised their contribution to Rs 200 per month; and five


4
 Individuals can also save for retirement in savings instruments called Public Provident Funds that provide
government guaranteed interest on a minimum annual investment of Rs 500.

                                                                                                              8
states/union territories contributed between Rs 250 to Rs 800 in additional monthly pension. As a

result, there is a wide variation in pension for the elderly poor across states (Appendix Table 1).

           The second source of variation comes from minimum age for eligibility (Ministry of

Rural Development, 2007). The federal minimum age for pension during the period of this study

is 65. In 9 states, the eligibility age for state pension is 60 for both men and women. Elderly

women in India are generally considered financially more insecure than men. Partly to reduce

their vulnerability, in 7 states, the minimum age eligibility is 60 for women, but 65 for men, and

in one state, Rajasthan, the minimum eligibility age is 55 for women and 58 for men (Appendix

Table 1). As a result of these two sources of variations, the 2006 increase in pension has differed

across age-state categories. 5

           What is the impact of these variations in pension over time, across states and age

categories on the living standards of the elderly? Theoretically, the 2006 policy change is

expected to affect the employment of the elderly population through two channels – income and

substitution effects. Increase in pension (income effect) will induce some elderly persons to seek

retirement, or reduce hours of work, in particular persons engaged in physically strenuous work,

which is often undesirable and even detrimental to health at older ages. Because pension

eligibility is conditional on an elderly person having family income below the poverty threshold,

it imposes an implicit tax on work, which may lower employment (substitution effect).

Reduction in employment due to the income effect is an intended aspect of the policy, whereas

reduction in employment due to the substitution effect implies a deadweight loss. While it is not

possible to separate these two effects in our analysis, it can be argued that changes in eligibility

criterion in the 2006 policy – moving eligibility from those with no income or no regular source



5
    Benefits are uniform within a state and age category in any year.

                                                                                                       9
of income to elderly persons with family incomes below the poverty threshold – is likely to

lower the substitution effect of pension on pension earners with very low incomes.

       The effect of NOAPS on elderly income will depend on its employment effect. Overall,

incomes would increase or decrease depending on the pension amount and earnings change on

account of the employment effect. Despite the crowding out effect, pension may improve elderly

well-being (e.g. health), in particular of those engaged in physically strenuous jobs. In general,

increase in income would be higher for the elderly poor who responded by changing their

employment minimally.

       The effects of the pension policy are likely to be limited if there is diversion of pension

funds to individuals who are not the intended beneficiaries (e.g. non-poor elderly persons). This

is a critical issue afflicting many social welfare programs in India. There is also concern about

insufficient coverage (Dutta, 2008; Prasad and Salomi, 2009). Most evaluation reports, however,

have found diversion or “leakages” from NOAPS to be modest compared to other welfare

schemes (Kumar and Anand, 2006). Further, attempts have been made to improve coverage, e.g.

by removing the ceiling on number of beneficiaries, and reduce diversion of funds (Ministry of

Rural development, 2007). Our investigation of the effects of recent changes in NOAPS would

enable us to draw inferences about its efficacy. If the program has not had any employment or

expenditure effects on the very poor or had relatively low effects that would be evidence of their

exclusion from the pension program.

Data

       The study is primarily based on data from two rounds of the National Sample Surveys

(NSS): the 61st round conducted in 2004-2005 (Schedule 10: Employment and Unemployment

Survey) and the 64th round conducted during 2007-2008 (Schedule 10.2: Employment,



                                                                                                     10
Unemployment and Migration Survey). These surveys were conducted a year before and a year

after the 2006 increase in federal and state pensions under NOAPS. Further, we conduct

robustness tests of the analysis applying data from the 50th and 55th rounds conducted in 1993-

1994 and 1999-2000, respectively. Each round is a nationally representative survey of over half a

million persons or about 125,000 households.

            These rounds of the NSS provide detailed data on household and individual

characteristics, including age, education, sex, marital status, current employment status,

household size, caste, urban-rural residence, and state or union territory (UT) of residence. The

NSS does not collect data on household income, but provides detailed information on the

monthly household expenditure, which we use as proxy for household income. The NSS does not

provide data on whether the respondent received pension under NOAPS. We use the educational

attainment of household head (or of the elderly person) as an indicator of their poverty status.

While most research in India has used monthly expenditure (or income) to determine the poverty

status of a family, the same is not appropriate for this study because NOAPS is likely to have

affected the incomes or expenditures of the poor elderly families.

            The 64th round, schedule 10.2 of NSS also provides expenditures on major items of

consumption. The 61st round, schedule 10, however, only provides data on total expenditure. To

study the effect of NOAPS on expenditure composition of elderly households, therefore, we

combine the 64th round, schedule 10.2 with the 61st round, schedule 1 (Consumer Expenditure

Survey conducted in 2004-2005) that provides data by expenditure categories. The 61st round,

schedule 1, is also nationally representative and surveyed close to half a million individuals or

125,000 households. We classify expenditures in eight categories: food; pan6, tobacco, &

intoxicants; rent & utilities; clothing, bedding, & footwear; personal care, consumer services, &
6
    Pan is a preparation of betel leaf, areca nut, and tobacco.

                                                                                                    11
entertainment; education; medical expenses; and durables. In both surveys, expenditures on

education, durables, and institutional medical care are for the past 365 days and on other items

for the past 30 days. For this analysis we convert all items to expenditures in the past 30 days.

Households with monthly expenditures less than Rs 100 (5 observations) and more than Rs

100,000 (9 observations) are dropped from the analysis

         The data on pension amount, by state, year and gender are taken from the annual reports

of the Department of Rural Development. Minimum eligibility age for state pension by gender

also comes from the same source. The two together are used to compute the total maximum

monthly pension by gender, age, state of residence, and year. Pension amount and expenditures

adjust for inflation. We use the Urban Non-manual Employees Consumer Price Index to adjust

for inflation in urban areas and the Agriculture Laborers Consumer Price Index to adjust for

inflation in rural areas.7

Effect of pension on Elderly Employment

Empirical model

         We begin with the following baseline model estimated over a sample of individuals aged

55 to 70 with a primary or lower education:

         (1)      Yi  X i    1 Pen as   s   a   t  u i

Yi denotes whether the respondent is currently employed and is a function of individual age (a -

a set of 16 categorical variables denoting each year of age) and other characteristics ( X it ),

namely, marital status (a set of variables indicating: unmarried, married, divorced, or widowed),

educational attainment (categories: illiterate, literate with 0-<primary education, primary

education), number of persons in the household (household size categories: 1, 2, 3-5, 6-8,>8),

7
 To test if estimates were driven by differences in prices across rural and urban areas, we also conducted all analysis
without adjusting for inflation. Estimates were similar to those obtained with the price adjustment.

                                                                                                                    12
urban/rural residence, and caste (scheduled tribe, scheduled caste, other lower castes, upper

castes), year(  t ), and state/ UT fixed effects ( s ). Equation (1) is estimated using the 61st (2004-

2005 data) NSS and the 64th NSS rounds (2007-2008 data), separately.

        Penas is the maximum pension amount by age and state in any year. Penas is matched to

the individual level data by respondent’s age, state, and year. Thus, in states that do not provide

state level pension, this variable is equal to Rs 75 in 2004-2005 and Rs 200 in 2007-2008 for

individuals aged 65 or older and 0 for others; in states that provide supplementary pension to the

elderly and have minimum age eligibility of 65 for state pension, it is equal to the state + federal

pension amount for 65+ and 0 for others. In states that have a lower age eligibility for state

pension, say 60, the variable Penas is equal to the state pension amount for individuals aged 60

but less than 65, and state +federal pension amount for those 65 or above. To illustrate, in the

state of Gujarat, where state and federal pension age eligibility differs, in 2004-2005, Penas is

equal to Rs 200 for individuals aged 60-64 and Rs 275 for individuals aged 65 or more. In 2007-

2008, Penas is Rs 200 for individual aged 60-64 and Rs 400 for those aged 65 or more. In both

periods, the pension variable is 0 for individuals aged 59 or less.

        The coefficient of interest is 1 . It estimates the effect of public pension on the

employment of low-educated elderly and near-elderly persons. One problem with equation (1) is

that demographic and economic factors, across state and age categories, that are correlated with

pension are likely to confound our estimates. We address this issue by estimating equation (2) on

a combined sample of 2004-2005 and 2007-2008 NSS data:
                   ~
(2)     Yit  X it    2 Pen ast  ~s  ~a  ~t   st   at   as  u~it
                                                                                   ,




                                                                                                       13
Equation (2) has three more sets of variables in addition to those in equation (1):  as denotes

elderly-state interactions (35 state/UT variables interacted with whether the respondent is aged

65 or older) and captures unobserved factors (e.g. state specific demographic, cultural and

economic factors) correlated with pension differences across state-age categories;  st is a vector

of state-time fixed effects8 that control for time-varying state characteristics, e.g. state level

economic growth, that may be correlated with differences in pension policy across state-years;

and at denotes age-time interactions (interactions of the 16 age dummies with whether the

observation is taken from the post-2006 period) and captures age-specific time varying factors

that may be correlated with national level changes in policy. Note that pension amount ( Penast )

in equation (2) varies by age, state, and year.

         The variable  2 estimates the effect of public pension on the employment of elderly and

near elderly persons after controlling for time-varying state effects, time-varying age effects as

well as age-specific state effects that may be correlated with policy. Thus the identifying

variation to estimate the pension effect in equation (2) comes from state-age-year variation in

pension. Arguably, there may be age specific time varying state factors correlated with Penast

that would threaten the validity of the specification in equation (2). We conduct a number of tests

described in detail in the section on Robustness Check to test the validity of the specification.

We also test this by estimating equation (2) on a sample of elderly/near elderly persons with a

secondary education, but no degree. They are less unlikely to receive public pension because

they are less likely to be poor (Table 1)9. In 2004-2005, 17% of our sample of elderly/near-


8
 Throughout the paper we use the term state effects to denote state/UT effects.
9
 Ideally, we would like to conduct this test on a population of persons that is similar to low-educated elderly and
near elderly group, but ineligible for pension. Unfortunately, it is not easy to find such a group. We select persons
with a secondary education, but no degree, because they are somewhat closer to the low-educated in terms of their

                                                                                                                    14
elderly10 households where the head had secondary education with no degree are poor11; the

corresponding proportion for elderly/near elderly households where the head had a primary or

less education is 40%. Thus, changes in pension amount across age-state-year are likely to have a

small effect on the employment of persons with a secondary education, but no degree, and if our

research design is valid, estimates of  2 for this group should be close to zero.

        Prior to 2006, NOAPS was intended to cover only half the elderly poor population:

elderly with no regular income or other financial support. In addition to raising the pension

amount, the 2006 NOAPS made two other major changes: removed state-specific ceilings on the

number of elderly to be covered by pension each year and provided pension to all elderly persons

with incomes below the poverty threshold irrespective of whether they had family support or not.

Thus inclusion of state-time effects, st , in equation (2) is important as it captures the effect of

coverage expansion so long as such expansion is constant across age categories.

        Because labor market experience differs by gender, all analyses are carried out separately

for men and women. In several states minimum age for eligibility is lower for women than men.

Penast is therefore computed separately for the two analyses. In all regressions, standard errors

are computed by clustering within the state of residence (White, 1971). We first conduct an all-

India analysis spanning over 28 states and 7 Union Territories (UT). To test if results were

unduly influenced by the inclusion of the 7 UTs with relatively fewer observations in our sample,

we next repeat all analyses by restricting data to states (excluding UTs). Finally following some

previous research on India, we repeat the analysis using data for the largest 19 states, namely:



labor market experience, than say persons with college education, but also less likely to be poor and hence
ineligible for pension.
10
   We use the term –elderly/near elderly - households to describe households with at least one 55+ member.
11
   We use the Tendulkar poverty thresholds by state and urban/rural areas to compute poverty rates (Planning
Commission, 2009).

                                                                                                               15
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,

Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,

Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, and West Bengal.

           We conduct the analysis on a sample of elderly and near elderly persons with a primary

or lower education, who are highly likely to be poor. Even among this sample, men and women

who are illiterate are more likely to be poor and therefore more likely to be eligible for public

pension (Table 1). There is, however, some concern that illiterate and less educated persons are

less likely to be informed of the public pension scheme and more likely to face hurdles in

completing the requisite paper work (Dutta, 2008; Prasad and Salomi, 2009). It is therefore an

empirical issue whether illiterate persons are more or less impacted by the policy and we study

this by estimating models that allow the effect of policy to differ by whether the elderly person is

illiterate, literate with 0-<primary education, or has primary education.

Results- Employment analysis

           Before presenting estimates of the effect of NOAPS on the employment of the elderly

poor, it is worthwhile to review employment trends by age groups. Figure 1 plots the proportion

of men currently employed by age and education categories. There are three main points to

note.12 One, across education categories, over 90 percent of the near elderly men aged 50-59 are

employed in both years. Two, employment among the elderly falls with age, and the decline is

sharper for men with secondary or higher education than for the less educated groups, resulting

in a sharp difference in employment across education categories at older ages. Three, the gap in

elderly employment across educational categories has increased over the study period such that

in 2007-2008, the employment of men aged 60-74 with at least a secondary education is 20 to 34

percentage points lower than of those with a primary or lower education. Figure 2 plots women’s
12
     We found similar trends with the NSS Employment and Unemployment surveys for 1993-1994 and 1998-1999.

                                                                                                             16
employment. The levels are modest, but here too there is evidence of a decline with age. Note

that for women too the decline in employment with age is steeper among the more educated.

       One possible explanation for the sharper decline in the employment of more educated

elderly men and, to a lesser degree, women, is that they are more likely to be with jobs with

mandatory retirement and pension schemes starting at ages 60 to 65. The more educated also

have higher incomes that may result in higher savings, for example savings in Public Provident

Fund accounts, to afford retirement.

       Our first objective is to study if NOAPS had an impact on the employment of elderly men

and women who are likely to be poor and thus eligible for public pension. Table 2 has the results.

Estimates in each cell of rows labeled 1 and 3 are from separate regressions. Estimates in each

column of rows labeled 2 and 4 are also from separate regressions. All regressions control for

age, education, marital status, urban residence, household-size and social caste, and state and

year effects. Columns labeled I are based on the 2004-2005 data from the 61st Round of the NSS

and columns labeled II are based on the 2007-2008 data from the 64th Round. Columns labeled

III use the combined samples from the two rounds, which is our preferred model, as it includes

additional controls for age-period effects, state-period effects, and state-age effects. Robust

standard errors clustered on state of residence are in parenthesis. ‘Pension Amount’ is the total

maximum pension (state+federal) (expressed in 100s of Rupees) by respondent’s age, sex, state

of residence, and year of observation.

       Estimates suggest that a Rs 100 increase ($11 in purchasing power parity) in pension is

associated with a modest one to three percentage points decline in the employment of

elderly/near elderly men. The estimates turn statistically insignificant when samples are




                                                                                                    17
restricted to the 19 largest states.13 In models that allow the effect of policy to differ by the

education of the respondent, estimates show that a Rs 100 increase in pension is associated with

a one to three percentage points decline in the employment of elderly men, and in most cases

statistical tests (indicted by +) fail to reject the hypothesis that the effects are the same for the

illiterate and low-educated literate men.

         These estimates are likely to be subject to at least two sources of bias. The first source of

bias arises from the fact that not all the elderly/near elderly respondents with primary or lower

education are eligible for pension. We have used education as an indicator for poverty and in our

sample in 2004-2005, about 40% of elderly/near elderly persons with 0-primary education and a

somewhat larger (45%) of the illiterate persons are poor. Thus the estimated effect would be

about half the true effect.

         The second source of bias would arise from the expansion in NOAPS coverage. Inclusion

of state-year and age-year effects are expected to control for program expansion. However, if

expansion across states is correlated with changes in pension amount, we will over-estimate the

effect of pension amount on employment. Thus, overall, to some extent the presence of the

second bias would lower the effect of the first bias. We investigated the second source of bias by

studying the administrative data on the number of beneficiaries in 2004-2005 and 2007-2008

(Appendix Table 1). There does not appear to be any clear indication that expansion was higher

in more generous states. For instance, Uttar Pradesh the largest state in the country with a

particularly poor implementation of NOAPS prior to 2006, the number of beneficiaries increased

eight times between 2004-2005 and 2007-2008 even though the state component of pension

continues to be relatively modest at Rs 100 – half the amount requested in the federal policy.


13
   In regressions that defined the age variable in larger age categories, the estimated effects were similar sized, but
statistically significant when models were restricted to the 19 largest states.

                                                                                                                          18
The adjoining state of Uttaranchal increased the state component of pension from Rs100 to Rs

200 between 2004-2005 and 2007-2008, but the increase in number of beneficiaries was

relatively lower.

       Panel 2 presents estimates of the effect of NOAPS on the employment of elderly/near

elderly women. All estimates are modest and mostly insignificant.

Robustness Check

       It is not clear why some states decided to increase public pension under NOAPS and

others did not. The analyses of the combined samples in Table 2 include controls for state-year

effects, age-year effects and state-year effects. Further, to test the validity of the research design,

we conduct four tests to check if there were any age-state specific trends that may have caused

state pension amounts to be different across years.

       First, we study if state governments’ response was driven by trends in old-age

dependency ratio across states. The Indian Census Bureau has provided old-age dependency

ratio across states for census years 1991 and 2001. The R-squared of the change in pension

amounts, by state, between 2004 and 2007 and changes in old age dependency ratio, by state,

between 1991 and 2001 was a modest 0.05. Further, we fail to reject the hypothesis that the

regression coefficient of the two variables is different from zero.

       Second, we also study if state responses were related with life expectancy at birth or life

expectancy at age 60. The Indian Census Bureau provides these data at 5-year intervals for the

largest 16-states. For our analysis the relevant years are life expectancy during 1996-2001 and

2001-2006. The R-squared of the change in pension amounts between 2004 and 2007 and change

in life expectancy at birth between 1996-2001 and 2001-2006 was 0.037 for men and 0.045 for

women. The R-squared of the change in pension amounts and change in life expectancy at 60



                                                                                                    19
between 1990-1995 and 2001-2005 was 0.008. While these tests are crude, they do provide

evidence that state-year trends in pension were not driven by long term demographic trends

relating to the elderly population across states.

         Three, to study if results in the employment analysis were driven by pre-policy trends, we

use four rounds of the NSS data for 1993-94, 1999-2000, 2004-2005 and 2007-2008 and

investigate trends in employment across states stratified by their public pension generosity.

States that provided less than Rs 200 (state contribution) in pension in 2007 are defined as the

low pension states and states that provided Rs 200 or more are defined as high-pension states.14

Figure 3 plots the employment of men with a primary or lower education living in high and low-

pension states during 1993-1994 to 2007-2008 by age categories. Among the low-educated men

in three age groups: 50-54, 55-59 and 60-64, the proportion employed is almost identical across

the two state categories during 1993-2008. Among the low-educated elderly men (65+), the

employment level is somewhat higher in states that were less generous in the post-2006 period,

but there is no specific trend, especially during 1993-2004, the pre-NOAPS increase period.

These almost flat employment levels across age groups during 1993-2004 thus document that the

state responses to NOAPS were not related to any pre-policy trends in employment among

elderly and near elderly adults across states.

         Finally, Appendix Table 2 (rows 1 and 2) has the effect of pension, based on equation

(2), on elderly men and women with a secondary education, but no degree. Members of this

group are less likely to be poor and therefore less likely to be eligible for public pension. For the



14
  The 1993-1994 NSS does not provide district level data for urban areas. Thus it is not possible to identity the
newly created states of Jharkhand, Uttaranchal, and Chhattisgarh. Chhattisgarh has been carved out of Madhya
Pradesh and both are low pension states. In 2007, Jharkhand and Uttaranchal provided Rs. 200 in state pension, but
their parent states – Bihar and Uttar Pradesh – provided less. Thus, a part of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, as defined by
the old boundaries, is low-pension and a part is high pension, but it is not possible to identify these regions in the
1993-1994 NSS. This analysis, therefore, excludes Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal.

                                                                                                                    20
research design in Table 2 to be valid, the estimated effects in Appendix Table 2 should be

modest, as they are, providing some validity to the research design.

Effect of Public Pension on Expenditure

         Next, we study the effect of NOAPS on expenditures of households with at least one

elderly/near elderly person. Ideally, we would prefer to study the effect on income. Because the

NSS does not collect income data, we use monthly household expenditure as a proxy for

income.15 We first study the effect of pension on household expenditures, followed by its effect

on the eight main expenditure categories. The analysis is done at the household level and the

samples are restricted to families where the head has a primary or lower education and there is at

least one member aged 55 or older16. Equation (3) describes the empirical model:
              ~
(3) Cit  Fit    E * ( Penhst )   st   at   as  eit

where C it is the monthly expenditure of household i in year t. Fit is a set of household

characteristics including age of household head (age categories: 20-30, 31-40, 41-50, 51-60, 61-

70, 71-80 and >80) 17, household size (household size categories: 1, 2, 3-5, 6-8,>8), number of

elderly or near elderly persons in the household (three categories depicting number of persons 55

or older: 1, 2, more than 2), caste, sex and education of household head, and whether the

household is in an urban area. Penhst is the maximum pension (state +federal) amount that

household h in state s could get in time t. It is computed as the sum of the maximum total state

and federal pension that the near elderly and elderly persons in a household can get.18  st denotes


15
   There is no nationally representative dataset in India that provides income data for the study period.
16
   We also conducted the analysis on all families – including those with no elderly member. The results were similar.
For brevity, we elected to not present those results.
17
   Analysis is restricted to families where the head of household is at least 20 years of age. There are 67 households
in our data where the household head is less than 20, and inclusion of these households did not affect the results.
18
   In our sample of households with elderly and near elderly members, 44 % had only 1 person aged 55 or more,
52% had two persons aged 55+, and 4% had more than 2 persons aged 55+. We conducted all analysis dropping
households with more than two persons 55+ and the estimates were similar to models that included them.

                                                                                                                   21
state-time interactions (70 state-time interactions- state dummy variables interacted with whether

the observation is from the pre-2006 or post-2006 period),  as denotes state-elderly interaction

(35 variables indicating interactions of state effects with whether the household has an elderly

person aged 65 or above). Further, we allow household-head age effects to vary by whether the

observation is taken from the post-2006 period (  at ). Equation (3) is estimated on the combined

sample of 2004-2005 and 2007-2008 data. To be consistent with the employment analysis, we

also estimate models separately for 2004-2005 and 2007-2008, and in these models,

 st ,  at , and  as are replaced by state and year fixed effects.

        The identifying assumption in equation (3) is that in the absence of pension policy, the

estimated value of  E would be zero. We test its validity by estimating equation (3) by restricting

samples to elderly and near elderly families where the head of household has secondary

education, but no degree. Estimates, presented in Appendix Table 3 (rows 3), are modest and

always statistically insignificant.

Results- Expenditure analysis

        Table 3 presents estimates of the effect of NOAPS on total expenditure in families with

elderly persons. While we present estimates from separate regressions for 2004-2005 and 2007-

2008 and for the combined samples, we have elected to discuss in detail results from the

combined samples (model III), our preferred model, which is based on equation (3) and includes

state-time, state-age and age-time interactions that allow us to control for factors that may be

correlated with the pension amount.

        Estimates in row 1, model III, suggest that a Rs 100 increase in pension amount was

associated with a Rs37 to Rs40 increase in family expenditures. Point estimates in models that

allow the effect to differ by the education level of household head suggest a smaller, and


                                                                                                    22
sometimes statistically insignificant, effect on expenditures in households where the head is

illiterate. These households have higher poverty, but our results show that they have benefitted

less from the pension program, suggesting that this most disadvantaged group has suffered more

on account of errors of exclusion.

       Expenditure effects are also likely to be afflicted with two sources of bias. Because not

all low-educated households are poor and therefore eligible for pension, our estimates are likely

to contain a downward bias. About 40 percent of our sample of low-educated elderly/near elderly

households is eligible for pension. Assuming that all eligible persons received pension, the true

effect could be obtained by dividing the estimated effect by 0.4. Adjusting for this bias would

thus suggest that a Rs 100 increase in pension is associated with a Rs 92 to Rs 100 increase in

expenditure (or income) of this group. The second source of bias comes from the expansion of

the program. Our analysis includes controls for state-year effects to capture the nationwide

expansion of the program in 2006. However, to the extent that expansion was correlated with the

state-year trend in the pension amount, our estimates will contain an upward bias.

       Table 4 provides expenditures in eight large categories of items. Samples are restricted to

households with at least one member 55 years or older. In 2004-2005, on average these

households spent about half their budget on food, 10 percent on tobacco, pan, alcohol, clothing,

and footwear and another 12 percent on rent and utilities. About 14% was spent on personal

items and entertainment, seven percent on medical care and about five percent on education and

durables. The pattern of expenditure remained largely the same in 2007-2008, after the increase

in pension with three exceptions: share of expenditure on education increased from two to three

percent, and on medical care from seven to eight percent, and the share on personal items and

entertainment fell from 14 to 12%.



                                                                                                   23
       Are these trends associated with public pension? Table 5 presents the analyses to answer

this question. The presentation and models are similar to those in Table 3. Estimates (model III)

suggest a statistically insignificant $4 to $8 increase (1%- 2% over the mean in 2004-2005) in

expenditures on food, a statistically significant $5 to $6 increase (26%-31% over the mean in

2004-2005) in expenditure on education, and a $15 increase (24% -27% over the mean in 2004-

2005) in expenditure on medical care. Estimated coefficients on education and medical care

remain robust in models restricted to 28 states or to the largest 19 states.

Does poverty kill?

       Researchers have argued that poor people have shorter life spans and therefore are likely

to be missing from the data (Pal and Palacios, 2011). Inclusion of state-age effects in the

employment analysis would to some extent address the issue of time-invariant differences in

longevity across states. Samples include two years of data, 2004-2005 and 2007-2008, and it is

assumed that changes in longevity across states are modest during the four year period of the

study. However, it is not possible to rule out that pension policy influenced longevity by

improving elderly well-being. If that is the case, the estimated expenditure effects will be due to

the interaction of two effects: increase in income from pension and increased chances of survival

(changes in sample composition before and after the policy change). While we do not have the

methodology to separate the two effects, we conduct a few tests to draw inferences about the

effect of policy on elderly longevity

       The first outcome we study is: whether the household has an elderly member. Public

pension will influence the probability that a household has an elderly member in two ways: by

increasing longevity and by changing living arrangements. Public pension is expected to increase

financial independence of the elderly and provide them with the wherewithal to live by



                                                                                                  24
themselves. It may also encourage younger family members to move in with the elderly. If the

policy encouraged elderly persons to live by themselves, it will increase the number of

households without an elderly person and bias the estimated effect towards zero even if there is

no change in longevity. The opposite will happen if pension led children or grandchildren to

move in with the elderly.

          The NSS does not provide data on whether an adult respondent has living parents, unless

they are living in the same household. Thus data limitations do not allow us to investigate

whether the parents of non-elderly adults are alive. We study the effect of pension on a second

outcome, namely, whether the elderly live in elderly only households (no non-elderly member).

If pension has no effect on this second outcome that would imply that the estimated changes in

the first outcome that are associated with pension are more likely to relate to changes in

longevity than to living arrangements. We begin by estimating equation (4) on all households in

the combined NSS sample for 2004-2005 and 2007-2008,
               ~
(4) Eit  X i   Z st    * Penst   t   s  u ist
                                                           ,

where Ei is an indicator for whether the household has an elderly member (aged≥65), and is

specified as a function of family characteristics (Xi): education and sex of household head, their

caste, time-varying state characteristics ( Z st ) namely state GDP. The variable Penst denotes

maximum pension amount (state + federal) by state s and year t.  t denotes year effects and  s

denotes state effects. The coefficient of interest is  which captures the effect of pension on the

probability that a household has an elderly member. To estimate if the policy had a different

effect on the presence of elderly men versus women in the household, we study two additional

outcomes: whether the elderly person is a male and whether the elderly person is a female.



                                                                                                   25
           It is likely that pension increased the number of elderly in a household. If so, a 0-1

outcome would underestimate the true effect of pension on longevity. However, we can address

this issue by studying the effect on the number of elderly persons in the household. To study if

pension had an impact on elderly living arrangements, we estimate equation (4) with two

modifications: one, the sample of analysis is restricted to households with at least one elderly

member, and two, the outcome measure is whether the household has elderly members only.

Results- Effect of policy on Elderly Living Arrangements

           Table 6 presents the results from this analysis. Model 1 controls for state gross domestic

product in year t-1, state and year fixed effects, Model 2 includes additional controls for

household characteristics. The sample of analysis in rows 1 and 2 is households where the head

has a primary or lower education. Estimates in row 1 and column 1 (model 1) suggest that a Rs

100 increase in pension amount is associated with a 0.8 percentage points (or 4%) increase in the

probability that a household has an elderly member. Estimates turn statistically insignificant in

column 2 that controls for family characteristics.19 Similar estimates are obtained (not presented)

when the sample is restricted to households where the head has less than a primary education.

All estimates turn statistically insignificant when samples are restricted to states (UTs are

excluded) or the top 19 states, but the point estimates remain roughly the same. Estimates in row

2, column 1suggest that pension has a positive and sometimes significant effect on the number of

elderly persons in the household. Here too estimates turn statistically insignificant in Model 2,

but the point estimates remain large. Estimated effects of the association between pension and

the probability that there is an elderly male (or elderly female) member in the household,

presented in Appendix Table 4, are similar sized, and often statistically insignificant.



19
     Estimates remained the same in models that also controlled for family size.

                                                                                                    26
       The bottom panel of Table 6 provides the effect of pension on whether the elderly live in

an elderly only household. The sample of analysis is households with at least one elderly

member and where the head of household has a primary or lower education. In our sample,

approximately 13 to 15% of households with at least one elderly member are elderly only

households. Estimates suggest that public pension had a modest and statistically insignificant

effect on this outcome. Validity tests presented in Appendix Table 4 (sample: elderly households

where the head has at least secondary education) are always negative and sometimes significant

(rows 1 and 2) – the opposite of what we would expect if there were state specific trends

correlated with pension that increased longevity.

       To sum up, our analyses provide weak support for the hypothesis that poverty kills:

pension increases the probability that there is an elderly in the household – the point estimates

are non-trivial (about 4% of the mean), but often statistically insignificant. We have studied the

effect of an increase in income (pension) on the probability that the household has an elderly

member approximately 1 year after the increase in pension. Arguably, income is likely to have a

much modest effect over a short term period. It is also possible that income has a non-linear

relationship with longevity and the increases in incomes that we have investigated are too small

to have a strong impact on longevity.

Conclusion

       We study the effect of India’s National Old Age Pension Scheme on outcomes pertaining

to the well-being of the elderly, namely their employment, monthly expenditure and

composition, and living arrangements. These outcomes allow us to draw inferences about the

effect of public pension for the poor on longevity as well as overall “leakages” in the program.




                                                                                                    27
       In 2006, the Indian federal government raised public pension for the poor from Rs 75 to

Rs 200 and lifted the earlier ceiling on the number of beneficiaries, thereby nearly doubling their

number. Further, the program was expanded to cover all elderly poor and not just those without

income or family support, which was a condition for eligibility prior to 2006. In the same year,

many state governments supplemented federal pension by raising state pension amounts such

that in 2006-2007 across states the total pension for the elderly poor ranged from Rs 200 to Rs

1000 ($22 to $108 in PPP). This combined with difference in minimum age eligibility for

pension across states allows us to study the effect of pension across age-state-year categories on

employment and family expenditures.

       This paper conducts several tests to document that the differences in generosity of

pension across states were not associated with past demographic trends (e.g. trends in life

expectancy at birth or at age 60 across states, trends in dependency ratio across states) or

employment trends among near elderly or elderly populations.

       Our estimates suggest that a Rs 100 increase ($11 in purchasing power parity) in pension

is associated with a one to three percentage points decline in the employment of men aged 55-70

with primary or less education, but has no effect on the employment of similar women. These

estimates control for unrestricted state-time effects, age-time effects as well as elderly-state

effects. The average maximum pension per elderly was Rs 300 in 2007-2008. Our analysis thus

suggests that NOAPs would lower the employment of low-educated elderly men by three to nine

percentage points (or 4 to 12%). These estimates are much smaller than the estimates of the

effect of social security in rich and middle income countries, and closer to the estimates in low-

income countries (See de Carvalho Filho, 2008; Gruber and Wise, 2004; Bloom et al., 2007).

One explanation for the relatively modest employment effects of NOAPs might be that the



                                                                                                   28
pension benefit under NOAPs is not large enough to encourage large scale retirement to

attain/maintain eligibility by the very poor – suggesting modest or negligible substitution effect.

       We also find that a Rs 100 increase in pension amount is associated with a Rs 37-Rs 40

increase in expenditure (a proxy for income) in families with elderly/near elderly persons where

household head has primary or lower education. Adjusting for the fact that only 40% of our

sample of low-educated households with at least an elderly or near elderly member is poor, this

implies that a Rs 100 increase in pension caused a Rs 92 to Rs 100 increase in family

expenditures. These estimates are large and capture the combined effect of increase in pension as

well as the expansion of the program to cover all poor elderly persons. Our analysis includes

controls for state-year effects to capture the nationwide expansion of the program in 2006.

However, to the extent that expansion was correlated with state-year differences in the pension

amount, our estimates will contain an upward bias.

       In regressions that allowed the effects to differ by the education of household head, the

estimated effects were lower and sometimes not statistically significant for the least educated

households (with illiterate household head) suggesting that these most disadvantaged households

who are more likely to be in poverty suffer from errors of exclusion more than the other groups.

This could partly be because the requisite paperwork is too difficult for the uneducated as has

been documented in previous studies (Dutta, 2008). If so, rationalization and simplification in

procedures for obtaining pension should reduce the bias.

       Further, the pension increase is found to be associated with an increased expenditure on

medical care and education, indicating that most of the income from pension is invested in

human capital for either improving the health or educational outcomes of family members.




                                                                                                   29
       In the final analysis we study three outcomes – whether there is an elderly person in the

household, their number, and in samples restricted to elderly households, the probability that the

household has only elderly members –to capture the effect of public pension on family

composition and longevity. Estimates suggest that approximately 1 year after the increase in

pension, the policy has a positive and sometimes significant effect on the probability that a

household has an elderly person. On the other hand, the effect of pension on the probability that

an elderly household has only elderly members is small and insignificant. We conclude that our

analysis at best provides some weak evidence that public pension for the poor increases

longevity.




                                                                                                   30
References

Alam, Moneer. 2004. “Ageing, old age income security and reforms: An exploration of Indian
      situation.” Economic and Political Weekly, August 14, 3731-3740.

Ali, Mohammad. 2012. “Jairam for new look at pension scheme”, The Hindu, May 19.

Ardington, Cally, Anne Case , & Victoria Hosegood, 2009. "Labor Supply response to Large
       Social Transfers: Longitudinal Evidence from South Africa,” American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics, American Economic Association: 1 (1): 22-48.

Barrientos, A., M. Gorman, and A. Heslop. 2003. "Old age poverty in developing countries
       contributions and dependence in later life", World Development, 31 (3): 555-570.

Banerjee, A. and E. Duflo.2010. “Aging and death under a dollar a day,” in Research Findings in
       the Economics of Aging, (editor) David A. Wise, (p. 169 - 203), National Bureau of
       Economic Research Conference report, University of Chicago Press.

Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, G. Fink and J. E. Finlay. 2007. “Demographic Change, Institutional
      Settings, and Labor Supply.”PGDA Working Paper # 42. Harvard Center for Population
      and development Studies.

Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 1998. “Large Cash Transfers to the Elderly in South Africa.
       “Economic Journal, 108(450):1330-1361.

de Carvalho Filho, Irineu Evangelista (2008) Old-age benefits and retirement decisions of rural
       elderly in Brazil Original, Journal of Development Economics, Volume 86, Issue 1, Pages
       129-146 .

Deaton, A. and C. H. Paxson.1995.“Measuring poverty among the elderly”, NBER Working
      Paper Series No 5296, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Dethier, J-J, P. Pestieau, and R. Ali. 2011. “The impact of a minimum pension on old age
       poverty and its budgetary cost. Evidence from Latin America.”Revista de Econom´ıadel
       Rosario, 14 (2):35 – 163.

Drèze, J. and P.V. Srinivasan. 1997. “Widowhood and Poverty in Rural India: Some Inferences
       from Household Survey Data”, Journal of Development Economics 54: 217-34.

Duflo, E. 2003.“Grandmothers and granddaughters: old age pension and intra-household
       allocation in South Africa”, The World Bank Economic Review, 17 (1): 1-25.

Dutta, Vasudeva Puja. 2008. “The performance of social pensions in India: the case of
       Rajasthan.” SP Discussion paper No. 0834.Social Protection and Labor, the World Bank.




                                                                                             31
Eric V. Edmonds & Kristin Mammen & Douglas L. Miller, 2005. "Rearranging the Family?
       Income Support and Elderly Living Arrangements in a low-income country,” Journal of
       Human Resources, 40 (1):186-207.

Fan, Elliot. 2010. “Who Benefits from Public Old Age Pensions? Evidence from a Targeted
       Program” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 58 (2): 297-322.

Gerhard Glomm, Jürgen Jung, Changmin Lee & Chung Tran, 2005. "Public Pensions and Capital
        Accumulation: The Case of Brazil." CESifo Working Paper No. 1539, CESifo Group
        Munich.

Gruber, J. and D. Wise. 2002. “An International Perspective on Policies for an Aging Society,”
       in Stuart Altman and David Schactman, eds., Policies for An Aging Society: Confronting
       the Economic and Political Challenges. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press, p. 34-62.

Gruber, J. and D. Wise. 2004. Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World:
       Micro-Estimation, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.

Nayar, P.K.B. 2009. “Who cares for the oldest old? Plight of the 80 plus population in global
       perspective.”HelpAge India: Research and Development Journal, 15(1):12-18.

Jeyalakshmi, S, S. Chakrabarti, and N. Gupta, 2011.“Situation Analysis of the Elderly in
       India.”Central statistics office, ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation,
       Government of India.

Juarez, Laura. 2010. "The Effect of an Old-Age Demogrant on the Labor Supply and Time Use
        of the Elderly and Non-Elderly in Mexico," The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis &
        Policy, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol. 10(1), pages 48.

Kinsella, Kevin and Phillips, David R. 2005. “Global aging: the challenge of success.”
       Population Bulletin, 60 (1):1-40.

Kaushal, N. 2012. “Pension for the Poor”, The Economic Times, edit page, May 31.

Kumar, A. & N. Anand. 2006. “Poverty Target Programs for the Elderly in India: With special
      reference to national Old Age Pension Scheme, 1995.” Background paper for the Chronic
      Poverty report 2008-2009.Chronic Poverty Research Center, UK.

Mathew, E.T, & S. Irudaya Rajan. 2008. “Employment as old age security” in S. Irudaya Rajan;
      C. Risseeuw, and M. Perera (eds): Institutional provisions and care for the aged:
      Perspectives from Asia and Europe, Anthem Press: New Delhi.

Ministry of Rural development, 2008.“Annual report-2007-2008.”Ministry of Rural
       Development, Government of India.




                                                                                                32
OECD.2011. Pensions at a Glance 2011: Retirement-Income Systems in OECD and G20
     Countries. OECD.

Pal, Sarmistha & Robert Palacios. 2011. “Understanding Poverty among the Elderly in India:
        Implications for Social Pension Policy.” Journal of Development Studies, 47(7):1017-
        1037.

Planning Commission.2008.“Eleventh five year plan 2007-2012”, Vol III, Agriculture, rural
       development, and physical infrastructure. Government of India, Chapter 4, pp79-100.

Planning Commission. 2009. “Report of the Expert Group to Review the methodology for
       Estimation of Poverty.”Planning Commission report, Government of India.

Prasad, B. Devi & N. Komali Salomi 2009.Implementation of the Old age Pension Scheme in
       Vishakhapatnam District, A.P. – A Study. Journal of Rural Development, 28(4):439-449.

Rajan, S. Irudaya. 2007. “Population Aging, health and Social security in India”, CREI
       Discussion paper series. Discussion paper No. 3. Osaka City University.

Ramakrishnan, H. 2011. “Aging Population: Policy Responses and Challenges.” The Actuary
      India. September. Pp 11-15.

United Nations. 2010. “World Population Ageing 2009.” Department of Economic and Social
       Affairs. Population Division. The United Nations.

White, Halbert. 1978. “A Heteroskedasticity Consistent Covariance Matrix and a Direct Test for
       Heteroskedasticity.” Econometrica 46:817-838.

World Bank. 2001. ‘India: The Challenge of Old Age Income Security’, Report No.22034-IN,
      Finance and Private Sector Development Division, South Asia Region, Washington D.C.

Word Bank. 2006. World Development Indicators, .Table 4.14: Exchange rates and prices.
      (http://devdata.worldbank.org/wdi2006/contents/Table4_14.htm).




                                                                                               33
                       Figure 1a. Proportion Currently Employed
                          Men by age and education, 2004-2005
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
 0
      50‐54          55‐59      60‐64        65‐69      70‐74     75‐80    >80

        Illiterate                      0‐<Primary               Primary
        Middle                          Secondary or higher




                        Figure 1b. Proportion Currently Employed
                           Men by age and education, 2007-2008
 1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
 0
      50‐54           55‐59     60‐64        65‐69       70‐74     75‐80    >80

         Illiterate                     0‐<Primary               Primary
         Middle                         Secondary or higher




                                                                                  34
                      Figure 2a. Proportion Currently Employed
                       Women by age and education, 2004-2005
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      50‐54          55‐59     60‐64        65‐69      70‐74      75‐80   >80

        Illiterate                     0‐<Primary              Primary
        Middle                         Secondary or higher




                       Figure 2b. Proportion Currently Employed
                        Women by age and education, 2007-2008
0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

 0
      50‐54          55‐59     60‐64        65‐69      70‐74      75‐80   >80

        Illiterate                     0‐<Primary              Primary
        Middle                         Secondary or higher




                                                                                35
Figure 3: Trends in Male Employment in High- and Low-Pension States,
        (Men with primary or lower education by age categories)



     1
   0.9
   0.8
   0.7
   0.6
   0.5
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
     0
                1993                1999                   2004              2007


         Aged 50‐54, Low‐Pension        Aged 50‐54, High‐Pension       Age 55‐59, Low‐Pension


         Age 55‐59, High‐Pension        Aged, 60‐64 Low‐Pension        Aged, 60‐64 High‐Pension


         Aged 65‐69, Low‐Pension        Aged 65‐69, High‐Pension       Aged 70‐74, Low‐Pension


         Aged 70‐74, High‐Pension       Aged >74, Low‐Pension          Aged >74, High‐Pension




Note: All India sample excluding Bihar, Jharkhand, UP and Uttaranchal because NSS 1993-1994 does not contain
district level data to define these states.




                                                                                                           36
Table 1: Monthly Per Capita Expenditure and Poverty Level, by Education of Household Head, 2004-2005

                                   Households with at least one elderly/ near elderly member1   Households with no elderly or near elderly members
                                                           Monthly Per           Poverty rate      N             Monthly Per            Poverty rate
Education of the household head/                       Capita Expenditure                                     Capita Expenditure
                                         N                  (in Rupees)                                          (in Rupees)
Illiterate                             35014                   595.64                44%         43972              538.46                  52%
Literate, 0-< than primary
education                                12049               682.71                38%           22566               637.27                40%
Primary Education                        12233               749.86                32%           18723               708.82                36%
Primary or less                          59296               646.67                40%           85261               606.52                45%

Middle school                            11507               819.26                29%           25424               815.88                28%
Secondary school without high-
school degree                             9486               1083.14               17%           16785              1005.63                19%
High school or more                      13429               1473.30               10%           26750              1510.82                10%
Middle School or more                    34422               1140.87               19%           68959              1136.41                19%

Persons aged 55-64 are near elderly and 65 or above are elderly.
N corresponds to the combined sample for 2004-2005 and 2007-2008.




                                                                                                                                                       37
         Table 2: Estimates of the Effect of NOAPS on the Employment of Elderly and Near Elderly Persons (age 55-70)

Sample                                                  All States & UTs                           All States                            19 Large States
Panel 1: Men with Primary Education        61st                64th    Combined           61st        64th      Combined          61st         64th      Combined
or Less                                  Round               Round         III          Round        Round         III          Round        Round           III
                                            I                   II                         I           II                          I            II
1. Pension amount                      -0.01               -0.028*** -0.025***        -0.009       -0.021**     -0.017**      -0.005       -0.013        -0.009
                                       (0.009)             (0.010)     (0.007)        (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.007)       (0.011)      (0.012)       (0.010)
2. Pension amount*illiterate           -0.014              -0.029*** -0.028***        -0.013       -0.022**     -0.019**      -0.011       -0.013        -0.011
                                       (0.011)             (0.011)     (0.007)        (0.011)      (0.011)      (0.007)       (0.010)      (0.012)       (0.009)
    Pension amount*less than primary   0.013               -0.027*** -0.013+          0.015        -0.023**     -0.006        0.01         -0.016        -0.003
    education                          (0.014)             (0.009)     (0.009)        (0.013)      (0.010)      (0.009)       (0.017)      (0.011)       (0.014)
    Pension amount*primary education   -0.021+             -0.031**+ -0.030***        -0.02        -0.022       -0.021*       -0.006       -0.017        -0.012
                                       (0.015)             (0.014)     (0.010)        (0.015)      (0.014)      (0.011)       (0.018)      (0.018)       (0.015)
    N                                  17637               18795       36432          17336        18467        35803         15066        16143         31209
Panel 2: Women with Primary Education or Less
3. Pension amount                      -0.005              -0.009        -0.007       -0.006       -0.010       -0.008        0.000        -0.008       -0.004
                                       (0.008)             (0.010)       (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.012)      (0.006)       (0.009)      (0.014)      (0.007)
4. Pension amount*illiterate           -0.006              -0.012        -0.009*      -0.006       -0.013       -0.010        -0.001       -0.011       -0.007
                                       (0.008)             (0.010)       (0.005)      (0.008)      (0.012)      (0.006)       (0.009)      (0.014)      (0.007)
    Pension amount*less than primary   -0.006              -0.007        -0.01        -0.007       -0.008       -0.010        0.000        -0.007       -0.011
    education                          (0.013)             (0.014)       (0.006)      (0.014)      (0.015)      (0.007)       (0.017)      (0.020)      (0.009)
    Pension amount*primary education   -0.005              -0.016        -0.010*      -0.005       -0.014       -0.009        -0.009       0.000        -0.007
                                       (0.012)             (0.015)       (0.006)      (0.012)      (0.016)      (0.006)       (0.018)      (0.022)      (0.008)
    N                                  24134               24383         48517        23678        23880        47558         21140        21244        42384

Note: Estimates in each cell of rows labeled 1 and 3 are based on separate regressions. Estimates in each column in rows labeled 2 and 4 are from separate
regressions. All regressions control for: age, education, marital status, urban residence, household-size, social caste, maximum pension amount (state+federal),
by age, state, and year, and state effects. Column headings describe the sample. Regressions in column labeled Combined III are based on the combined sample
of 2004-2005 and 2007-2008 data (61th and 64th rounds) and include additional controls for state-period interactions and age-time interactions. They also allow
state effects to differ by whether the respondent is 65 or more. Robust standard errors clustered by state are in parenthesis. Pension amount (expressed in 100s of
Rupees) is matched by respondent’s age, sex, state of residence and year of observation. *0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01. + indicates if the
estimated effects for persons who are illiterate and persons who have less than primary (or persons with primary education) differ at a 90% confidence interval.




                                                                                                                                                                  38
Table 3: Estimates of the Effect of NOAPS on Monthly Expenditure in Low-educated Households (Household level analyses)
(Household Head’s Education: Primary or Less)

                                               All States & UTs                               All States                                19 Large States
                                  61st Round       64th Round    Combined      61st Round    64th Round     Combined       61st Round     64th Round     Combined
                                       I                II           III            I             II            III             I              II            III
1.   Pension amount             52.215**           21.574*      36.652**      50.613**       23.530*       39.597**       51.557**       22.248         37.789**
                                (21.290)           (11.959)     (14.554)      (21.612)       (12.272)      (15.036)       (24.418)       (13.156)       (17.267)

2.   Pension amount*            38.122**          16.925       27.541*        35.268**       21.042*       31.334**       35.035*        19.405*       28.333
       Illiterate               (16.401)          (11.700)     (14.480)       (16.463)       (11.563)      (14.763)       (19.113)       (11.121)      (16.727)
     Pension amount * less      56.541            29.643       44.527*        61.133*        33.081        51.010**       70.766*        24.488        49.567*
       than primary             (33.704)          (21.551)     (22.457)       (34.106)       (22.077)      (23.459)       (38.118)       (24.618)      (27.647)
     Pension amount*            66.862*           29.954       49.463**       64.364*        22.803        46.271*        59.948         31.756        48.264*
       Primary                  (33.687)          (24.639)     (23.868)       (34.145)       (24.117)      (24.181)       (39.186)       (26.860)      (26.991)
     N                          29224             30072        59296          28676          29544         58220          25276          26119         51395
     Includes controls for:
     State effects              Yes               Yes          Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes
     State specific time
     effects and state-
     specific age effects       No                No           Yes            No             No            Yes            No             No            Yes

Note: The dependent variable is monthly household expenditure in rupees expressed in 2007-2008 prices. The reported figures are coefficients on the variable on
maximum pension (federal+state, expressed in 100s of Rupees) amount that a family in state s in year t can receive and varies by the number of pension eligible
adults, by age, in a household. Estimates in each cell of row 1 are from separate regressions. Estimates in each column of row labeled 2 are from a separate
regression where the estimated effect of pension is allowed to vary by the education level of household head. Column headings describe the sample that are
restricted to households where the head of household has a primary or lower education and the household head is 20 years or older. Further, samples are
restricted to households with at least 1 person 55 or older. All regressions control for age of household head and their gender, household size, caste, urban/rural
residence, number of persons 55 or older in the household, and state and year fixed effects. Regressions in column labeled Combined III are based on the
combined sample of 2004-2005 and 2007-2008 data (61th and 64th rounds) and include additional controls for state-year fixed effects, elderly-state effects
(interactions of whether the household has a 65+ person and state effects), and age-time effects (interaction of age of household-head categories with whether the
observation is post-2006 period. Robust standard errors clustered on state of residence are in parenthesis.
 *0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                  39
         Table 4: Pattern of Household Per Capita Expenditure
         (Sample restricted to households where head of household has a primary or lower education and the household has at least one 55+ member; amounts
         are expressed in Rupees, 2007-2008 prices)

                                                             2004-2005                                         2007-2008
                                                  Amount                    Share                   Amount                    Share
1.   Food                                         428.44                    0.52                    417.16                    0.52

2.   Tobacco, pan, & alcohol                       23.47                     0.03                    23.30                     0.03

3.   Clothing, bedding, & footwear                 60.04                     0.07                    51.61                     0.06

4.   Rent & utilities                              97.26                     0.12                    96.95                     0.12

5    Personal items, consumer                     112.60                     0.14                    97.07                     0.12
     Services, & entertainment
6.   Education                                     18.82                     0.02                    20.86                     0.03

7.   Medical                                       58.60                     0.07                    64.35                     0.08

8.   Durables                                      28.69                     0.03                    22.71                     0.03

     N                                                         28291                                             30078
1
  Personal items, consumer services, and entertainment includes expenditures on personal effects, toilet and sundry articles, entertainment, and consumer services
including conveyance.




                                                                                                                                                               40
         Table 5: Estimates of the Effect of NOAPS on Expenditure Patterns of Households with Elderly Members

                                               All States & UTs                            All States                               19 Large States
                                  61st Round      64th Round Combined        61st Round   64th Round     Combined      61st Round    64th Round      Combined
                                       I               II           III           I            II            III            I             II             III
1.   Food                        23.243**        4.307         7.287        23.540**      5.4           8.067         20.218*        4.385          4.475
                                 (10.104)        (5.078)       (5.398)      (10.275)      (5.198)       (5.566)       (10.624)       (5.307)        (5.253)

2.   Tobacco                     -0.801          -0.669      -0.575         -0.636        -0.349        -0.155        -0.502         -0.046        -0.045
                                 (0.960)         (0.685)     (0.970)        (0.976)       (0.699)       (0.993)       (1.034)        (0.716)       (1.076)

3.   Clothing, bedding, &        4.607*          -0.002      0.203          4.710*        0.16          0.393         3.532          -0.147        -0.874
     Footwear                    (2.421)         (0.926)     (1.170)        (2.485)       (0.951)       (1.232)       (2.390)        (0.998)       (1.007)

4.   Rent & utilities            3.326           -1.27       -1.576         3.153         -0.667        -0.672        3.744          -0.228        -0.294
                                 (3.138)         (1.179)     (1.574)        (3.186)       (1.128)       (1.504)       (3.694)        (1.216)       (1.668)

5    Personal items, consumer    6.088           3.51        4.79           6.444         3.376         3.985         2.524          3.476         1.796
     services,& entertainment    (7.176)         (4.491)     (6.744)        (7.303)       (4.554)       (6.918)       (6.002)        (4.926)       (7.516)

6.   Education                   10.581***       3.424**     4.913**        10.426***     3.984***      5.688**       9.853***       4.182***      4.902**
                                 (2.966)         (1.282)     (2.210)        (2.970)       (1.206)       (2.110)       (3.320)        (1.202)       (2.080)

7.   Medical                     15.079**        14.933***   15.477***      15.330**      14.493***     15.677***     9.495**        15.030***     14.403***
                                 (6.203)         (3.626)     (4.080)        (6.322)       (3.706)       (4.193)       (4.078)        (4.112)       (4.796)

8.   Durables                    1.905           2.927       0.054          0.802         3.001         -0.157        -3.183         2.392         -3.583
                                 (4.661)         (2.602)     (4.044)        (4.706)       (2.666)       (4.210)       (3.400)        (2.987)       (4.044)
Includes controls for:
State effects                      Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes
State specific time effects and
state-specific age effects         No            No            Yes            No           No            Yes            No            No           Yes
       N                           28281         30074         58355         27716         29546         57262          24574        26121         50695
Note: Estimates in each cell are from separate regressions. The dependent variable is monthly household expenditure, in rupees expressed in 2007-2008 prices,
on the item listed as row heading. See notes to Table 3 for model specification. *0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                41
         Table 6: Estimated Effect of Public Pension on Household Composition
         (Sample restricted to households where the head has a primary or lower education)

                                             All States and Union Territories                 All States                         19 Large States
    Dependent variable                      Model 1           Model 2            Model 1            Model 2            Model 1           Model 2
Sample: All Households
1.  Household has an elderly member         0.008**            0.006             0.007              0.005              0.007              0.005
                                            (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.004)            (0.004)

2.  Number of elderly members in        0.012*                 0.009             0.009              0.006              0.009              0.005
    Household                           (0.006)                (0.006)           (0.007)            (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.007)
    N                                   144881                 144873            142577             142569             125446             125442
Sample: Households with at least one elderly member
3. Elderly only household               -0.004                 -0.005            0.002              0.000              0.001              0.000
                                        (0.006)                (0.005)           (0.006)            (0.005)            (0.006)            (0.005)
    N                                   29241                  29241             28861              28861              25838              25838

Note: Each cell is estimated from a separate regression. Dependent variable is listed as row heading. The sample of analyses in each cell in rows 1 and 2 is all
households where the household head has a primary or lower education. The sample of analyses in each cell in row 3 is restricted to households with at least one
elderly member and where the household head has a primary or lower education. Reported coefficients are the estimated effects of a Rs 100 increase in pension
on the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered on state-year. Regressions in Model 1 control for state domestic product in state s in year t-1, state/UT
effects and year effects. Model 2 includes additional controls for the following household characteristics: education of household head, their gender, household
caste, and whether the household is in an urban area or rural area.

         *0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01




                                                                                                                                                               42
Appendix Table 1: Descriptive Data on National Old Age Pension Scheme
                                Pension Amount           Minimum Age for                Number of Beneficiaries
 State Name                (Federal +State) in Rupees   Eligibility for State
                           2004-2005        2007-2008         Pension1                   2004-2005       2007-2008
 Andhra Pradesh                75              200                65                        466000          919230
 Arunachal Pradesh            150              200                60                        12923*           14500
 Assam                         75              250          65 (m)  60(f)                   299005          628949
 Bihar                        100              200                60                        493696         1415179
 Chhattisgarh                 150              275                65                        165730          451066
 Goa                          750              1000               60                          3731            5013
 Gujarat                      275              400                60                        62558*           62691
 Haryana                      200              300                65                         99476          130306
 Himachal Pradesh             150              200                65                         22700           83678
 Jammu & Kashmir               75              200                65                        64708*           72038
 Jharkhand                    100              400                65                        166236          623654
 Karnataka                    100              400           65(m) 60(f)                    477409          811726
 Kerala                       110              235                65                       131346*          141956
 Madhya Pradesh               150              275                65                        448363         1222212
 Maharashtra                  250              375           65(m) 60(f)                    819523          828193
 Manipur                       75              200           65(m) 60(f)                    43619*           63412
 Meghalaya                    100              200           65(m) 60(f)                     34063           32740
 Mizoram                      100              250           65(m) 60(f)                     10525           15516
 Nagaland                     100              300                65                         28053           28053
 Orissa                       100              200                65                        493090          643400
 Punjab                       200              450           65(m) 60(f)                    45853*           61371
 Rajasthan                    200              400           58(m) 55(f)                    547700          631040
 Sikkim                       200              400                65                         10104           15169
 Tamil Nadu                   200              400                65                        471129          636384
 Tripura                      125              200                65                         69469          136592
 Uttar Pradesh                125              300                65                        299019         2426481
 Uttaranchal                  125              400                65                         42326           65752
 West Bengal                  300              400                65                        291671         1046470
 Union Territories
 Andaman & Nicobar             75              500                60
 Island                                                                                       528*              702
 Chandigarh                   200              200                65                         4497*             5619
 D&N Haveli                    75              200                65                         1086*             6956
 Daman & Diu                   75              200                60                          372*              630
 Delhi1                       350              600                60                       150000*            94000
 Lakshadweep                  100              300                60                           32*              142
 Pondicherry                  125              600                60                           NA              3566

Source for pension data: Ministry of Rural Development Annual Reports and response to parliament questions.
1
  m: male; f: female
Source for number of beneficiaries: IndiaStat Tables.

*indicates figures for 2005-2006; NA: Not available; 1Data for 2004-2005 pertains to National Capital Territories of
Delhi.




                                                                                                                 43
         Appendix Table 2: Validation tests of the research methodology

                                                                     NSS data: 2004-2005 and 2007-2008
                                 All States & UTs                                All States                               19 Large States
                                         III                                         III                                        III
Panel 1: Association between Pension Amount and Employment

Sample: Men with secondary education, no degree; aged 55-70
Pension Amount                           -0.002                                   0.013                                        0.024
                                         (0.013)                                 (0.014)                                      (0.023)
N                                         5700                                    5505                                         4930
Sample: Women with secondary education, no degree, aged 55-70
Pension Amount                            0.012                                   0.011                                        -0.002
                                         (0.008)                                 (0.009)                                      (0.012)
N                                         1915                                    1843                                          1645
Panel 2: Association between Pension Amount and Family Expenditure
Sample: Elderly/near elderly households; household head with secondary education, no degree
Pension Amount                           -5.565                                 -12.648                                      -24.279
                                        (40.291)                                (38.583)                                     (43.769)
N                                         9486                                    9200                                         8282

Notes: See notes to Table 2 for model specification and definition of pension amount in Panel 1 and notes to Table 3 for model specification and definition of
pension amount in Panel 2. *0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01




                                                                                                                                                                 44
         Appendix Table 3. Estimated Effect of NOAPS on the Probability of Having an Elderly Male or Female in the Household

Dependent variable/         HH has an elderly male member                                         HH has an elderly female member
Sample/                     All States and UT     All States               Largest 19 states      All States and UT     All States               Largest 19 states
                            Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2                Model 1 Model 2        Model 1 Model 2 Model 1 Model 2                Model 1 Model 2
HH Head’s Education :
  Primary or less           0.005*      0.004      0.004       0.002       0.004       0.002      0.005*      0.003       0.005       0.003      0.004       0.003
                            (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)

Dependent variable/         Number of elderly male members in HH                                  Number of elderly female members in HH

HH Head’s Education:
   Primary or less          0.005*      0.004      0.004       0.003       0.004       0.002      0.005*      0.003       0.005       0.003      0.005       0.003
                            (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)

Note: Each cell is estimated from a separate regression. Dependent variable is listed as column heading. The sample of analyses is households where the head
has a primary or lower education. Reported coefficients are the estimated effects of a Rs 100 increase in pension on the dependent variable. Standard errors are
clustered on state-year. Regressions in Model 1 control for state domestic product in state s in year t-1, state/UT and year effects. Model 2 includes additional
controls for the following household characteristics: education of household head, their gender, household caste, and whether the household is in an urban area or
rural area.

*0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.01




                                                                                                                                                               45
        Appendix Table 4. Validity Test of Models Estimating the Effect of Public Pension on Household Composition
        (Sample restricted to households where the head has a secondary or higher education)

                                            All States and Union Territories              All States                  19 Large States
    Dependent variable                     Model 1           Model 2           Model 1          Model 2    Model 1            Model 2
Sample: All Households
1.  Household has an elderly member        -0.004             -0.004           -0.007          -0.005      -0.008*           -0.006
                                           (0.004)            (0.003)          (0.004)         (0.004)     (0.005)           (0.005)

2.  Number of elderly members in        -0.011                -0.008           -0.016**        -0.011      -0.019**          -0.013
    household                           (0.007)               (0.006)          (0.008)         (0.007)     (0.009)           (0.008)
    N                                   66623                 66623            63904           63901       54489             54488
Sample: Households with at least one elderly member
3. Elderly only household               -0.001                -0.001           0.001           0.002       0.001             0.003
                                        (0.005)               (0.005)          (0.006)         (0.006)     (0.006)           (0.007)
    N                                   10852                 10852            10513           10513       9543              9543

Notes: See notes to Table 6. *0.05 <p ≤ 0.1, **0.01 <p ≤ 0.05, ***p ≤ 0.0




                                                                                                                                        46
