                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE IMPORTANCE (OR NOT) OF PATENTS TO UK FIRMS

                                          Bronwyn H. Hall
                                          Christian Helmers
                                            Mark Rogers
                                             Vania Sena

                                        Working Paper 19089
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19089


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




We thank the editor and four anonymous referees for helpful comments. The paper was presented
at the AEA Meetings 2013, UC Berkeley, and the UK Intellectual Property Office. We thank participants
for useful comments. Disclaimer: This work contains statistical data from UK ONS which is Crown
copyright and reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and Queen’s Printer for Scotland.
The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the endorsement of the ONS in relation
to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical data. This work uses research datasets which may
not exactly reproduce National Statistics aggregates. Funding: United Kingdom Intellectual Property
Office. The views expressed here are those of the authors. They are not necessarily those of the UK
Intellectual Property Office or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Bronwyn H. Hall, Christian Helmers, Mark Rogers, and Vania Sena. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Importance (or not) of Patents to UK Firms
Bronwyn H. Hall, Christian Helmers, Mark Rogers, and Vania Sena
NBER Working Paper No. 19089
May 2013
JEL No. L21,L25,O34

                                           ABSTRACT

A surprisingly small number of innovative firms use the patent system. In the UK, the share of firms
patenting among those reporting that they have innovated is about 4%. Survey data from the same
firms support the idea that they do not consider patents or other forms of registered IP as important
as informal IP for protecting inventions. We show that there are a number of explanations for these
findings: most firms are SMEs, many innovations are new to the firm, but not to the market, and many
sectors are not patent active. We find evidence pointing to a positive association between patenting
and innovative performance measured as turnover due to innovation, but not between patenting and
subsequent employment growth. The analysis relies on a new integrated dataset for the UK that combines
a range of data sources into a panel at the enterprise level.


Bronwyn H. Hall                                   Mark RogerV
Dept. of Economics                                +DUULV0DQFKHVWHU&ROOHJH
549 Evans Hall                                    2[IRUG8QLYHUVLW\
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Vania Sena
and NBER                                          Southend Campus Elmer Approach
bhhall@nber.org                                   Southend-on-Sea SS1 1LW
                                                  UK
Christian Helmers                                 vsena@essex.ac.uk
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
c/. Madrid, 126
28903 Getafe, Spain
christian.helmers@uc3m.es




An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19089
      1. Introduction
One of the most puzzling findings in the empirical analysis of firms’ patenting behaviour
is the low proportion of patenting firms in the population of registered companies. Our
investigation of this phenomenon in the UK finds that only 1.6% of all registered firms
in the UK patent and that even among those that are engaged in some broadly defined
form of R&D, only around 4% have applied for a UK or European patent during our
period of analysis (1998-2006).1 In our data, even in high-tech manufacturing sectors,
which arguably produce the most patentable inventions, the share of patenting firms in
the UK does not surpass 10%. Restricting the high-tech sector to R&D-doing firms that
also innovate, the share of patenting firms increases only to 16%. Findings for the US
are similar: Balasubramanian and Sivadasan (2011) find that only 5.5% of US
manufacturing firms own a patent. Moreover, shares of patenting firms differ
dramatically across sectors – even within the manufacturing industry; for example in
the UK, manufacturing of chemicals and chemical products has a share of around 10% of
patenting firms whereas publishing and printing has a share of only around 1%. This
suggests that (a) some firms do not automatically patent all of their patentable
inventions, (b) some firms avoid the patent system altogether, either because of its cost
or because patenting is perceived to yield no additional benefit, and (c) some
innovations involve inventions that are not patentable.

In this paper we investigate three questions whose answers may shed some light on the
reasons that relatively few firms patent. First, we look at the determinants of the
perceived importance of patents and other IP mechanisms for securing the returns to
innovation, as self-reported by firms. Second, we relate the actual, observed decision to
patent to a set of firm characteristics and the perceived importance of patents to the
firm and in the firm’s sector. Finally, we ask whether patenting is associated with better
innovative performance or with higher employment growth, controlling for many other
factors. If it is, that suggests that the low patenting rate is of concern, whereas if
patenting has only a limited association with performance, that could explain why
relatively few firms find it worthwhile.




1   European means a patent that was filed with the European Patent Office (EPO).

                                                     2
The analysis is based on a new firm-level dataset that combines detailed information on
firms’ self-reported innovation activities from the UK Community Innovation Survey
(CIS) with firms’ actual patent and trademark holdings. The combination of the different
data sources allows us to overcome a number of problems that have plagued existing
work on the determinants of a firm’s patenting propensity. If patent data are available
but not information on a firm’s innovative activities, strong assumptions regarding
firms’ underlying innovative activities are required in order to measure a firm’s
patenting propensity.2 However, even when data on innovation input such as R&D are
available, it is empirically difficult to determine whether patenting propensities differ
due to differences in unobserved productivity, i.e., the way R&D is translated into
patentable inventions, or due to genuine differences in patenting propensities (Brouwer
and Kleinknecht, 1999). The availability of some information on innovation output,
together with data on a firm’s actual patent applications, allows us to partially overcome
this problem and to assess the determinants of a firm’s decision to patent conditional on
innovating. Although innovation is possible without necessarily having patentable
inventions, innovating firms are more likely to possess such inventions. There are few
existing analyses of observed patenting behaviour that are able to control for the
presence of an invention; most of those available use spending on R&D as a proxy for
innovative activity. However, formal R&D is only a proxy for firms’ innovative activity as
inventions may result from a range of (even routine) activities and is therefore not
exclusively an outcome of the targeted effort of R&D. As we show empirically later in
the paper, this phenomenon is more likely in service sectors than in manufacturing, the
traditional sector studied using the R&D proxy.

Despite these advances, our data is still of observational nature, that is, the variables of
interest are subject to companies’ endogenous choices. A company’s decision to protect
a specific invention through a patent or an alternative protection mechanism is far from
random. This limits our ability to identify causal mechanisms that determine a firm’s
decision of how to appropriate returns to inventing and innovating. We are, therefore,
constrained to pointing to robust empirical patterns in the data. This is a major
shortcoming that applies to the literature on the decision to patent and its implications

2The required assumption is that firms face the same decision conditional on a range of observable
characteristics, that is, they have similar inventions that they can patent or protect in a different way such
as maintaining them secret.

                                                      3
more generally due to the absence of experiments.3 In addition, although in principle we
have a panel data set for analysis, the CIS resamples for each survey, so that the
resulting panel is highly unbalanced. Thus exploiting variation over time is of little help
in achieving identification of the parameters of interest.

Our results show that in general innovation of any kind is negatively associated with a
preference for patents over secrecy or formal IP over informal IP, although the
association is weakly positive in the case of manufacturing and very negative in
Knowledge-Intensive Business Sectors (KIBS). Patent propensities vary greatly across
type of innovation, firm size and industry. The most important, and well-known,
explanation of the low overall propensity to patent is that most firms are small and
small firms are unlikely to patent. Another reason is that most UK firms are in sectors
where patenting is not used much or where innovative activity is low. In addition, firms
are less likely to patent if they have process innovations or innovations new to the firm,
but not the market (as one might expect). Third, we provide some empirical evidence on
the relationship of a firm’s patenting decision to its subsequent performance and find
that patents are positively associated with innovative sales performance but not
significantly with employment growth. Thus there is some suggestion that they are
associated with more successful innovations but not with overall performance.4

This paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly summarises the relevant literature
that is based on the analysis of CIS data. Section 3 describes the structure and content of
the dataset used for the analysis. Section 4 provides descriptive evidence on our
principal research questions. Section 5 outlines our empirical approach and Section 6
discusses the corresponding results. Section 7 summarises the main findings.



3 In the context of patents it might not even be obvious how a randomised intervention should be
designed to yield meaningful insights. Yet there is scope to exploit exogenous variation induced by policy
interventions or idiosyncratic shocks to identify the effect of the variable of interest. In the innovation
literature, examples exploiting such natural or quasi-experiments are rare. Exceptions include Scherer
and Weisburst (1995) who use a decision in 1978 by the Italian Supreme Court ruling an existing law
unconstitutional that excluded pharmaceuticals from patent protection in Italy to identify the effect of
patent protection on innovation measured as R&D and U.S. patents. In a similar study, Sakakibara and
Branstetter (2001) use a change in the Japanese patent law to identify the effect of the strength of patent
rights protection on firms' R&D expenditure and patenting activity.
4 However, our empirical framework is not suited for making counterfactual statements, i.e., we are
unable to say whether patenting and innovative performance would still be positively correlated if more
firms patented.

                                                     4
    2. Literature
In this section, we briefly review a number of studies using CIS data on innovations to
study patenting.5 This is useful to frame our analysis within the existing research and to
compare our results with existing findings. Hall et al. (2012a) offer a broader review of
the existing literature on firms’ choices between formal and informal IP. As we discuss
there, both the theoretical and empirical literatures focus on the trade-off between
secrecy and patenting, primarily because other methods of IP protection are likely to be
complementary and used together, rather than obvious substitutes as in the case of
secrecy and patenting.6

Brouwer and Kleinknecht (1999) uses the CIS 1 data (for the Netherlands) to study the
determinants of a firm’s decision to patent. The Dutch CIS 1 data also contain
information on firm’s patent holdings, which allows Brouwer and Kleinknecht to
investigate the determinants of a firm’s actual patent holdings. They find firm size, R&D
intensity, sales of innovative products, and R&D collaboration agreements to be
positively correlated with a firm’s patenting propensity. Also firms in high-tech sectors
appear to have higher patenting propensities. Arundel (2001) uses CIS 1 data for seven
European countries to show that the propensity to use secrecy relative to patents falls
with firm size (measured as R&D expenses and employment) for product innovations,
while the association is much weaker for process innovations.

Pajak (2010) uses firms’ responses in the French CIS 4 on the importance of different
protection methods to evaluate the determinants of a firm’s choice between patenting
and secrecy. His main variables of interest in determining a firm’s choice are firm size
and the size of the inventive step. As expected, Pajak finds that the use of patents is
increasing in a firm’s size (measured as employment). Moreover, for his sample of small
firms in intermediate goods sectors, Pajak finds that firms reporting innovations new to
the firm are more likely to use patents, whereas the same firms seem to prefer secrecy


5 There is a large earlier literature on the determinants of patenting in manufacturing which emphasizes
the role of R&D, exemplified by Scherer (1965) and Bound et al. (1984) that we do not review in the
interest of brevity. For work that surveys firms on their use of IP, see Mansfield (1986), inter alia.
6As discussed in more detail in our literature review, it is also true that the use of patents and secrecy
may be combined. For example, different components of an invention may be patented whereas others,
such as the production method, may be kept secret. Alternatively, patent applicants may attempt to
obscure enablement in a patent applications by for example increasing the complexity of filings.

                                                     5
for inventions new to the market, which he considers in line with the theoretical
predictions of Anton and Yao (2004). This empirical finding should be interpreted with
caution, however, as the sample size is small (72 firms) and the share of innovating
small firms is less than 10%. The results presented in this paper point to the opposite
conclusion.

Heger and Zaby (2013) use data from the Mannheim Innovation Panel (MIP) (which
represents the German CIS) to offer an explanation for the empirically observed
variation in patent propensities across companies. The empirical analysis of patenting
propensities is possible because the MIP contains firms’ self-reported innovation
measures as well as data on their patent applications. The authors show theoretically
and empirically that the decision to patent depends on the effect on competition
associated with the disclosure of information required by a patent. This effect varies
across firms because it depends on the competitive advantage of companies. This
variation in the cost of disclosure due to a patent translates directly into variation in
patent propensities across firms.

The literature on the link between a firm’s choice of patenting vs. secrecy and its
subsequent performance is much thinner. An exception is Hussinger (2006), who
investigates the impact of this choice on innovative performance, measured as the share
of sales due to new products. She also uses the MIP in combination with patent filings at
the German Patent and Trademark Office, restricting the sample to R&D-performing
firms that report a product innovation. Hussinger finds patenting but not secrecy to be
associated in a statistically significant and positive way with a firm’s sales due to new
products.


    3. Data
The dataset used in our analysis consists of four components, which are all linked by a
unique enterprise business register number:7

    1. Business Structure Database (BSD);


7We conduct the analysis at the ‘enterprise’ level where an enterprise comprises all legal units under
common control. The patent and trademark data is available only at the enterprise level which motivates
us for consistency to conduct our analysis at the enterprise level.

                                                   6
      2. UK Community Innovation Surveys (CIS) 3, 4, and 5;
      3. UK and EPO patent data;
      4. UK and Community (OHIM) trademark data.


The individual components are described in more detail in an Online Appendix.

The linked dataset is a firm-level panel that contains detailed information on firm
characteristics, innovative activities as well as patent filings over the 9-year period
1998-2006. Due to the stratified nature of the sampling of the CIS data and a changing
sampling frame over time, the panel is highly unbalanced.

Because each CIS refers to several years (CIS 3 to 1998-2000, CIS 4 to 2002-2004 and
CIS 5 to 2004-2006), we collapse the panel to three time periods which cover the entire
period 1998-2006 (with the exception of 2001).8 This means that we look at patenting
decisions any time over the three-year reference period of the CIS. Given the nature of
the CIS, it is impossible to establish a closer link between an observed patenting
decision in a given year and the reported underlying innovative activity. Because of this,
our analysis is primarily cross-sectional and describes the general relationship between
innovating and patenting behaviour across firms.

Table 1 shows the panel structure of the data, first for all firms matched to the CIS and
then for the innovating sample we use in the subsequent analysis.9 The shaded
rectangles indicate the availability of data and it is easy to see that most firms were
sampled only once. Only 485 firms have been sampled in all three CIS waves. The
largest overlap between CIS waves exists for CIS 4 and 5 with a total of 5,136 firms.
Overall, only one quarter of the sample firms appear in at least two CIS waves (and only
17% for the innovating subsample).10



8All continuous variables from the BSD are averaged over each of the three CIS reporting periods,
whereas we use the maximum value for discrete variables from the BSD and the registered IP data. This
implies, for example, that the patent dummy variable measures whether a firm has taken out at least one
patent during a three-year CIS reference period.
9   The table omits a few observations that were missing key variables such as employment.
10Although the CIS panel has relatively little overlap, for economic data from the BSD we have
considerably more overlap, which allows us to compute employment growth over the whole period, for
example. Note that for our analysis, we restrict the data to sectors that have been sampled in all three CIS
waves, i.e., we exclude retail trade (SIC 52), hotels & restaurants (SIC 55), motion picture and video
activities (SIC 921) and radio and television activities (SIC 922).

                                                     7
Table A1 in the Appendix shows the distribution of observations across sectors for the
full CIS sample and for the firms in our innovation sample. The population sector shares
shown in the third column of Table A1 have been produced using sampling weights to
account for the stratified nature of the CIS samples. Because the sample stratification is
largely by firm size, sectors with large firms are overweighted in our sample (that is,
chemicals, food and beverages, high-tech metals and machinery, transportation, and
manufacturing in general) and those with more small firms underweighted (business
and computer services, R&D services, trade).


     4. Descriptive analysis
This section provides descriptive evidence of the patenting activities of firms, looking at
how patenting differs as a function of firms’ underlying innovative activities and of the
importance that firms attribute to different knowledge appropriation mechanisms. We
also look at the relation between a firm’s patenting decision and its innovative
performance in terms of the sales of new products.

Table 2 shows the number of observations in our broad sample of firms that do any
kind of R&D or that introduce new products and/or processes during the relevant
three-year period. Here R&D is defined as either internal or external spending, the
purchase of new hardware or software related to innovation, or spending on training,
design, or marketing related to innovation.11 The table shows that almost two-thirds of
the firms undertake some kind of R&D-related spending and one-third have an
innovation. In fact, very few firms in our sample innovate without spending on some
kind of R&D.

The next three columns of the table show the numbers and shares of patenting firms in
the large sample, and population shares, weighted using sampling weights to account
for the stratified sampling of the CIS. Only 1.6% of the population of registered firms
patent, whereas 2.9% of our sample does, again reflecting the slight up-weighting of
larger firms. The figure is almost twice as large for manufacturing (5.9%) and lower for
the Knowledge-intensive business sectors (1.7%). Firms that both innovate and spend

11Later in the paper, when we use R&D expenditure, it covers only actual spending on R&D for
consistency with earlier work, and because coverage for the full set of innovation expenditures is
relatively weak.

                                                    8
on R&D are roughly twice as likely to patent. If we look at the unweighted shares, we
see that the largest share of patenting firms is found in the manufacturing sector for
firms that conduct R&D and report an innovation (10.7%). Although there is a small
number of observations where a firm has applied for a patent even though it has not
innovated during the past three years, the share of innovating firms that patent is over
five times that for non-innovating firms (645/10345 = 6.2% versus 240/20161 = 1.2%).
In order to focus our attention on firms that have the potential to patent, the subsequent
analysis in this paper is performed on the 10,345 firm-year observations shown in
Table 2, those firms that introduced a product or process that was new to the firm or
the market during the preceding three years.12

As discussed in the introduction, even when focusing our attention on innovative firms,
there may still be important differences across the types of innovation. Table 3
distinguishes between the four types of innovations reported in the CIS: (i) product
innovation new to the market, (ii) process innovation new to the market, (iii) product
innovation new to the firm, and (iv) process innovation new to the firm. The largest
share of innovators reports product innovations new to the market or process
innovations new to the firm. However, firms with product innovations that are new to
the market are considerably more likely to patent (conditional on conducting R&D). In
particular firms that report a product innovation that is new to the market are about
twice as likely to patent as firms that report a process innovation that is new to the
market. These findings support both the view that product innovations that are
generally novel are more likely to be based on a patentable invention and that process
inventions are easier to keep secret and therefore less likely to be patented.13

Figure 1 shows the CIS answers with regard to the importance of the various IP
protection mechanisms for our sample of innovating firms. Firms were asked in the CIS
to evaluate the importance of the different mechanisms on a Likert scale between 0 and


 The actual estimation sample consists of 10,093 observations, as we lose a few observations (about
12

2%) because of missing or invalid data on the control variables.
13The table also suggests that a small share of innovating firms patents despite reporting only
innovations new to the firm. This may suggest that firms file patent applications despite a low likelihood
of passing the novelty and inventive step thresholds. It is also possible that a patent was filed on an
invention that is not yet incorporated into a product. However, due to the nature of our data, we cannot
establish a link between a reported innovation and the observed patent application to investigate this
further.

                                                     9
3, where 0 means a firm does not use this type of protection mechanism whereas 3
means that it represents a ‘very important’ mechanism for the firm. The figure shows
the share of firms that rate each type of IP mechanism as of medium or high importance.
As would be expected, the share of firms regarding any of the registered IP rights
(registered designs, trademarks, patents) as important is substantially larger for
patenting than for non-patenting firms.14 In contrast, patenting and non-patenting firms
that are innovators rate informal IP mechanisms about the same. The results for
registered IP suggest that if a firm patents, it is also more likely to think that other forms
of registered IP are important. At the same time, patenting does not diminish the
importance of informal IP protection, suggesting that firms may tend to use both
mechanisms, possibly for different purposes.

Figure 2 provides evidence of the association of a firm’s innovative activity and its share
in sales due to product innovation, which can be considered as a measure of a firm’s
innovative performance. For ease of illustration, in Fig. 2, we have discretised firms’
sales distribution into four size bands (0%; more than 0% and less than 10%; between
10% and less than 25%; and 25% and above). When looking at innovations that are
‘new to the firm,’ we do not see any strong pattern in the distribution of firms across
turnover bands. Firms appear to be distributed similarly across turnover size bands
independently of how highly they rank patents or secrecy. This suggests that there is
little correlation between a firm’s innovative performance in terms of turnover due to
innovative products that are merely ‘new to the firm’ and the importance the firm
attaches to the different protection mechanisms.

However, the data look different for innovations that are ‘new to the market,’ even
though the average shares are approximately the same as those for ‘new to the firm’
sales. Firms that attach high importance to patents and/or secrecy also have a nonzero
share of innovative sales. For example, only 25% of firms that have no turnover due to a
product innovation that is ‘new to the market’ indicate heavy use of patents, whereas
about 40% of firms with some innovative sales report heavy reliance on patents. The
difference is similar with regard to the use of secrecy (44% in the 0% turnover category
and about 62% in other categories). Overall, this suggests that firms that regard patents


14   See also Table A2 in the Appendix.

                                             10
and/or secrecy as important, and that have a product innovation that is ‘new to the
market’ (i.e., high ‘quality’ invention), outperform (in terms of innovative sales share)
firms that have such an innovation but do not use patents and/or secrecy. It also
highlights the fact that although both secrecy and patents are used to protect
inventions, even firms with innovative products new to the market seem to prefer
secrecy to patents.


   5. Empirical Analysis
Our empirical analysis explores three relationships: 1) the determinants of a firm’s
preference for formal over informal IP protection; 2) the determinants of the actual
patenting decision; and 3) the implications of these preferences and decisions for firm
performance.

We limit the regression samples to firms that report a product and/or process
innovation during the CIS reference period in order to ensure that in principle all firms
face a decision of how to protect their innovation. To account for the type and to some
degree also for the ‘quality’ of inventions, we also include information on whether an
innovation is new to the market or new to the firm. In the case where a firm patents its
invention, we are also able to use some patent indicators that have been shown to be
correlated with invention value.

The first equation we estimate is the following:

         rel _ ipic = a + b1 prodnM ic + b 2 prodnFic + b 3 procnM ic + b 4 procnFic
                                                                                        (1)
                      + g X ic + f fip jc + qi ip jc + dc + mj + eic


where i denotes a firm, c denotes a CIS wave, and j denotes a sector. rel_ipic is a variable
that measures the importance of one IP mechanism relative to another, following
Arundel (2001), who suggested using the difference between the importance attributed
to patents and secrecy. While levels may be difficult to compare at the firm-level,
differences should be internally consistent. We consider two definitions of the relative
importance variable: the difference between the formal IP and informal IP ratings and
the difference between the patent and secrecy ratings. The former variable is roughly
continuous, since the formal and informal IP measures are averages over a set of ratings


                                                  11
and we use ordinary least squares for estimation. The latter variable takes on only
seven integer values (-3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3) and we use ordered probit estimation when it
is the dependent variable. The variables prodnMic and procnMic denote product and
process innovations that are new to the market and variables prodnFic and procnFic
denote product and process innovations that are new to the firm. Differences in the
estimates associated with product innovations new to the market may arise if product
inventions are more likely to represent patentable subject matter than process
innovations. In addition, the variable that indicates whether a product innovation is
‘new to the market’ may also capture the costs associated with disclosing the invention
to the public. If firms consider inventions characterised by a larger inventive step to be
more valuable, then disclosing the information through a patent application may be less
desirable to the firm and hence a firm may be more likely to opt for secrecy (Anton and
Yao, 2004). Variable fipic represents firms’ perception of the importance of protection
mechanisms in the form of formal intellectual property (registered design, trademark,
patent, and copyright) at the SIC 3-digit sector level. iipic denotes the importance firms
in the 3-digit sector attribute to informal protection mechanisms including secrecy, lead
time, and complexity. These variables are constructed as simple averages across all
firms in an SIC 3-digit industry.

Xic is a vector of firm-level characteristics including R&D intensity and a dummy
variable for firms with no R&D, firm age, size, size squared, whether the firm is foreign-
owned, whether the firm is a member of a group, and whether the firm exports. We also
include a dummy variable that indicates whether the firm reported financial constraints
to its innovative activity.

The second equation we estimate is an equation for the probability a firm applies for a
UK/EPO patent during the relevant period:

                        1 prodnM ic   2 prodnFic  3 procnM ic   4 procnFic 
             pic ~                                                                    (2)
                       X ic   fip jc   iip jc   c   j   ic              

pic denotes firm i’s actual patenting decision (firm i is in sector j and CIS wave c). This
means that we reduce a firm´s decision to a binary choice, either the firm decides to




                                               12
patent or not.15 The fact that information reported in the CIS refers to a 3-year period
means that we relate patent applications anytime during the 3-year period to whether a
firm reports an innovation over the same period. Φ(.) is the normal distribution and we
use a simple probit model for estimation. The independent variables are the same as
those used in the first model (we add a dummy for either British or Community (OHIM)
trademark ownership). Since we condition the sample on firms reporting a product
and/or process innovation, we may interpret the decision not to patent as a decision to
use some alternative mechanism to protect a given invention.

Existing survey evidence suggests that firms tend to use only some of their patents
(Giuri et al., 2007), which means that the decision to patent per se may not be
informative about its effect on performance. To gain more insight, in a third step, we
analyse directly the relationship between a firm’s observed decision to patent and its
(innovative) performance. As performance measures, we use (a) the share of a firm’s
turnover that is due to innovations, with separate variables for innovations that are
‘new to the firm’ and ‘new to the market.’ This allows us to distinguish between the
effect of patenting on a firm’s sales based on imitation (‘new to the firm’) and innovation
(‘new to the market’). In addition, we also use (b) firm growth measured by
employment as a performance measure.16 The model specification is thus:

         performic     pic   fip jc  iip jc   X ic   c   j   ic       (3)


where perform is the share of sales from products new to the market, the share of sales
from products new to the firm, or employment growth. In Equation (3), the main object
of interest is the variable pic which indicates whether a firm has applied for a patent
during the reference period. Most of the other variables are as in Equation (1), with the
addition of an indicator of whether the firm also owns trademarks. We drop the




15We are primarily interested in whether a firm applies for a patent at all and less in its patenting
intensity which is why we collapse the number of patent applications to a binary variable. However, we
also obtained results for specification (2) using patent counts as the dependent variable. The results are
very similar to those reported in Table 5 and are available upon request.
16We also investigated labour productivity as performance measures. However, labour productivity is
only available for firms that are included in the ARD2. This means that the sample is considerably smaller
and we therefore prefer to rely on the CIS-based turnover performance measure and employment growth
computed using the BSD.

                                                     13
financial constraints indicator, on the grounds that they should not affect the
performance relationship, but only the choice of inputs.


   6. Results
In this section we discuss the results from estimating Equations 1-3. Descriptive
statistics for our regression sample are provided in online Appendix Tables A3
(univariate) and A4 (correlations).


6.1 The relative importance of formal and informal IP
Table 4 shows the results for the specification of the model in Equation (1). Columns (1)
to (3) show results for the relative importance of formal versus informal IP and column
(4) compares patents to secrecy. We include time dummies in all specifications and
sector dummies in columns (2) to (4).

With respect to the key variables, the results for formal vs. informal and patents vs.
secrecy are essentially the same. Larger firms are more likely to prefer formal IP to
informal IP, but not patents to secrecy. In the latter case, financial constraints appear to
be more important than size. All types of innovation are associated with a slight
preference for informal methods to formal methods of protection, something which we
also saw in Figs 1 and 2. One explanation may be that informal methods become
relatively more important when a firm is innovative, reducing the gap between formal
and informal methods (and leading to a fall in the relative importance of formal vs.
informal methods).

An interesting result in column (3) is that the coefficients on the corresponding sector-
level variables are approximately equal to one and opposite in sign. This implies that a
firm’s rating of relative importance moves one for one with the 3 digit sector level
rating of relative importance (within two digit industries, which have been controlled
for). Judging from the improvement in the small explanatory power of this regression,
the sector level preferences are one of the more important drivers of the firm level
preference.

The results for the R&D variables are somewhat puzzling. About half of the firms have
R&D on the BSD. Those that do not strongly prefer informal to formal IP and secrecy to

                                            14
patents. However, it is also true that for those that report R&D, higher R&D intensity is
also associated with a preference for informal IP protection over formal. This may
reflect the fact that such firms are generally newer and smaller technology-intensive
firms facing more uncertainty over the success of their inventions and innovations.
Although age and size are controlled for, there is variation even among young small
firms which is reflected in this coefficient.


6.2 The decision to patent
In Table 5 we show results for the probit estimation of equation (2), the decision to
patent. The first column presents results without sector dummies, and the remaining
three columns include them. Patenting firms are larger, slightly more likely to be
exporting, more likely to be a member of a group, but slightly less likely to be foreign-
owned, which may reflect to some extent a tendency for foreign-owned UK enterprises
to file patents under their parent name (and therefore not be matched to our sample).
They are also more likely to use trademarks.

The regressions show strongly that patenting is associated with new-to-the-market
innovation and not with new-to-the-firm innovation (except when the sector dummies
are left out). We view this as validation of the ‘new-to-the-market’ concept. Although it
is a long way from a ‘novel’ invention (one of the statutory requirements for a patent) to
a product ‘new-to-the-market,’ these regressions indicate that the two are related, with
such a product innovation essentially doubling the probability that a firm will patent.

In the previous table, we found that a firm’s perception of the relative importance of
formal over informal IP was influenced by the sectoral perception, but this relationship
does not translate to the patenting decision of the firm. The sectoral rating of the
importance of formal vs. informal IP is not significant, whereas firms that rate formal IP
highly are indeed more likely to patent.

Our preliminary conclusions from this investigation into the reasons for the low
patenting rate among UK firms are the following. First, only one third of firms have any
innovations during a three-year period. Second, only about half of those have
innovations new to the market. So at most, we might expect about 18 % of the firms to
patent. In addition, size plays an important role, as we can see in Figs 3 and 4. Figure 3


                                                15
uses the regression results in Table 4 to show the predicted patenting propensity as a
function of size for four types of firms in the metals and machinery sector: non-
innovating and non-R&D-doing, innovating and non-R&D-doing, new-to-the-firm
innovating and R&D-doing, and new-to-the-market innovating and R&D-doing. As
expected, there are huge differences in expected patenting propensities for these four
types of firms. But it is important to observe that almost all (about 90-95%) of our firms
lie in the region below 500 employees, and that the median firm has about 50
employees. At that size, all but the new to the market innovators have patenting
propensities less than 10%. So size explains a lot.17

Figure 4 shows that another explanation is differences across sectors, as expected. It
shows the patenting propensity-size distribution for a new-to-the-market innovator
that does R&D in five different sectors, ranging from the least patent-intensive (financial
intermediation firms) to the most (R&D services firms). At the median firm size, the
propensities range from 1% to almost 50%. In fact, the pseudo R-squared from a
regression of patenting on size, sector, and survey year alone is 0.18; adding the
additional variables to the model does not improve its prediction accuracy over this
simple regression, even though they are significant in some cases.

A final explanation we have uncovered is in the attitudes of the firms surveyed by the
CIS. On average, all types of innovators, including new-to-the-market innovators, rate
informal means of protection, especially secrecy, as a more important IP protection
mechanism than patents, which suggests that they are likely to place more reliance on
that method of protection. Those firms that do choose to patent also tend to have
trademarks, suggesting that some firms like use of formal IP of all kinds, whereas others
do not.


6.3 Innovative performance
This section analyses directly the relationship between a firm’s choice to patent an
invention (or maintaining it as a secret) and its innovative performance, conditional on
the firm having some kind of innovation. We show results for the analysis of the relation

17This confirms earlier findings by Rogers et al. (2007a), in which the authors found a substantially larger
share of firms in the large-firm category to patent than among SMEs. They also found patenting
companies in the large-firm category to file considerably more applications than firms in the small- and
medium-size category.

                                                    16
between two measures of innovative performance (sales of products new to the firm
and sales of products new to the market) and a firm’s decision to patent. Following the
literature (Mairesse and Mohnen 2010), we transform the sales share with a logit
transform so that the dependent variable is quasi-normally distributed and the
coefficients of the regression are close to elasticities or semi-elasticities. To see this,
note that the estimated coefficient associated with the variable X in such a regression is
the following:

                                           log[ s / (1  s)]
                                     
                                                 X

where s is the sales share. The semi-elasticity of s with respect to X is therefore:

                                       log s
                                                (1  s)
                                        X

which is approximately equal to β when s is small, and declines towards zero as s
becomes large.

Columns (1) and (2) of Table 6 show the results when we consider only product
innovations that are ‘new to the market,’ which we consider to be ‘true’ innovations that
could in principle be patentable. The most salient finding is the large positive coefficient
associated with the patent dummy variable, which suggests a strong positive
association between a firm´s decision to rely on a patent and its performance in terms of
share in turnover due to an innovation. Having applied for a patent during the period
increases the share of turnover from new products by about 50% at the mean share of
8%. Clearly, this does not imply any causal effect of patents on innovative sales, as we
cannot rule out potential reverse causality or other unobservables correlated with
patenting driving this effect. However the use of patents suggests that the firm has a
more marketable innovation and is operating in a market segment where formal IP
protection is important. Also having trademarks has an additional positive impact on
new-to-the-market innovative sales.

Columns (3) and (4) of Table 6 show the results when we consider innovative sales
from product innovations that are ‘new to the firm.’ These are likely to be imitations of
existing innovations and therefore far less patentable than innovations that are

                                              17
considered to be ‘new to the market.’ This is reflected in the results shown -- the
patenting dummy is not statistically significant in either of the specifications shown, nor
is the trademark dummy or the sector-level importance of formal IP. This means that
the share of turnover generated with products that are derived from innovations that
are only ‘new to the firm’ is not associated in a statistically significant way with a firm’s
observed patenting behaviour.

In contrast, most of the coefficients associated with the other regressors in columns (3)
and (4) display the same signs and similar magnitudes as in the first two columns of
Table 6, with two exceptions: R&D intensity and exports. R&D intensity is negatively
associated with new-to-the market-sales but not with new-to-the-firm sales. This may
be because the most R&D-intensive firms do not produce products, but instead license
their results to producing firms. In contrast, exporting firms have approximately 10%
higher share of sales of products new to the firm, but about the same share of sales of
products new to the market, suggesting that they are more likely to be engaged in
exploiting existing innovations over a broader market rather than creating new ones.


6.4 Growth performance
The last two columns of Table 6 use employment growth as an indicator of firm
performance.18 Employment growth regressions have a long history and raise a number
of econometric specification issues; for a review of these, see Hall (1987). That paper
explores the role of measurement error and sample selection in estimating the growth-
initial size relationship and reports two main findings: 1) measurement error in
employment appears to introduce little bias in the size coefficient and 2) there did
appear to be a sample selection effect whereby smaller firms were more likely to exit,
but this was confounded with size-related heteroskedasticity and possibly nonlinearity
in the relationship. The conclusion was that attrition bias was likely to be rather small.
Since here we are using a similar sample of UK firms and we are mainly concerned with
the influence of the IP-related variables on growth, we control for size but do not



18Rogers et al. (2007b) analyse the association between firms’ patenting decision on subsequent growth
for the population of SMEs in the UK. Due to data limitations they are constrained to using growth in total
assets and turnover as performance measures. Their results also suggest no statistically significant
correlation between a firm’s patenting activity and its asset and turnover growth

                                                   18
investigate measurement error and attrition biases, on the grounds that they are likely
to be small.

We rely on the BSD data to construct the employment growth measure as the average
annual growth rate over the number of years available for each firm between 1998 and
2006. We show the results of regressions of the growth rate on whether the firm has a
patent, whether it has a trademark, and the sectoral importance of formal and informal
IP as well as the controls, time, and sector dummies. All variables are measured at the
beginning of the period (either 1998 or later if the firm enters the sample later). The
results suggest a positive association between patenting and employment growth, but
one that is statistically insignificant. Firms with patents have growth rates that are on
average 12% (in level) above those without patents, controlling for sector, size, age,
R&D, exporting, foreign ownership, and group membership.

Consistently with the new-to-market innovation performance results, we find that older
firms grow more slowly and group members grow faster. In contrast to those results,
exporting firms exhibit worse employment growth. Controlling for a firm’s own
patenting, the sectoral importance of formal and informal IP is not associated with
growth, unlike the case of innovative sales.

Our final exploration in the last column also looks at whether several patent indicators
that are known to be associated with patent value have any relationship to employment
growth. That is, if we control for the quality of the inventions that are patented as well
as the simple fact that at least one patent was applied for, can we see any relationship.
The indicators we use are the average number of distinct classes (IPCs) per patent, the
number of forward citations received per patent, the number of backward citations
made per patent, and the number of citations to the non-patent literature made per
patent, all in logs. Unfortunately none of them enter significantly, and the net effect of
these variables is to weaken the coefficient on the simple patent dummy, with little
impact on the other variables in the model. Our conclusion is that we may have too
small a sample of patenting firms (recall that only 6% of innovating firms patent) to
obtain much precision using these indicators.




                                               19
6.5 Sectoral differences
In Tables 7 and 8 we look at how our estimates differ across two major sectors involved
in innovation: a traditional R&D-intensive sector, manufacturing, and a service sector,
that relies less on R&D but innovates heavily, Knowledge-Intensive Business Services
(KIBS), which consists of business services (2003 UK SIC 71 and 74), computer services
(SIC 72) and R&D services (SIC 73). The contrast is of interest for two reasons: first,
because the innovation process in the two sectors is quite different, with manufacturing
being more ‘technological’ in general, and second, because the KIBS sector is growing
relative to manufacturing.19 11.5% of the observations in the manufacturing sample
have a patent, whereas only 3.9% of the KIBS sector observations have a patent.

The first two columns of Table 7 present results for the ordered probit regression with
the relative importance of patents vs. secrecy as a dependent variable. Innovating firms
in the two sectors clearly weight the importance of patents vs. secrecy differently:
manufacturing firms have a slight positive preference for patents if they are new-to-the-
market product innovators, but prefer secrecy if they are process innovators (as
expected). On the other hand, innovating firms in KIBS strongly prefer secrecy to
patents. This finding also holds for formal IP vs. informal IP in general (not shown).
None of the other firm characteristics seem to have an influence on their rating of
patents vs. secrecy in both sectors, with the exception of firm age and R&D intensity in
manufacturing.

The last two columns present the patenting probability estimates for the two sectors. In
the manufacturing sector innovating firms (other than mere new-to-the-firm process
innovators) are more likely to patent, whereas only new-to-the-market product
innovation is associated with patenting in KIBS. For both manufacturing and KIBS, being
in a sector that rates formal IP protection as important is associated with patenting, as
is size, being a member of a group, and financial constraints (negatively). Thus the main
contrast between manufacturing and KIBS is that patenting is slightly more strongly
associated with innovation in the former, whereas it is more strongly associated with
exporting in the latter. This suggests some heterogeneity within both sectors – large



19Between 2005 and 2010, manufacturing employment in the UK declined 37%, while employment in
Professional, scientific, and technical services grew 32% (Wilson and Homendiou, 2012, Table 3.4).

                                               20
exporting firms that are in a group and not financially constrained use patents, whereas
the other smaller firms are much less likely to.

Table 8 presents the performance regressions for the two sectors. First, we note that the
strongest and most stable relationship is that older firms have lower innovative sales
and lower growth, in both sectors as in the aggregate. Having a patent application is
strongly associated with the new-to-the-market innovation sales share, but in the case
of KIBS, it is strongly negative for the new-to-the-firm innovative sales share. We are
not sure how to interpret this, although it may be related to variation in the level of
vertical integration in these kinds of service firms. That is, research-oriented firms that
patent may not have much in the way of innovative sales, since they supply under
contract to other firms.

The growth rate regressions for manufacturing are similar to those for all firms, with an
insignificant positive association with patenting and more strongly positive association
with having trademarks. The coefficients on size and size squared imply that growth
falls with firm size until around 300 employees and then increases. In addition, the
coefficients of interest in the KIBS regression have very large standard errors,
suggesting weak identification. An interesting result is that the relative importance of
formal vs. informal IP in the 3-digit sector is strongly associated with employment
growth, even in the presence of the 2-digit sector dummies. It is possible that the
attitudes toward IP are better predictors in this sector than actual patenting and
trademarking because there are relatively few firms that make use of these formal IP
mechanisms yet, although there may be more in the future. Another alternative is that
patenting and trademarking are somewhat undercounted due to the difficulties of
matching the newer and younger firms in these sectors to the IP data.


   7. Conclusion
This paper provides an analysis of the determinants of a firm´s patenting decision and
assesses the potential implications of the choice on its performance measured as
innovative sales and as employment growth. The analysis relies on a new integrated
dataset that combines a range of data sources into a panel at the enterprise level. Our
findings suggest the following conclusions.


                                              21
Determinants of a firm´s choice of IP protection
Our descriptive analysis shows about one third of UK firms report any form of
innovation. Strikingly, we find that only 3% of firms in our sample patent and that even
among firms that conduct R&D, only 4% patent. In particular, the share of patenting
firms is much lower than what one might expect given that around 20% of firms that
invest in R&D report product innovations.

When we investigated the determinants of patenting versus not patenting for
innovative firms, we found that most of the predictor variables confirmed prior
intuition: patentees are more likely to be product innovators rather than process
innovators, more likely to also use trademarks, and they are larger, slightly more likely
to export, and to be part of a business group.

What then explains the fact that so few of the firms patent, even if we restrict ourselves
to new to the market product innovators that do R&D? One possible reason is that the
samples we are using contain a large number of smaller firms (<250 employees) who
may find use of the formal IP system simply too costly. This hypothesis is weakly
supported by the small negative coefficients on the presence of financial constraints in
both the importance of formal IP vs. informal IP and the patent propensity regressions.
Certainly size is a very important predictor in our patenting propensity regressions and
coupled with the skew size distribution for firms, this can explain the low patenting
rate. However, looking at the large sample (which includes sectors that generally do not
have patentable inventions), we have seen in earlier work (Hall et al. 2012b) that almost
half of the large firms do not use formal or informal IP either. Because firms that use one
IP mechanism are more likely to use another, another possibility is that firms have a
‘propensity’ to use or not use IP, and that the problem is lack of familiarity with the
system and suboptimal behaviour on the part of some firms.

A final (and perhaps the most likely) explanation is that the use of any IP protection
mechanism costs time and money and most firms find that the benefits do not exceed
the costs, especially in the case of patents.20 However, our findings on performance call


20The costs of patenting do not only involve the direct financial costs of preparing and prosecuting a filing
(or paying for specialized counsel), but also indirect costs in form of for example management time. In
addition, patents need to be enforced, which requires the monitoring of possible infringement and taking
legal action in case infringement is detected. As documented by Helmers and McDonagh (2012), patent

                                                    22
this explanation into question, at least for some firms. The large positive association
between patenting and innovative sales suggests that there could be non-patenting
firms out there that would benefit from using patents or other forms of IP protection.


The use of IP protections and (innovative) performance
The results on innovation performance suggest that patented innovations are more
successful in promoting innovative sales. However, because we do not know whether
performance and patenting are both driven by the unobservable quality of the firm’s
innovation or by the quality of the firm itself, it is not possible to make a causal
inference based on our analysis that patenting any innovation will lead to better
innovative sales performance. In contrast, we do not find any statistically significant
association between patenting and employment growth.




Acknowledgements
We thank the editor Anindya Banerjee and four anonymous referees for helpful
comments. The paper was presented at the AEA Meetings 2013, UC Berkeley, and the
UK Intellectual Property Office. We thank participants for useful comments.
Disclaimer: This work contains statistical data from UK ONS which is Crown copyright
and reproduced with the permission of the controller of HMSO and Queen’s Printer for
Scotland. The use of the ONS statistical data in this work does not imply the
endorsement of the ONS in relation to the interpretation or analysis of the statistical
data. This work uses research datasets which may not exactly reproduce National
Statistics aggregates.

Funding
United Kingdom Intellectual Property Office. The views expressed here are those of the
authors. They are not necessarily those of the UK Intellectual Property Office.




litigation in the UK, before the Patents Court, is extremely costly, with costs varying between GBP 1 and 6
million for cases heard by the court between 2000 and 2008.

                                                    23
References
Anton J. and D. Yao (2004): Little Patents and Big Secrets: Managing Intellectual Property, RAND
        Journal of Economics, 35, 1-22.

Arundel A. (2001): The relative effectiveness of patents and secrecy for appropriation, Research
      Policy, 30, 611-624.

Balasubramanian N. and J. Sivadasan (2011): What Happens when Firms Patent? New Evidence
       from US Economic Census Data, Review of Economics and Statistics, 93, 126-146.

Bound, J., C. Cummins, Z. Griliches, B. H. Hall, and A. Jaffe (1984): Who Does R&D and Who
       Patents?, in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Z. Griliches (eds.). Chicago, University of
       Chicago Press, 21-54.

Brouwer E. and A. Kleinknecht (1999): Innovative output, and a firm’s propensity to patent. An
      exploration of CIS micro data, Research Policy, 28, 615-624.

Giuri P., M. Mariani, S. Brusoni, G. Crespi, D. Francoz, A. Gambardella, W. Garcia-Fontes, A. Geuna,
         R. Gonzales, D. Harhoff, K. Hoisl, C. Le Bas, A. Luzzi, L. Maggazini, L. Nesta, O. Nomaler, N.
         Palomeras, P. Patel, M. Romanelli, B. Verspagen (2007): Inventors and Invention
         Processes in Europe: Results from the PatVal-EU Survey, Research Policy, 36, 1107-1127.

Hall, B. H. (1987): The relationship between firms size and growth in the U. S. manufacturing
         sector, Journal of Industrial Economics, 35, 583-606.

Hall B.H., C. Helmers, M. Rogers, and V. Sena (2012a): The choice between formal and informal
        intellectual property: a review, Cambridge, MA: NBER Working Paper No. 17983.

Hall B.H., C. Helmers, M. Rogers, and V. Sena (2012b): The use of alternatives to patents and
        limits to incentives, UK Intellectual Property Office Report 2012/21.

Heger D. and A. Zaby (2013): The Heterogeneous Costs of Disclosure and the Propensity to
      Patent, Oxford Economic Papers, 65, this issue.

Helmers C. and L. McDonagh (2012): Patent Litigation in the UK, LSE Law, Society and Economy
      Working Papers 13/2012.

Hussinger K. (2006): Is silence golden? Patents versus secrecy at the firm level, Economics of
       Innovation and New Technology, 15, 735-752.

Mairesse J. and P. Mohnen (2010): Using Innovation Surveys for Econometric Analysis, Chapter
       for Handbook of the Economics of Innovation, B. H. Hall and N. Rosenberg (eds.),
       Amsterdam and New York: Elsevier.

Mansfield, E. (1986): Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study, Management Science 32, 173-
       181.

Pajak S. (2010): Do Firms Rely on Big Secrets? An Analysis of IP Protection Strategies with the
        CIS 4 Survey, Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1538980 Last accessed 26
        February 2013.

Rogers M., C. Helmers, and C. Greenhalgh (2007a): An analysis of the characteristics of small and
       medium enterprises that use intellectual property, UK Intellectual Property Office.


                                                 24
       Available at http://www.ipo.gov.uk/ipresearch-characteristics-200710.pdf              Last
       accessed 26 February 2013.

Rogers M., C. Helmers, and C. Greenhalgh (2007b): An analysis of the characteristics of small and
       medium enterprises that use intellectual property, UK Intellectual Property Office.
       Available at http://www.ipo.gov.uk/ipresearch-association-200710.pdf Last accessed
       26 February 2013.

Sakakibara M. and L. Branstetter (2001): Do stronger patents induce more innovation? Evidence
       from the 1988 Japanese patent law reforms, Rand Journal of Economics, 32, 77-100.

Scherer, F. M. (1965): Corporate inventive output, profits and growth. Journal of Political
       Economy, 73, 290-297.

Scherer F. M. and S. Weisburst (1995): Economic Effects of Strengthening Pharmaceutical Patent
       Protection in Italy, International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law, 26 (6),
       1009-1024.

Wilson R. A. and K Homenidou (2012): Working Futures, UK Commission for Employment and
       Skills, Evidence Report No. 41. Available at http://www.ukces.org.uk Last accessed 26
       February 2013.




                                               25
Figures

      60%


      50%


      40%


      30%                                                                                         All firms


                                                                                                  Patenting
      20%                                                                                         firms


      10%


        0%




Fig. 1: Share of innovating firms rating different types of IP protection as medium or
highly important


     70.0%


     60.0%                                                                                        No sales
                                                                                                  from new
                                                                                                  products
     50.0%

                                                                                                  <10% sales
     40.0%                                                                                        from new
                                                                                                  products

     30.0%
                                                                                                  10%-25%
                                                                                                  sales from
                                                                                                  new
     20.0%                                                                                        products

                                                                                                  >25% sales
     10.0%                                                                                        from new
                                                                                                  products

      0.0%
             Product new to the   Product new to the    Product new to the   Product new to the
             market innovator -   market innovator -      firm innovator -    firm innovator -
                  patents              secrecy                patents             secrecy
                                             Type of innovation

Fig. 2: Importance of patents and secrecy to product innovators



                                                        26
     0.60



     0.50                                                            Firm aged 20 yrs,
                                                                     innovator, R&D-
                                                                     doer
     0.40                                                            Firm aged 20 yrs,
                                                                     new-to-firm
                                                                     innovator, R&D-
     0.30                                                            doer
                                                                     Firm aged 20 yrs,
                                                                     innovator, non-
                                                                     R&D
     0.20
                                                                     Firm aged 20 yrs,
                                                                     non-innovator,
     0.10                                                            non-R&D


     0.00
             -        500           1,000          1,500     2,000
                              Size (employees)

Fig. 3: Probability of patenting – metals and machinery sector


      0.80


      0.70
                                                                      R&D services

      0.60
                                                                      High technology
      0.50
                                                                      Metals &
      0.40                                                            machinery

      0.30                                                            Food & beverage


      0.20                                                            Financial,
                                                                      insurance, real
      0.10                                                            estate


      0.00
                 -     500           1,000         1,500     2,000
                               Size (employees)

Fig. 4: Probability of patenting – Innovating, R&D-doing firms aged 20 years




                                              27
Tables

                                           Table 1
                                        Panel structure
         Number of                    Sample
             firms   Share (%)         firms*     Share (%)       CIS 3   CIS 4   CIS 5
               485        2.0%             98           1.1%       X       X       X
               396        1.7%            148           1.7%       X       X
             5,136       21.6%          1,098          12.8%               X       X
               214        0.9%             74           0.9%       X               X
             5,905       24.8%          1,595          18.6%       X
             5,929       24.9%          3,243          37.8%               X
             5,725       24.1%          2,321          27.1%                       X
            23,790                      8,577

    Note: X indicates where data are available.
    *The sample of innovating firms, cleaned, used for analysis




                                                  28
                                                        Table 2
                             Share of patenting firms (sample relative to the population)
                                              All sectors                         Manufacturing                  KIBS**
                                                                     Pop
                                          Has UK      Share        share              Has UK    Share            Has UK    Share
                                          or EPO        with        with              or EPO      with           or EPO      with
                                    All   patent     patents     patents        All   patent   patents     All   patent   patents

Total                           30506         885       2.9%        1.6%      11151     662        5.9%   8446      146     1.7%
Does R&D                        18610         747       4.0%        2.3%      7666      587        7.7%   5115      131     2.6%
Innovates                       10345         645       6.2%        3.9%      4951        *           *   2723        *        *

No R&D or innovation            11018         113       1.0%        0.6%      3191       73        2.3%   3104       20     0.6%
R&D but no innovation            9143         127       1.4%        0.6%      3009       91        3.0%   2619       23     0.9%
Innovation but no R&D*            878          11       1.3%        1.3%       294        *           *    227        *        *
Does R&D and innovates           9467         634       6.7%        4.2%      4657      496       10.7%   2496       99     4.0%
*The cells with * are missing due to suppression of data due
to confidentiality reasons.
** KIBS consists of business services including computing and R&D services.




                                                                     29
                                              Table 3
                                        Types of innovation
                                                                           Innovators with
                                                                  product process product process
                                                                  new to the market    new to the firm,
                                                                                      but not the market



All firms                                                          4015      1645      3095      4009
R&D doers                                                          3797      1564      2893      3757
R&D doers who patent                                                433       178       107       216

                                                                        Sample share innovating
All firms                                                         13.2%    5.4%       10.1%     13.1%
R&D doers                                                         20.4%    8.4%       15.5%     20.2%
R&D doers who patent                                              58.0%    23.8%      14.3%     28.9%
Note that a negligible number of firms patent but do not do
R&D.
There are 31,722 firms in the sample, including non-innovators.




                                                    30
                                                    Table 4
       The relative importance of formal vs. informal IP protection mechanisms
                                (10,093 observations)
Dependent variable                                  formal vs. informal                        patents vs. secrecy
                                                           OLS                                   Ordered probit
Variable                                (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)
Product innovation new to
the market                        -0.12 (0.02)***     -0.13 (0.02)***      -0.12 (0.02)***        -0.05 (0.03)*
Process innovation new to
the market                        -0.17 (0.02)***     -0.17 (0.02)***      -0.16 (0.02)***      -0.12 (0.03)***
Product innovation new to
the firm                          -0.06 (0.02)***     -0.06 (0.02)***      -0.06 (0.02)***       -0.07 (0.03)**
Process innovation new to
the firm                          -0.12 (0.02)***     -0.12 (0.02)***      -0.11 (0.02)***      -0.12 (0.02)***
Formal IP important in the
3-digit sector                                                             1.26 (0.07)***
Informal IP important in the
3-digit sector                                                             -1.17 (0.07)***
D (financial constraints)           -0.02 (0.02)         -0.02 (0.02)         -0.02 (0.02)      -0.06 (0.02)***
Log (R&D per employee)            -0.05 (0.01)***     -0.05 (0.01)***      -0.05 (0.01)***      -0.05 (0.01)***
D (no R&D)                        -0.16 (0.04)***     -0.16 (0.04)***      -0.15 (0.04)***      -0.15 (0.06)***
Log age                              0.00 (0.01)         -0.00 (0.01)         -0.00 (0.01)        0.03 (0.02)*
Log employment                       0.01 (0.01)       0.01 (0.01)***       0.01 (0.01)***        -0.02 (0.02)
Log employment squared             -0.00 (0.002)        -0.00 (0.002)        -0.00 (0.002)       -0.005 (0.003)
D (exports)                         -0.05 (0.04)         -0.04 (0.04)         -0.04 (0.04)        -0.05 (0.05)
D (member of a group)                0.02 (0.02)          0.02 (0.02)          0.02 (0.02)         0.04 (0.03)
D (foreign-owned)                    0.01 (0.02)          0.01 (0.02)          0.01 (0.02)         0.03 (0.03)
15 sector dummies                        No                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
Standard error                         0.790               0.789                0.777
R-squared                              0.023               0.028                0.058                0.013

Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors clustered on enterprise are shown in parentheses.
Period dummies for the three different CIS waves are included in all regressions.




                                                    31
                                                    Table 5
                              Probit estimation of the probability a firm patents
                                   10,093 observations (8,577 enterprises)
                                                                            Marginal effects (s.e.)
Variable                                              (1)                   (2)                 (3)              (4)

Product innovation new to the market          0.060 (0.006)***      0.047 (0.006)***    0.046 (0.006)***   0.033 (0.006)***
Process innovation new to the market          0.016 (0.006)***      0.015 (0.006)***    0.015 (0.006)***   0.013 (0.006)**
Product innovation new to the firm            0.017 (0.007)**         0.012 (0.007)      0.012 (0.007)*      0.011 (0.007)
Process innovation new to the firm              0.002 (0.005)         0.000 (0.005)       0.000 (0.005)      0.002 (0.005)
Formal IP important in 3-digit sector                                                    -0.006 (0.018)
Informal IP important in 3-digit sector                                                   0.026 (0.017)
Formal IP important to the firm                                                                            0.031 (0.003)***
Informal IP important to the firm                                                                             0.003 (0.003)
                                                                                                                 -0.015
D (financial constraints)                       -0.003 (0.005)        -0.007 (0.004)      -0.007 (0.004)       (0.004)***
D (has trademarks)                            0.084 (0.006)***      0.089 (0.006)***    0.089 (0.006)***   0.073 (0.005)***
Log (R&D per employee)                          -0.005 (0.003)        -0.000 (0.003)       0.000 (0.003)      0.003 (0.003)
D (no R&D)                                    -0.029 (0.011)**        -0.012 (0.011)      -0.011 (0.011)      0.000 (0.010)
Log age                                         -0.001 (0.004)       -0.007 (0.004)*     -0.007 (0.004)*     -0.003 (0.004)
Log employment                                 0.008 (0.003)**      0.017 (0.004)***    0.017 (0.004)***   0.018 (0.004)***
Log employment squared                          -0.000 (0.000)        0.001 (0.001)*    0.001 (0.001)**    0.002 (0.001)***
D (exports)                                    0.020 (0.008)**         0.009 (0.009)       0.009 (0.009)      0.009 (0.009)
D (member of a group)                         0.035 (0.006)***      0.034 (0.005)***    0.034 (0.005)***   0.032 (0.005)***
D (foreign-owned)                               -0.001 (0.005)       -0.009 (0.005)*     -0.009 (0.005)*    -0.010 (0.005)*
Sector dummies                                        no                   yes                 yes                 yes
Share with dep var=1                                 0.064                0.064                0.064            0.064
Share correctly predicted                            0.936                0.939                0.939            0.939
Share correctly predicted (dep var=1)                0.074                0.155                0.155            0.159
Share correctly predicted (dep var=0)                0.995                0.993                0.993            0.992
Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors clustered on enterprise are shown in parentheses.
Period dummies for the three different CIS waves are included in all regressions.




                                                               32
                                                               Table 6: Performance regressions
Dependent variable                                                   Log (Share/(1-Share))                                       Average employment growth
                                          Sales share product new to the mkt      Sales share product new to the firm                     1998-2006
                                                (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                    (5)                (6)
D (has EPO or UK patent)                 0.531 (0.082)*** 0.518 (0.082)***         -0.025 (0.064)      -0.029 (0.064)          0.121 (0.078)     -0.194 (0.147)
D (has trademarks)                       0.202 (0.064)*** 0.181 (0.063)***          0.076 (0.054)       0.072 (0.055)          0.055 (0.054)      0.049 (0.054)
Formal IP important in the 3-digit
sector                                                            0.195 (0.139)                           -0.045 (0.122)      -0.119 (0.119)      -0.120 (0.120)
Informal IP important in the 3-
digit sector                                                    0.317 (0.135)**                            0.208 (0.119)*       0.071 (0.112)       0.062 (0.112)
Log (R&D per employee)                   -0.091 (0.027)***     -0.085 (0.024)***        0.014 (0.022)       0.016 (0.022)      -0.007 (0.027)      -0.011 (0.027)
D (no R&D)                               -0.238 (0.084)***      -0.214 (0.084)**        0.057 (0.073)       0.063 (0.073)      -0.077 (0.088)      -0.090 (0.087)
Log age                                  -0.225 (0.031)***     -0.222 (0.031)***     -0.220 (0.031)***   -0.220 (0.031)***   -0.412 (0.039)***   -0.412 (0.039)***
Log employment                            -0.047 (0.028)*        -0.046 (0.028)        -0.021 (0.026)      -0.021 (0.026)     0.104 (0.037)***    0.084 (0.041)**
Log employment squared                    0.010 (0.005)**       0.011 (0.005)**        0.009 (0.005)*       0.008 (0.005)     0.041 (0.009)***    0.037 (0.010)***
D (exports)                                -0.082 (0.071)        -0.081 (0.071)       0.108 (0.029)***    0.108 (0.029)***   -0.241 (0.063)***   -0.249 (0.064)***
D (member of a group)                      0.074 (0.044)*         0.061 (0.044)       0.091 (0.041)**     0.087 (0.041)**     0.115 (0.041)***    0.110 (0.041)***
D (foreign-owned)                           0.080 (0.040)        0.073 (0.040)*         0.016 (0.037)       0.014 (0.037)      -0.038 (0.036)      -0.041 (0.036)
Log (average #IPCs per pat)                                                                                                                         0.002 (0.126)
Log (backward cites per pat)                                                                                                                        0.104 (0.080)
Log (forward cites per pat)                                                                                                                         0.028 (0.098)
Log (NPL cites per pat)                                                                                                                             0.176 (0.212)
Sector dummies                                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                 Yes                 Yes                   Yes
R-squared                                      0.054                 0.059                0.135               0.135               0.075                 0.076
Standard error                                  1.56                  1.56                 1.54                1.54               1.36                  1.36
Observations                                   10,093                10,093               10,093              10,093              6,712                 6,712
Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors clustered on enterprise are shown in parentheses.
Period dummies for the three different CIS waves are included in all regressions.



                                                                                    33
                                                    Table 7

                    Patenting and its relative importance by broad sector
Dependent variable                     patents vs. secrecy                  D (patent app during the period)
                                   Ordered probit coefficients                   Marginal effects (s.e.)
Variable                         Manufacturing          KIBS               Manufacturing            KIBS
Product innovation new to
the market                        0.07 (0.04)*         -0.14 (0.06)**      0.05 (0.01)***        0.03 (0.01)***
Process innovation new to
the market                       -0.12 (0.05)**          -0.09 (0.06)        0.02 (0.01)*          0.00 (0.01)
Product innovation new to
the firm                           0.03 (0.04)         -0.15 (0.06)**        0.03 (0.01)*          0.01 (0.01)
Process innovation new to
the firm                         -0.09 (0.03)***      -0.18 (0.05)***        0.00 (0.01)          -0.00 (0.01)
Formal IP important to the
firm                                                                       0.06 (0.005)***      0.03 (0.005)***
Informal IP important to
the firm                                                                      -0.00 (0.01)        0.01 (0.00)*
D (financial constraints)          -0.03 (0.03)          -0.06 (0.04)      -0.03 (0.01)***       -0.01 (0.01)**
Log (R&D per employee)           -0.05 (0.02)**          -0.04 (0.03)          0.00 (0.00)         0.00 (0.00)
D (no R&D)                         -0.18 (0.08)          -0.08 (0.12)          0.01 (0.02)         -0.01 (0.01)
Log age                           0.06 (0.03)**           0.03 (0.03)          0.00 (0.01)         -0.00 (0.00)
Log employment                     -0.00 (0.02)          -0.01 (0.05)       0.03 (0.01)***        0.01 (0.00)**
Log employment squared             -0.00 (0.00)          -0.00 (0.01)          0.00 (0.00)      0.002 (0.001)**
D (exports)                        -0.06 (0.06)           0.05 (0.11)          0.01 (0.02)        0.05 (0.02)**
D (member of a group)              0.06 (0.04)            0.02 (0.06)       0.06 (0.01)***       0.02 (0.01)***
D (foreign-owned)                  0.03 (0.04)            0.00 (0.06)        -0.02 (0.01)*         -0.01 (0.01)

R-squared                          0.01                     0.005
Share with dep var=1                                                            0.115                  0.039
Share correctly predicted                                                       0.906                  0.962
Share correctly predicted (dep var=1)                                           0.210                  0.029
Share correctly predicted (dep var=0)                                           0.984                  0.999
Observations                       4839                     2668                4839                   2668

Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors clustered on enterprise are shown in parentheses.
Period dummies for the three different CIS waves and sector dummies are included in all regressions.




                                                    34
                                                                          Table 8
                                                              Performance regressions by sector
Dependent variable                                                   Log (Share/(1-Share))                                        Average employment growth
                                         Sales share - product new to the mkt     Sales share - product new to the firm                    1998-2006
                                          Manufacturing            KIBS           Manufacturing              KIBS              Manufacturing           KIBS
D (has EPO or UK patent)                 0.453 (0.090)*** 1.072 (0.239)***         0.032 (0.075)       -0.300 (0.148)**         0.057 (0.067)      0.272 (0.292)
D (has trademarks)                         0.047 (0.076)      0.331 (0.169)**      0.058 (0.068)         0.079 (0.135)         0.132 (0.062)**    -0.014 (0.157)
Formal IP important in the 3-digit
sector                                    0.279 (0.159)*         0.086 (0.473)          -0.041 (0.132)      -0.461 (0.442)     -0.242 (0.118)**     1.511 (0.841)*
Informal IP important in the 3-
digit sector                              0.097 (0.162)          0.798 (0.438)*           0.218 (0.133)      -0.463 (0.413)       0.175 (0.117)      -1.398 (0.786)*
Log (R&D per employee)                    -0.107 (0.037)        -0.096 (0.053)*           0.006 (0.029)     0.113 (0.051)**      -0.018 (0.036)        0.027 (0.065)
D (no R&D)                                -0.220 (0.122)         -0.346 (0.194)          -0.002 (0.095)     0.322 (0.161)**      -0.045 (0.104)       -0.108 (0.223)
Log age                                 -0.237 (0.046)***      -0.265 (0.058)***       -0.159 (0.039)***   -0.295 (0.065)***   -0.326 (0.055)***   -0.482 (0.073)***
Log employment                            -0.031 (0.038)         -0.058 (0.069)         -0.060 (0.033)*     0.146 (0.069)**     0.126 (0.047)***     0.178 (0.104)*
Log employment squared                    0.013 (0.007)*          0.013 (0.011)          -0.004 (0.006)     0.029 (0.013)**     0.053 (0.014)***     0.037 (0.021)*
D (exports)                               -0.059 (0.095)         -0.012 (0.197)         0.073 (0.035)**     0.168 (0.060)***   -0.219 (0.063)***    -0.342 (0.151)**
D (member of a group)                     0.023 (0.059)           0.105 (0.102)           0.056 (0.058)       0.108 (0.089)     0.085 (0.036)**        0.104 (0.122)
D (foreign-owned)                        0.148 (0.055)**         -0.119 (0.087)           0.052 (0.046)      -0.039 (0.086)       0.019 (0.038)       -0.145 (0.103)
R-squared                                     0.055                   0.086                   0.168               0.106               0.084                0.055
Standard error                                 1.50                   1.71                    1.42                1.65                1.04                 1.75
Observations                                  4,839                   2,668                   4,839               2,668               3,358                1,629
Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors clustered on enterprise are shown in parentheses.
Period dummies for the three different CIS waves and sector dummies are included in all regressions.




                                                                                  35
