                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          REFERENCE-DEPENDENCE AND LABOR-MARKET FLUCTUATIONS

                                            Kfir Eliaz
                                           Rani Spiegler

                                       Working Paper 19085
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19085


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2013




Spiegler acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council, Grant no. 230251.
We thank Gadi Bar-Levy, Martin Dufwenberg, Erik Eyster, Robert Hall, Elhanan Helpman, Giuseppe
Moscarini, Christopher Pissarides, Thijs van Rens, Ariel Rubinstein, Ron Siegel, Balazs Szentes, Eran
Yashiv, Michael Woodford, Alwyn Young and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kfir Eliaz and Rani Spiegler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Reference-Dependence and Labor-Market Fluctuations
Kfir Eliaz and Rani Spiegler
NBER Working Paper No. 19085
May 2013, Revised June 2013
JEL No. D03,E24,E32,J64

                                              ABSTRACT

We incorporate reference-dependent worker behavior into a search-matching model of the labor market,
in which firms have all the bargaining power and productivity follows a log-linear AR(1) process.
Motivated by Akerlof (1982) and Bewley (1999), we assume that existing workers’ output falls stochastically
from its normal level when their wage falls below a "reference point", which (following Kszegi and
Rabin (2006)) is equal to their lagged-expected wage. We formulate the model game-theoretically
and show that it has a unique subgame perfect equilibrium that exhibits the following properties: existing
workers experience downward wage rigidity, as well as destruction of output following negative shocks
due to layoffs or loss of morale; newly hired workers earn relatively flexible wages, but not as much
as in the benchmark without reference dependence; market tightness is more volatile than under this
benchmark. We relate these findings to the debate over the “Shimer puzzle” (Shimer (2005)).


Kfir Eliaz
School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
Israel
Kfir_Eliaz@Brown.edu

Rani Spiegler
School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
Israel
r.spiegler@ucl.ac.uk
1         Introduction
Economists have long pondered over the observation that wages display downward
rigidity and do not fall in recessions as much as one might expect on the basis of supply-
and-demand analysis. An intuitive idea with a long pedigree, going back to Keynes
(1936), Solow (1979), Akerlof (1982), Akerlof and Yellen (1990), Kahneman et al.
(1986), Fehr and Falk (1999) and many others, is that reciprocal-fairness considerations
deter employers from cutting wages during recessions. Specifically, the theory is that
the labor contract’s inherent incompleteness forces employers to rely to some extent on
workers’ intrinsic motivation. When workers feel that they have been treated unfairly,
their intrinsic motivation is dampened and their output declines. According to this
"morale hazard" theory, wage cuts relative to a "reference point" have such an eﬀect,
which is why employers try to avoid them.1
    The intuitive appeal of this argument is also reflected in survey data. Blinder and
Choi (1990) and Bewley (1999) interviewed personnel managers and other labor-market
actors, and found overwhelming support for the morale theory. As Bewley (1999) puts
it:

          "My findings support none of the existing economic theories of wage rigid-
          ity, except those emphasizing the impact of pay cuts on morale. Other
          theories fail in part because they are based on the unrealistic psychological
          assumptions that people’s abilities do not depend on their state of mind and
          that they are rational in the simplistic sense that they maximize a utility
          that depends only on their own consumption and working conditions..."

    The morale theory of labor relations has substantial experimental support. In one
prominent example, Fehr and Falk (1999) studied an experimental labor market in
which wages are determined by a double auction and labor contracts are incomplete
(in the sense that firms cannot monitor eﬀort and output, and workers receive a flat
wage). They found that the market-clearing wage significantly exceeds the competitive
level, and hired workers reciprocate by exerting high eﬀort. Numerous studies along
similar lines are surveyed in Fehr et. al (2009).
    In this paper we incorporate a "morale hazard" account of the labor relation into a
search-and-matching (S&M) model of the labor market in which "productivity" fluc-
tuates according to a log-linear AR(1) process, and explore its theoretical implications
for equilibrium wage and unemployment fluctuations. Our main departure from the
    1
        The notion of “morale hazard” has a completely diﬀerent meaning in the insurance industry.


                                                    2
standard S&M model in the Mortensen-Pissarides tradition (see Pissarides (2000) and
Shimer (2010) for textbook treatments) lies in the assumption that the labor contract is
incomplete; workers receive a flat wage, and their normal productivity relies on "intrin-
sic motivation". When the worker’s wage falls below his reference point, he becomes
less motivated and his output falls below the normal level by a random fraction that
captures the importance of "morale" in the production function.
    In our model, the worker’s reference point evolves over the course of his relationship
with the firm. A formerly unemployed worker enters his first employment period only
with the "aspiration" to be paid the lowest admissible wage (normalized to zero). At the
end of the worker’s first period of employment, having developed a relationship with his
employer, he cultivates an aspiration to earn the expected equilibrium wage of existing
workers (conditional on his current information). This aspiration will constitute the
worker’s reference point in the next period. Thus, the reference wage of a newly hired
worker is zero, while the reference point of an existing worker at period t is equal to his
expected wage, calculated according to his "rational" expectations at period t − 1. In
Appendix B, we present a slightly diﬀerent formulation of the reference point, which
endogenizes this distinction between newly hired and existing workers; our main results
are robust to this variation.
    Our "lagged expectations" approach to the formation of workers’ reference point
follows an influential model due to Kőszegi and Rabin (2006). The justification for the
expectation-based specification is that a given wage oﬀer may be greeted as a pleasant
surprise or as a demoralizing disappointment, depending on how it compares with the
worker’s former expectations. For instance, if the worker expected a big salary increase,
failure to meet this expectation may hurt his morale, even if his current wage is higher
than yesterday’s wage. The justification for the "lagged" aspect is that it takes the
reference point some time to adapt to changing circumstances, just as it takes people
time to change a habit. This delayed adaptation will be the source of wage rigidity in
our model.2
    Before stating our main result, we wish to comment on our methodology. The
standard Mortensen-Pissarides model mixes non-cooperative game-theoretic modeling
with the "cooperative" Nash bargaining solution. Instead, we formulate the model
entirely as an extensive non-cooperative game with moves of Nature and study its
subgame perfect equilibria (SPE), as in Rubinstein and Wolinsky (1985). We seek a
complete analytical characterization of dynamic equilibria with transparent qualitative
  2
   See Crawford and Meng (2011) for an empirical implementation of the "lagged expectations"
approach to reference dependence.



                                             3
features, and this impels us to make a few simplifications. First, we focus exclusively
on the labor market and leave out consumption and capital. Second, we eliminate
two degrees of freedom in the standard S&M model: workers have no bargaining power
(firms repeatedly make take-it-or-leave-it one-period wage oﬀers), and their non-market
payoﬀ is proportional to productivity. Doing so not only simplifies the analysis, but
also ensures that all wage-rigidity eﬀects are due to the novel behavioral element. We
do not add any new parameters, and our equilibrium characterization is presented for
quite general reference-dependent output functions. Finally, for most of the paper, we
impose a two-period exogenous separation process, which is innocuous in the reference-
independent benchmark but facilitates analysis under reference dependence.3
    Our main result is that as long as the magnitude of productivity shocks is not too
large, our model generates a unique SPE, which displays the following features.
Wage rigidity and destruction of output. Equilibrium wage for existing workers displays
downward rigidity w.r.t current productivity shocks. Specifically, for intermediate noise
realizations, the firm oﬀers the reference wage, and therefore does not respond to local
productivity fluctuations. At high noise realizations, the firm pays the current outside
option (which we assumed to be proportional to current productivity). In certain
special cases of the model, when the drop in worker productivity due to loss of morale
is large, the wage is entirely rigid. At low noise realizations, the firm either lays oﬀ
existing workers or pays them their outside option (in which case, the workers’ output
declines), depending on the realized importance of "morale" in the production function.
Thus, existing workers experience layoﬀs or demoralization in equilibrium following bad
shocks.
History dependence. The fraction of existing workers’ output that is destroyed as a
result of wage rigidity is purely a function of current morale and productivity shocks.
Since both shocks are drawn from stationary distributions, this fraction is history-
independent. Thus, existing workers’ observed output depends on both productivity
levels and productivity changes. In particular, for a given productivity level, we may
observe recession symptoms (notably layoﬀs) if this level is a consequence of a bad
shock.
Entry-level wages. Newly matched workers are always hired in equilibrium and paid
a wage below existing workers’ wage. The entry-level wage is not rigid; it strictly
   3
     Kuang and Wang (2010) conduct a quantitative analysis of an S&M model with a reduced-form
fair-wage equation, which includes past wages as some of the independent variables. Dufwenberg and
Kirchstegier (2000) study a static model with one firm and two workers, in which firms refrain from
exploiting competition between workers to cut wages due to reciprocal-fairness considerations.



                                                4
increases with current productivity, albeit at a lower rate than in the benchmark model
without reference dependence. Unlike existing workers, the equilibrium wage of new
hires is purely a function of current productivity.
Increased volatility of market tightness. As in the standard S&M model, free entry im-
plies that market tightness is determined by the firms’ hiring incentive. We show that
the elasticity of tightness with respect to productivity is higher than in the reference-
independent benchmark. This eﬀect is stronger for intermediate values of the AR(1)
autocorrelation coeﬃcient. The reason for this volatility eﬀect is that existing workers’
output destruction due to reference-dependence increases the weight of newly hired
workers’ output in the determination of the value of a vacancy. This raises the sen-
sitivity of this value to initial conditions, since the stochastic process that governs
productivity is mean-reverting.

Relation to the Shimer Puzzle
In an influential paper, Shimer (2005) argued that the S&M model has shortcomings in
accounting for real-life labor-market fluctuations, in the sense that the wage volatility
it predicts is too large and the unemployment volatility it predicts is too small. A
fast-growing literature ensued. One research direction, suggested by Shimer (2004)
and Hall (2005), and challenged by Pissarides (2009), Kudlyak (2009) and Haefke et
al. (2012), has centered around the hypothetical role of wage stickiness in addressing
Shimer’s puzzle.
    Our results can be viewed in light of this debate. As we show in Section 4, our model
synthesizes some theoretical arguments raised by the two sides in the debate, showing
they need not be mutually contradictory after all. We wish to emphasize that although
our model generates a volatility eﬀect in the "right" direction, it cannot be viewed as an
attempt to resolve Shimer’s puzzle, which is quantitative in nature, whereas our paper
is theoretical and qualitative in style. However, since our model provides a behavioral
foundation for the association between wage rigidity and enhanced tightness volatility,
it suggests a basis for future attempts to address the puzzle.


2    A Model
Consider the following complete-information, infinite-horizon game. There is a contin-
uum of players: a measure one of workers and an unbounded measure of firms (the
latter assumption captures free entry among firms). We break the description into the
following components: search and matching, separation, wage and output determina-


                                            5
tion, the agents’ information and their preferences.
Search and matching
Time is discrete. At each period t, firms and workers are matched according to the
following process. An unemployed worker (including workers who lost their job at the
beginning of period t, as described below) is automatically in the search pool (that
is, we abstract from questions of labor market participation). An unmatched firm
(including firms that dismissed workers at the beginning of the period, as described
below) decides whether to be in the search pool, i.e., post a vacancy.4
    If there are Ut unemployed workers and Vt open vacancies at this stage, then a
measure m(Ut , Vt ) ≤ min{Ut , Vt } of unemployed workers are matched to vacancies at
the beginning of period t + 1. The matching function m satisfies the standard as-
sumptions: it is continuous, strictly increasing in each of its arguments and exhibits
constant returns to scale. The matching probabilities for workers and firms at pe-
riod t are thus μt = m(Ut , Vt )/Ut and qt = m(Ut , Vt )/Vt , respectively. Note that
limV →∞ m(U, V )/V = 0. We assume that if all firms post vacancies, then q = 0.
    Define market tightness at t as the ratio

                                                    Vt  μ
                                             θt =      = t
                                                    Ut  qt

Since m exhibits constant returns to scale, θ is a strictly decreasing function of q, given
by
                                            1
                                      m(1, ) = q                                        (1)
                                            θ
From now on we will be primarily interested in market tightness as an indicator of the
state of unemployment, and we will suppress U and V.
Separation and wage determination
Consider a worker who, at the end of period t, completes a tenure of i ≥ 1 consecutive
periods of employment at the same firm. We say that the worker is of type i at period
t. With probability s(i), the two parties will be separated by the beginning of period
t + 1 for some unspecified exogenous reason. With probability 1 − s(i), the match will
survive into the beginning of period t + 1, and the worker will turn into type i + 1.
    When the two parties are matched at the beginning of period t, the firm first chooses
whether to employ the worker. We use ri,t ∈ {0, 1} to denote the firm’s endogenous
separation decision when facing a worker of type i, where r1,t = 1 means that the
firm chooses to employ the worker at t, and ri,t = 0 means that the firm chooses to
  4
      For expositional simplicity, we conventionally assume that each firm can post at most one vacancy.


                                                    6
dismiss him. Conditional on employing a worker of type i at period t, the firm makes a
take-it-or-leave-it, flat-wage oﬀer wi,t ≥ 0. This is a "spot" contract that covers period
t only (put diﬀerently, the firm can renegotiate the labor contract at the beginning of
every period).
    The two parties are endogenously separated at period t if the firm dismisses the
worker, or if the worker rejects the firm’s wage oﬀer. In this case (as well as following
an exogenous separation), the worker joins the search pool of period t, while the firm
chooses whether to be in the search pool of period t.
Reference-dependent output
Conditional on accepting a wage oﬀer wt at period t, an employed worker of type i
produces an output level given by
                                      (
                                           pt if wi,t ≥ ei,t
                             yi,t =                                                     (2)
                                          γ t pt if wi,t < ei,t

where:


   • pt is the level of productivity that characterizes the economy at period t. We
     assume that pt follows a log-linear AR(1) process with a long-run mean of 1,
     i.e. pt = pβt−1 εt , where β ∈ (0, 1) is the autocorrelation coeﬃcient, and εt is i.i.d
     according to a continuous, strictly increasing cdf F [ 1ξ , ξ], where ξ > 1. Finally,
     F (ε) ≡ 1 − F ( 1ε ) - that is, ln(ε) is symmetrically distributed around zero.

   • ei,t is the worker’s reference wage. We assume that a worker enters his first period
     of employment at a given firm with "modest aspirations", in the sense that his
     reference point e1,t equals the lowest possible wage, which is zero. On the other
     hand, existing workers, who were employed by the same firm at period t − 1,
     enter period t with a reference point equal to the wage they expected to earn at
     t conditional on being retained. Thus, at any period t, e1,t = 0; and for every
     i > 1, ei,t is the expectation of wi,t conditional on being retained at t, given the
     worker’s information at the end of period t − 1 and the continuation strategies
     followed by all agents.

   • γ t ∈ [0, 1] is a random parameter representing the fraction of output loss due to
     worker demoralization when their wage falls below the reference point. It captures
     the eﬀect of wage disappointment on workers’ output (and implicitly, the extent
     to which the labor contract is incomplete; this interpretation is substantiated in


                                               7
        Appendix C). We assume that γ t is i.i.d according to a cdf G that has no mass
        point in [0, 1). We also assume that G(γ) < 1 for every γ < 1.


Information
In each period t ≥ 1, every agent observes the realizations of all exogenous random
variables up to (and including) period t. In particular, εt and γ t are common knowledge
at the time the firm chooses its wage oﬀer wt . The agent also observes his own private
history. Finally, whenever a firm and a worker interact, they observe the history of
wage oﬀers since they were matched. They do not observe the negotiation history in
other firm-worker matches.
Preferences
All agents in the model maximize their expected discounted sum of payoﬀs, using the
same constant discount factor δ. The payoﬀ flow for firms at each period is as follows.
A firm outside the labor market earns zero. A firm in the search pool earns −c, where
c > 0 is the cost of posting a vacancy. A firm in a relationship with a worker earns
a payoﬀ that equals output minus the wage paid. An unemployed worker at period t
receives a non-market payoﬀ of bpt , where b ∈ (0, 1). An employed type-i worker gets
a payoﬀ of wi,t . The assumption that the outside option is proportional to current
productivity is made not only for simplicity, but also to ensure that in the reference-
independent benchmark, equilibrium wages will be fully flexible, such that all rigidity
eﬀects will arise from the novel behavioral element.

Empirical background for our behavioral model
Our account of workers’ output reflects two well-documented behavioral phenomena
that involve reference dependence.
Loss aversion. This concept (due to Kahneman and Tversky (1979)) means that deci-
sion makers register outcomes in terms of gains or losses relative to a reference point,
and react to losses more strongly than gains. There is abundant experimental support
for loss aversion, as well as field evidence that this motive is relevant in high-stakes
decision problems. For example, homeowners are reluctant to lower their asking price
when a boom in the real-estate market is followed by a downturn (Genesove and Mayer
(2001)).5 Models incorporating loss aversion have been proposed to explain phenomena
such as consumer antagonism to price hikes (Anderson and Simester (2010)), the Equity
Premium Puzzle (Benartzi and Thaler (1995)) and skewed managerial compensation
schemes (de Meza and Webb (2007), Dittmann, Maug and Spalt (2010)).
  5
      See Odean (1998), Haigh and List (2005) and Pope and Schweitzer (2011) for other instances.

                                                  8
Negative reciprocity. When individual i is willing to incur a cost in order to punish
another individual j for choosing an action that inflicts harm on i relative to some
reference point, we say that he exhibits "negative reciprocity" (an example is respon-
ders’ tendency to reject "insultingly low" oﬀers in the Ultimatum Game).6 Fehr and
Gächter (2000) survey the literature, and point out that negative reciprocity emerges
as a stronger motive than its counterpart, "positive reciprocity" (the propensity to re-
ward friendly behavior): "Whereas the positive eﬀects of fair treatment on behavior are
usually small, the negative impact of unfair behavior is often large" (Fehr et al. (2009,
p. 366)). Our model approximates this finding by assuming away positive reciprocity.
Models of negative reciprocity have been used to shed light on economic phenomena
such as the prevalence of incomplete labor contracts and the endogenous emergence
of long-term relational contracts (see Fehr and Schmidt (2002) and Hart and Moore
(2008)).
   Formula (2) captures these phenomena in reduced form: workers perceive a wage
oﬀer below their reference point as a loss, which triggers a negative-reciprocity response.


2.1     The Reference-Independent Benchmark
Let us first consider the benchmark model in which γ = 1 with probability one, where
output is reference-independent. In this case, our model reduces to a standard S&M
model in which firms have all the bargaining power.

Proposition 1 Let γ = 1. There is a unique SPE, in which firms choose (rt , wt ) =
(1, bpt ) at every t and regardless of the worker’s type, and workers accept any wage
oﬀer weakly above bpt .

    Equilibrium in the reference-independent benchmark exhibits several noteworthy
features. First, equilibrium behavior is Markovian in a narrow sense: hiring/retention
and wages at any period t are purely a function of pt . Second, wages are entirely
flexible, in the sense that they are proportional to productivity. Third, there is no
behavioral distinction between newly matched and existing workers. Finally, there are
no layoﬀs.
    Proposition 1 determines equilibrium market tightness via a free-entry property. A
firm’s expected discounted benefit from posting a vacancy at period t, conditional on
   6
    As Fehr and Gächter (2000) emphasize, “Reciprocity is fundamentally diﬀerent from "retaliatory"
behavior in repeated interactions. These behaviors arise because actors expect future material benefits
from their actions; in the case of reciprocity, the actor is responding to a negative action even if no
material gains can be expected.”

                                                  9
finding a new match at the beginning of t + 1, is equal to the expected discounted sum
of the firm’s payoﬀs over the duration of the employment relation. Formally, it is a
function of the state at t, defined as follows:
                                                   Ã                  !
                                       X
                                       ∞               Y
                    Π(pt ) = (1 − b)          δi            (1 − s(j)) E(pt+i | pt )               (3)
                                        i=1        0<j<i


Note that Π is an increasing function. If c > Π(pt ), then in SPE no firm posts a vacancy
at t, and market tightness is infinite. If c ≤ Π(pt ), then in equilibrium firms will be
indiﬀerent between searching and not searching. The probability qt that a searching
firm will find a match at the beginning of t + 1 will be set such that c = qt Π(pt ).
Market tightness is derived from qt according to (1). Hence, equilibrium tightness at t
is purely a function of pt as well.


3       Equilibrium under a Two-Period Separation Process
We now analyze SPE in our model, under the following restriction on the exogenous
job separation process: s(1) = 0 and s(2) = 1. That is, the employment relation lasts
at most two periods. This could approximate industries in which firm-specific human
capital depletes quickly as a result of rapid technological changes. However, we assume
it mainly for tractability. We briefly discuss more complex finite-horizon separation
processes at the end of this section.7
    It is useful to make two preliminary observations. First, in SPE, all newly matched
workers at any given period are treated identically; similarly, all existing workers at
any given period are treated identically. The reason is that all agents on each side
of the market are identical, and no firm-worker pair gets to observe the history of
any pairwise interaction prior to their own match, thus preventing the emergence of
history-dependent asymmetries. In what follows we often refer to the way "the worker"
or "the firm" behave at a given history, with the understanding that this pertains to
all firms and all workers of the same type at the same period.
    Second, we can think about an equilibrium wage oﬀer in terms of whether it satisfies
a worker’s "individual rationality" (IR) and "morale hazard" (MH) constraints, in
analogy to IR/IC constraints in contract theory. Fix a history h following a wage oﬀer.
An SPE satisfies the IR constraint at h if the worker is weakly better oﬀ than if he
    7
    We have been able to derive analytic solutions for a stationary infinite-horizon separation process
when β = 0 or β = 1. However, since these cases are degenerate in terms of the eﬀect of wage rigidity
on tightness volatility, we chose not to include this analysis in the paper.


                                                       10
rejects the firm’s wage oﬀer and sticks to his equilibrium strategy thereafter. An SPE
satisfies the MH constraint at h if the wage oﬀer at h is weakly higher than the worker’s
reference wage at that history.
    By assumption, the MH constraint coincides with the constraint that wages are non-
negative, as far as newly matched workers are concerned. Therefore, the MH constraint
is only relevant for existing workers. According to the one-deviation property of SPE,
the IR constraint always holds in equilibrium, and the only question is at which histories
it is binding. Note that in SPE, if the IR constraint holds with slack at h, the MH
constraint must be binding. The reason is simple: if the MH constraint is violated or
holds with slack, the firm can slightly lower its wage and the worker will accept the
oﬀer (because if he rejects it he will join the search pool, and since this rejection is
unobserved by future employers, they will be unable to adjust their wage oﬀers to it)
and his productivity will be unaﬀected.
    The following result characterizes wage and retention policies in SPE, under a mild
condition on the magnitude of the business cycle.

                               √
Proposition 2 Let ξ ≤ 12 (1 + 5). Then, the game has a unique SPE outcome, which
has the following properties.8
(i) An existing worker’s period-t reference point is

                                               e2,t = φ · bpβt−1

where the coeﬃcient φ ∈ [E(ε), ξ] is uniquely determined by the following equations:
                        R1R                                        R1R
                         0   ε>ε∗ (γ)
                                         max{φ, ε}dF (ε)dG(γ) +     b   ε<ε∗ (γ)
                                                                                   εdF (ε)dG(γ)
               φ =                                                                                (4)
                                                     1 − G(b)F (φb)
                               bφ
           ε∗ (γ) =                                                                               (5)
                        1 − max{0, γ − b}

(ii) An existing worker is dismissed at period t if and only if γ t < b and εt < φb.
Conditional on being retained at t, his wage is
                                     (
                                         max{e2,t , bpt } if        εt > ε∗ (γ t )
                 w2 (pt−1 , pt ) =                                                                (6)
                                             bpt          if γ t > b and εt < ε∗ (γ t )



  8
      We ignore the firm’s behavior at zero-probability cutoﬀ events.

                                                      11
    (iii) A newly matched worker at period t is always hired; his wage at period t is
                                 ∙         Z 1Z         φ                      ¸
                                         β
                     w1 (pt ) = b pt − δpt                   (φ − ε)dF (ε)dG(γ)                 (7)
                                               0    ε∗ (γ)


    Let us list the important qualitative features of the SPE outcome.
Wage rigidity and endogenous output destruction. Existing workers may experience
wage rigidity, layoﬀs or loss of morale, depending on the realizations εt , γ t . When
εt ∈ (ε∗ (γ t ), φ), existing workers at period t are retained and paid their reference
wage e2,t , which is purely a function of pt−1 and therefore rigid in the sense that
it is not responsive to productivity shocks in the range (ε∗ (γ t ), φ). When εt > φ,
existing workers receive their participation wage, which lies above the reference wage,
and therefore produce normal output. When εt < ε∗ (γ t ), existing workers experience
destruction of output: either γ < b, in which case they are fired; or γ > b, in which
case they are kept at their participation wage which lies below their reference wage,
and thus produce sub-normal output due to loss of morale. Because the destruction of
output experienced by an existing worker is purely a function of (εt , γ t ), the expected
output that a newly hired worker at period t believes he will produce at t+1 is λpβt E(ε),
where the constant λ is given by
                       ∙Z 1 Z                                 Z 1Z                         ¸
                1
            λ=                           εdF (ε)dG(γ) +                       γεdF (ε)dG(γ)     (8)
               E(ε)       0   ε>ε∗ (γ)                         b   ε<ε∗ (γ)




History dependence. The equilibrium treatment of existing workers at period t is
Markovian with respect to an extended state (pt , pt−1 , γ t ) (or, equivalently, (pt , εt , γ t )).
Their reference wage is purely a function of pt−1 . Whether they receive it or the par-
ticipation wage bpt (which is purely a function of pt ) depends entirely on (εt , γ t ); and
so does their retention policy. Therefore, existing workers’ ex-ante layoﬀ rate at any
period t is G(b)F (φb), independently of the history up to period t − 1. Newly hired
workers’ wage is purely a function of pt .
IR and MH constraints. The IR constraint of newly matched workers is always binding,
and consequently their continuation payoﬀ at any period t is as if they earn bpt0 at
every t0 ≥ t. In contrast, existing workers’ IR constraint holds with slack whenever
εt ∈ (ε∗ (γ t ), φ) - i.e., whenever they are retained and paid their reference wage, in
which case their MH constraint is binding. When existing workers are retained at their
participation wage, their IR constraint is binding while their MH constraint is violated

                                                   12
(if γ t > b and εt < ε∗ (γ t )) or satisfied with slack (if εt > φ).
The structure of entry-level wages. The equilibrium wage paid to new hires is both
strictly positive and strictly increasing in pt (this is ensured by our restriction on ξ),
albeit at a lower rate than in the γ = 1 benchmark. In this sense, entry-level wages are
"partially flexible" w.r.t current productivity. Note that unlike the γ = 1 benchmark,
equilibrium wages exhibit a "seniority premium": existing (newly matched) workers
earn wages above (below) the current outside option.

Sketch of the proof of Proposition 2
First, we derive an upper bound on the rent that existing workers can get in equilibrium,
which translates into a lower bound on newly hired workers’ wage. This bound is above
zero, such that wage oﬀer to newly hired workers satisfies the MH constraint with slack.
Hence, their IR constraint is always binding in equilibrium. (This is the diﬃcult part
                                                                      √
of the proof, and it relies on the assumption that ξ < 12 (1 + 5).) This in turn
implies that newly matched workers must always be indiﬀerent between accepting an
equilibrium wage oﬀer (and sticking to their equilibrium strategy thereafter) and being
permanently unemployed. Therefore, an existing worker at period t would accept any
wage above bpt . We have thus fixed existing workers’ participation wage.
    For any given reference wage e2,t , we can check, for every realization of εt , γ t , which
of the following three courses of action maximizes the firm’s profit: (i) dismiss an
existing worker, (ii) keep him at his participation wage, (iii) keep him at his reference
wage. This enables us to write down the expression for e2,t , which is uniquely given
by (4)-(5). The assumption that G(γ) < 1 for every γ < 1 is instrumental in the
uniqueness of the solution. Otherwise, it could be possible that existing workers’
reference wage at t is strictly higher than bξpβt−1 , namely the maximal outside option
that is feasible given pt−1 , and firms would always stick to the reference wage in order
to avert loss of worker morale. When γ is very close to one, firms would not have
an incentive to do so, and this prevents the reference wage from being equal to the
lagged-expected wage. Uniqueness can be generated by others perturbations as well
(see Eliaz and Spiegler (2012)).
    The cutoﬀ ε∗ (γ) is the productivity shock for which the firm is indiﬀerent between
keeping the worker at his reference wage and dismissing him or keeping him at his
participation wage, depending on whether γ is below or above b. We have thus derived
existing workers’ equilibrium wage, and the firm’s retention policy immediately follows
from that. To obtain new hires’ wage, we use their indiﬀerence to permanent unem-
ployment, such that their equilibrium wage at t is equal to bpt minus the discounted


                                               13
rent they expect to receive as existing workers at t + 1.

Two special cases
First, revisit the reference-independent benchmark, by letting G(γ) = 0 for all γ < 1.
Since G(b) = 0, existing workers are always retained. Applying formulas (4)-(5), we
obtain φ = E(ε) = ε∗ (1); hence, an existing worker at t receives bpt . Applying formula
(7), we obtain that a newly hired worker receives the same wage. This reproduces
Proposition 1 for the two-period separation process.
    Second, consider the limit case G(b) → 1. Observe that formula (4) collapses into

                                 φ = E[max{φ, ε} | ε > φb]

The solution to this equation is φ = ξ, which implies ε∗ (·) = ξb with probability
one. Existing workers are thus retained and paid w2,t = ξbpβt−1 whenever εt > ξb, and
dismissed otherwise. Existing workers’ output coeﬃcient λ is given by
                                              Z   ξ
                                        1
                                    λ=                 εdF (ε)
                                       E(ε)    ξb


Newly hired workers earn
                                    ∙         Z ξ              ¸
                                            β
                          w1,t   = b pt − δpt     (ξ − ε)dF (ε)                       (9)
                                                  ξb




    Existing workers’ equilibrium wage in this case is absolutely rigid, in the sense that
it is purely a function of productivity in the previous period. Wage rigidity here has
a flavor of "grade inflation". When G(b) → 1, existing workers’ reference wage is
the expectation of the maximum between the outside option and the reference wage
itself. This means that the reference wage must always be greater than or equal to
the expected outside option, which can only be true if the reference wage equals the
highest possible value of the outside option. When γ < b, a firm would rather dismiss
a worker than paying him a wage below his reference point. Thus, existing workers get
their reference wage with probability one conditionally on being retained.


3.1    Volatility of Market Tightness
In order to study the equilibrium volatility of market tightness, we follow the S&M
literature, and assume in this subsection that the matching function takes the following

                                             14
form
                                  m(Ut , Vt ) = kUtα Vt1−α                              (10)

where α ∈ (0, 1) and k is suﬃciently small so that match probabilities are always well-
defined. This allows us to get an explicit, closed-form expression for market tightness.
Let us first establish that in SPE, tightness at any period t is purely a function of pt .
The expected discounted profit generated by a vacancy opened in period t conditional
on getting a new match at the beginning of period t + 1 is
                                         h           2
                                                            i
                             δ(1 − b)E(ε) pβt + δλpβt E(εβ )

where λ is given by (8). This expression is an increasing function of pt , and we denote
it by J(pt ). Note that in the γ = 1 benchmark, we have λ = 1, hence J(pt ) is reduced
to Π(pt ), as given by (3).

Lemma 1 In the SPE characterized by Proposition 2, θt is a function of pt given by
the following equation:                      r
                                             α kJ(pt )
                                  θt (pt ) =
                                                 c
as long as c/J(pt ) < 1. Otherwise, market tightness is zero.

    To understand why equilibrium market tightness is a well-defined function of current
productivity, recall that θt is a strictly decreasing function of qt , the probability that a
searching firm finds a match at t. Because of free entry, qt itself is a function of J(pt ).
Thus, although some aspects of equilibrium behavior at t - specifically, the treatment
of existing workers - depend on pt−1 , tightness is only a function of pt .
    To see how reference dependence aﬀects tightness volatility, let us write down the
expression for the elasticity of θt w.r.t pt (omitting the subscript):
                                                  2
                                   β pβ + βδλpβ E(εβ )
                                    ·                                                   (11)
                                   α pβ + δλpβ 2 E(εβ )

It is easy to verify that this expression decreases with λ in absolute terms. Recall
that λ = 1 in the reference-independent benchmark, and that λ < 1 when reference
dependence is introduced. We conclude that reference dependence increases tightness
volatility. The intuition for this eﬀect is as follows. In expectation, a constant fraction
1 − λ of existing workers’ normal output is destroyed, independently of the history.
Therefore, the constant λ acts like an additional discount factor between the worker’s
first and second periods of employment. The "extra discount factor" increases the

                                             15
weight that first-period output receives in the calculation of the value of the vacancy.
Because β < 1, the worker’s productivity in his second period of employment is less
sensitive to the value of p that prevailed at the time the firm originally posted the
vacancy than his first-period productivity. Therefore, introducing the new term λ
increases the sensitivity of the vacancy’s value to the initial value of p. This intuition
clarifies why the volatility eﬀect disappears when β → 1.
    For a closer look at the interplay between the eﬀects of reference dependence and the
persistence of the business cycle, suppose that productivity is at the long-run average,
i.e. pt = 1. At this point, the elasticity of tightness is

                                       β 1 + βδλE(εβ )
                                   −    ·                                             (12)
                                       α 1 + δλE(εβ )

When β is high, the "standard" tightness volatility - i.e., the value of (12) for λ = 1 -
is higher. However, at such values of β, the eﬀect of reference dependence on tightness
volatility vanishes. At the other extreme, when β is low, "standard" tightness volatility
is low, but the eﬀect of reference dependence is large. The derivative of (12) w.r.t λ is
maximized at β = 12 . Thus, the eﬀect of reference dependence on tightness volatility
is maximized at intermediate levels of persistence.


3.2     The Role of γ
So far, we compared SPE in our model for an arbitrary G to the reference-independent
benchmark γ = 1. Let us extend this comparative-statics exercise and ask more gen-
erally how the equilibrium outcome changes as output becomes more sensitive to wage
drops below the worker’s reference point. For simplicity, we focus on the limit case in
which G assigns probability one to some particular value γ < 1. We already saw that
in the range γ < b, changes in γ have no impact on the equilibrium outcome.
    Let γ > b. In this case, the expression for φ is reduced to
                                           Z   φ
                              φ = E(ε) +            (φ − ε)dF (ε)
                                            mφ


where
                                        ε∗ (γ)     b
                                 m=            =
                                          φ      1−γ+b
It is straightforward to check that as γ goes up, φ decreases while ε∗ (γ) rises. This
means that existing workers’ reference wage, as well as the range of realizations of εt for
which they are paid this wage, shrink. As a result, newly hired workers’ wage goes up

                                               16
and approaches their outside option. When γ → 1, the interval [mφ, φ] vanishes, and
equilibrium wage and retention policies converge to the reference-independent bench-
mark. The eﬀect on λ of raising γ is ambiguous: on one hand, the probability of
sub-normal output due to demoralization increases, but on the other hand, the output
loss due to demoralization is lower because γ is higher. Therefore, it is not clear to us
whether tightness volatility monotonically decreases with γ in the range (b, 1).


3.3       The Role of Contract Renegotiation
Our model assumes that firms repeatedly oﬀer one-period contracts. In particular, they
are unable to commit at period t − 1 to the worker’s wage at t. Does this assumption
make a diﬀerence?9 For simplicity, consider the limit case G(b) → 1. In the absence of
commitment, we saw that an existing worker’s wage at period t is ξbpβt−1 . Now suppose
that at the end of period t − 1, the firm can commit to pay a fixed wage w∗ < ξbpβt−1 to
its worker at period t. Assume the firm cannot commit not to dismiss the worker. As a
result, the worker will be retained and paid w∗ when pt ≥ w∗ and dismissed otherwise.
His reference wage will consequently be w∗ , and he will produce the normal output pt
if he continues to be employed. However, the worker will reject the firm’s oﬀer at t if
bpβt > w∗ . If the probability that bpβt > w∗ is suﬃciently low, the firm’s loss from these
ineﬃcient rejections will be outweighed by the gain from the reduced wage whenever
bpβt ≤ w∗ . In this case, the firm would benefit from commitment.
     Note, however, that the worker’s rejection of the fixed wage oﬀer bpβt > w∗ is pre-
cisely the event in which the two parties would want to renegotiate the contract, because
the rejection involves ineﬃcient destruction of surplus, which can be prevented by a
renegotiated flat-wage contract at period t. Therefore, the assumption that contracts
are renegotiated every period seems appropriate in the present context.


3.4       An Exercise: The Eﬀect of Payroll Tax
Suppose that a payroll tax at a constant rate τ is imposed on firms.10 For simplicity,
consider the limit case G(b) → 1, where firms pay existing workers’ their reference
wage conditional on retaining them. Existing workers’ wage does not change, because
their outside option at t continues to be bpt , hence their wage continues to be ξbpt−1 .
However, as far as the firm is concerned, imposing the payroll tax is equivalent to
raising the workers’ outside option coeﬃcient from b to b/(1 − τ ), hence the layoﬀ
  9
      We are grateful to Giueseppe Moscarini for suggesting this point.
 10
      In principle, tax incidence might matter through framing eﬀects on the reference point.


                                                  17
cutoﬀ changes to ε∗ = ξb/(1 − τ ). By (9), new workers’ wage increases, because their
expected future rent shrinks. The rise in ε∗ also implies that λ goes down, hence
tightness volatility increases.


3.5    General Finite-Horizon Separation
Our analysis in this section was based on the assumption that s(1) = 0 an s(2) = 1.
Let us consider a generalization of this exogenous separation process, in which s(i) = 0
for every i = 1, ..., T − 1, and s(T ) = 1, where T ≥ 2. Characterization of SPE would
proceed along the same lines as in Proposition 2, with three key diﬀerences. First, the
retention policy is more complex. In particular, a firm may prefer to retain a worker
at a reference wage above his output because of a high continuation payoﬀ. Second, in
order to ensure that newly hired workers’ wage is strictly positive, a stronger condition
on the magnitude of the business cycle is required. Finally, the expressions for the
worker’s wage as a function of his tenure are more cumbersome.
    For illustration, let us construct an SPE in which newly hired workers’ IR constraint
                                                                                           √
is always binding, under the following parametric restrictions: T = 3, β = 1, ξ < 2
and G[b − (1 − b)E(ε)] → 1 (the latter restriction implies b > 12 ). Consider first a
worker of type i = 3 at period t. This worker is essentially equivalent to a worker of
type 2 in the two-period model: his wage equals the maximal outside option at period
t conditional on pt−1 , i.e., w3,t = e3,t = ξbpt−1 , and he is retained if and only if εt ≥ ξb.
Since γ < b with probability one, the worker almost surely receives his reference wage
conditional on being retained.
    Next, consider a worker of type i = 2 at the same period t. His participation wage,
denoted w̄2,t , is the same as newly hired workers’ equilibrium wage in the two-period
model, i.e. w̄2,t = b̂pt , where
                                   ∙      Z ξ              ¸
                             b̂ = b 1 − δ     (ξ − ε)dF (ε) < b
                                             ξb


Let us guess that type 2 workers receive their reference wage with probability one
conditional on being retained. Therefore, by the same reasoning as in the case of type
3 workers, we obtain w2,t = e2,t = ξ b̂pt−1 . To confirm that the guess is correct, we need
to verify that the firm’s expected discounted sum of profits from keeping the worker at
a wage below his reference point is almost surely negative, i.e.
                                                 Z   ξ
                           γ t pt − b̂pt + δpt           (ε − ξb)dF (ε) < 0
                                                  ξb


                                                     18
for almost all realizations of γ t . Our assumption on G ensures that this is the case.
It follows that the firm retains type 2 workers at period t if and only if εt is above a
cutoﬀ ε∗ that is given by
                                                             Z   ξ
                                ∗                        ∗
                         pt−1 ε − ξ b̂pt−1 + δpt−1 ε                 (ε − ξb)dF (ε) = 0
                                                             ξb


hence
                                                      ξ b̂
                                    ε∗ =         Rξ                        < ξb
                                           1+δ   ξb
                                                    (ε − ξb)dF (ε)
    It remains to derive the wage of type 1 workers at period t and verify that it is
strictly positive. Since we are asserting a binding IR constraint for new hires, these
workers should be indiﬀerent to permanent unemployment. Therefore, their wage is
equal to their outside option minus the expected discounted sum of rents they accu-
mulate as existing workers:
                         Z ξ∙                             Z ξ                      ¸
        w1,t   = bpt − δ     b̂pt (ξ − εt+1 ) + δbpt εt+1     (ξ − εt+2 )dF (εt+2 ) dF (εt+1 )
                           ε∗                                         ξb

                            √
The assumption that ξ < 2 ensures that w1,t > 0. Hence, newly hired workers’ MH
constraint holds with slack, implying that their IR constraint is binding.
    Observe that in this equilibrium, all existing workers at t are paid a fully rigid
wage conditional on being retained, which is purely a function of pt−1 , whereas newly
hired workers’ wage at t is proportional to pt . Wages exhibit a "seniority premium":
wi,t increases with i (it is obvious that w2,t < w3,t ; verifying that w1,t < w2,t is less
immediate, and ensured by the restriction that b > 12 ). Finally, workers with a longer
tenure are more likely to be dismissed.


4       Discussion
This section discusses two features of our model: its relation to the Shimer Puzzle,
and the model’s ability to capture persistent eﬀects of productivity shocks on wages,
inflows into unemployment and tightness.


4.1      Wage Rigidity and the Shimer Puzzle
The enhanced tightness volatility discussed in Section 3.1 naturally brings Shimer’s
puzzle to mind. We re-emphasize that the following discussion is not an attempted


                                                      19
resolution of the puzzle, but a clarification of theoretical arguments that were raised
in response to it. Also, this section is not intended to be a survey of recent attempts
to resolve the Shimer puzzle. We focus on a small number of approaches that are
straightforward to compare to ours, and a number of important works on the subject
(such as Hall and Milgrom (2008) or Gertler and Trigari (2009)) are not mentioned
because of the diﬃculty of comparison.
    Shimer (2004) and Hall (2005) proposed to resolve the puzzle by assuming that
wages are only partially responsive in the sense that they remain fixed as long as they
do not violate the participation constraint of either the firm or the worker. The latter
requirement is made to avoid the "Barro critique" that rational parties would find a
way to renegotiate when wage rigidity threatens to destroy surplus (Barro (1977)).
The Shimer-Hall approach imposes wage rigidity a priori, without deriving it from
explicit behavioral or institutional considerations. In contrast, our model generates
wage rigidity from workers’ reference-dependent behavior. In addition, the Shimer-Hall
approach does not distinguish between newly hired and existing workers; whichever
force that generates wage rigidity applies to all workers, regardless of their tenure.
    Incorporating such a distinction into S&M models seems important since casual
observation, as well as the evidence from Bewley (1999) and Fehr et al. (2009), suggest
that the psychological forces that give rise to wage rigidity have a greater impact on
existing relationships. The Shimer-Hall approach could be modified to accommodate
this distinction, simply by imposing wage rigidity only on existing workers (this would
not change implications for aggregate wage data because new hires constitute a small
fraction of the total stock of employed workers at any given point in time).
    However, this modification cannot generate increased tightness volatility. As pointed
out by Pissarides (2009) (as well as Kudlyak (2009) and Haefke et al. (2012)), a newly
matched pair fully internalizes all future rigidities into their negotiation, such that the
equilibrium wage oﬀsets all future departures from the "normal" surplus-division rule.
As a result, the firms’ hiring incentives are unaﬀected by the anticipated rigidity of
existing workers’ wage.
    The above discussion highlights the diﬃculty of constructing a model that can
simultaneously accommodate the following ingredients: a distinction between newly
hired and existing workers in which only the latter experience wage rigidity, increased
tightness volatility relative to a benchmark without wage rigidity, and robustness to
the Barro critique. Our framework oﬀers a way of accomplishing this. The key is the
incompleteness of the labor contract and the workers’ time-changing reference point.
The standard S&M model, as well as the Shimer-Hall modification, assume complete


                                            20
contracts. When complete contracts are feasible, the rule for dividing the surplus
does not aﬀect the size of the surplus. This independence breaks down in our model.
When a firm violates an existing worker’s MH constraint by paying him a wage below
his reference point, the bargaining set eﬀectively shrinks due to the worker’s loss of
morale, potentially to the point where all gains from mutual agreement are dissipated.
As a result, the value of a new firm-worker match is not neutral to anticipated wage
rigidity.
    Does the fact that our model gives rise to ineﬃcient output destruction (in the
second period of the firm-worker relationship) mean that it is vulnerable to the Barro
critique? An implicit assumption behind the critique is that the labor contract is com-
plete: the firm and the worker can always reach a contract that shares any available
surplus (recall that Barro (1977) predated the rich literature on incomplete contracts).
Our model rests on the assumption that the labor contract is incomplete: the interac-
tion between the two parties involves events outside the contract’s scope, which arise
from the change in the worker’s reference point. Ineﬃcient output destruction in our
model is a consequence of this contractual incompleteness. Thus, in a deep sense, our
model is not vulnerable to Barro’s critique.11
    The claim that new hires’ wage is more flexible than existing workers’ wage has some
empirical support. Most recently, Haefke et al. (2012) constructed a time series for
wages of new hires using micro-data on earnings and hours worked from the Current
Population Survey (CPS) outgoing rotation groups. They found that the wage for
newly hired workers is relatively responsive to productivity (however, their estimate
has a rather large standard error). Our paper is of course not the place for empirical
evaluation of claims as to the relative flexibility of the wage of existing workers and
new hires, and our discussion here focuses on the theoretical aspects of the debate.
Furthermore, it is important to distinguish between flexible determination of new hires’
wage and the responsiveness of this wage to productivity. In particular, in our model
new hires’ wages are only partially responsive to productivity, even though they are
flexibly determined (in the sense that the MR constraint holds with slack).12
    It is also useful to think about our theoretical argument in relation to another
well-known response to Shimer’s puzzle. Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008) argued that
  11
     In contrast, the version of the model with commitment discussed in Section 3.3 is vulnerable to the
Barro critique because it implies ineﬃcient output destruction that can be avoided by a renegotiated
incomplete contract.
  12
     Hall and Milgrom (2008) argue that the partially flexible wages they obtain from the alternating-
oﬀers bargaining model (without distinguishing between new and existing workers) can resolve the
Shimer puzzle quantitatively.



                                                  21
the Shimer Puzzle can be resolved under a diﬀerent calibration strategy that assigns
more bargaining power to the firm and implies a less pro-cyclical outside option for
workers. Note that while this approach can account for rigid wages, it does not distin-
guish between new hires and existing workers, and thus implies that the former earn
rigid wages as well. Our model, of course, takes the hagedorn-Manovskii assumption
regarding the distribution of bargaining power to the extreme. However, it shows that
even if the workers’ outside option is maximally pro-cyclical, one obtains patterns of
rigid wages for existing workers and partially flexible wages for new hires.


4.2     Comparison with other Classes of Models
In this sub-section we discuss our results in comparison with alternative S&M models of
the labor market. We will demonstrate that the combination of eﬀects that our model
generates - wage rigidity for existing workers, flexible entry-level wages, a seniority
premium, endogenous job destruction that is sensitive to changes in productivity, and
enhanced volatility of market tightness - cannot be reproduced by these alternative
models.

4.2.1   Idiosyncratic Shocks and Endogenous Job Destruction

Since endogenous destruction of output plays a major part in our tightness volatility
result, it is natural to ask whether other mechanisms of endogenous job destruction
would generate similar patterns. The most well-known S&M model that exhibits en-
dogenous job destruction, due to Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) - referred to as the
MP model henceforth - generates this eﬀect through idiosyncratic productivity shocks.
To create an MP-like model that is as comparable to ours as possible, modify the
benchmark model as follows. First, assume the same two-period separation process as
in Section 3: s(1) = 0, s(2) = 1. Assume further that the output of an existing worker
is subjected to a random idiosyncratic shock, such that an employed worker produces
an output of pt ν t , where vt is i.i.d with E(v) = 1 across firms and periods.
    SPE wage oﬀers in this model are exactly as in the benchmark: workers are always
oﬀered bpt when they are employed. Hiring and retention decisions are as follows:
rt = 1 if and only if ν t ≥ b. Thus, in each period, a constant fraction of firms will
choose to fire existing workers - just like our model. However, this variation lowers the
volatility of market tightness - the exact opposite of our eﬀect. To see why, note that
we could reinterpret the benchmark model as an MP model in which firms make their
hiring/retention decisions before learning the realization of their idiosyncratic shock.


                                           22
Because E(v) = 1 > b, firms will always choose r = 1. When vt < b, the firm’s pre-
commitment to play r = 1 is ineﬃcient ex-post; if the firm could delay its decision
until after it has learned its idiosyncratic shock, it would eﬃciently fire the worker.
    This is a simple value-of-information argument: enabling firms to move after learn-
ing their idiosyncratic shock increases expected profits. But this means that when
we switch from the benchmark model to the MP-like model of this subsection, this is
equivalent to introducing a premium factor λ > 1 to the firm’s profit in the second
period of its relationship with the worker. In other words, the MP-like variation in-
creases the importance of the second period in determining the value of the vacancy,
thereby reducing its sensitivity to initial conditions.
    This comparison highlights the feature that endogenous separations in our model
destroy value. The worker’s changing reference point and the firm’s inability to oﬀer
a complete labor contract imply that vacancies will be closed even though the two
parties would have agreed ex-ante that it would be eﬃcient to keep them. In contrast,
vacancies in the MP model are closed if and only if it is eﬃcient to do so. This diﬀerence
translates to tightness volatility eﬀects in opposite directions.

4.2.2   Moral Hazard and Eﬃciency Wages

Our model is essentially an eﬃciency-wage model: in equilibrium, firms pay (existing)
workers a wage above their reservation value, in order to induce higher output. The
mechanism that generates this eﬀect is based on reciprocal fairness considerations, in
the tradition of Akerlof (1982), but there could be others. Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984)
assume that when a worker shirks, he is caught and fired with some probability. In
order for the worker to have an incentive to exert eﬀort, the firm must oﬀer him a wage
above his outside option.
    Costain and Jansen (2010) and Malcolmson and Mavroeidis (2010) incorporated
the Shapiro-Stiglitz eﬃciency wage model into an S&M model. To illustrate the simi-
larities and diﬀerences between such a model and ours, we briefly analyze the following
modification of the benchmark model. After a worker accepts a wage oﬀer at period t,
he makes an eﬀort decision xt ∈ {0, 1} and products an output of pt [γ t + (1 − γ t )xt ].
Assume γ < b, and suppose that the firm can observe xt with probability χ. An
employed worker’s payoﬀ at period t is wt − κxt , where κ is his cost of eﬀort.
    Since γ < b, the incentive constraint that induces workers to exert eﬀort must
hold in order for firms to earn positive profits. In SPE, both this constraint and
the IR constraint will be binding. As a result, equilibrium wage at period t will be
bpt + κ/(1 − χ). Firms will therefore choose rt = 1 if and only if pt ≥ κ/(1 − χ)(1 − b).

                                           23
This means that separation will be more frequent when productivity is low. As a
result, eﬃciency wages will have an adverse eﬀect on the incentive to hire new workers
at low values of p, such that the eﬀect on tightness volatility will be roughly in the
same direction as in our model. However, the equilibrium wage is linear in p, as in the
benchmark model, which means that the model does not generate wage rigidity.

4.2.3    Long-Term Contracts and Consumption Smoothing

An alternative theory of wage rigidity is based on the idea (dating back to Azriadis
(1975) and Beaudry and DiNardo (1989)) that employers can commit to long-term wage
contracts which enable liquidity-constrained workers to smooth consumption across
periods. When productivity fluctuates, a risk-neutral employer with no liquidity con-
straints can essentially oﬀer insurance to a risk-averse worker with limited access to
savings. By risk aversion, the worker would be willing to take a pay cut in return for
a stream of flat wages. Thus, entry wages would fluctuate with productivity, whereas
on-going wages would be rigid because of the long-term commitment to pay the same
wage in each period.
    To investigate the eﬀect of risk sharing in our framework, let γ = 1, and assume
that the worker is risk-averse and that the firm can commit to a two-period labor
contract. For the sake of illustration, assume separable CARA utility from streams of
wage earnings (an analogous argument would hold under CRRA). The risk premium
that a new hire in period t would be willing to pay for a constant-wage scheme for
periods t and t + 1 is independent of pt . Hence, a firm’s expected discounted benefit
from posting a vacancy at period t is equal to Π(pt ) plus a constant. As in Section
3.2, assume the matching function is Cobb-Douglas. Lemma 1 implies that the ratio
θ(p0 )/θ(p) for p0 < p - and hence, volatility of market tightness - is lower than in the
benchmark.13


4.3     Persistent Eﬀects of Productivity Shocks
In our model, the SPE outcome at any period t is a function of the extended state
(pt−1 , pt ) - or, equivalently, (pt , εt ). Longer lags have no eﬀect; and certain aspects of
the equilibrium (new hires’ wage, market tightness) are exclusively a function of pt .
  13
    In a recent paper, Rudanko (2011) assumes that the employer is also risk-averse but has better
access to capital markets than the employee. She then shows that the equilibrium generates higher
tightness volatility compared to a benchmark in which employees can use the capital market to smooth
their consumption. Recall that our model abstracts from consumption, thus implicitly assuming that
workers spend their wage earnings instantaneously.



                                                24
These are artefacts of two features of our model: (i) the stochastic process governing
productivity is log-linear AR(1); (ii) the reference point at t is a function of workers’
expectations at t − 1. In this sub-section we discuss how relaxing these assumptions
may lead to longer-lasting eﬀects of productivity shocks.
    Suppose that the process governing productivity is pt = Ψ(pt−1 , ..., pt−K ) · εt , where
K > 1 is an integer, Ψ is some deterministic function and εt is i.i.d according to
F [1/ξ, ξ], as in our basic model. For simplicity, let us focus on the limit case G(b) → 1.
It can be shown that if ξ is suﬃciently close to one, SPE characterization is essentially
the same as in the basic model. In particular, the characterization of φ is the same,
such that existing workers at period t earn ξbΨ(pt−1 , ..., pt−K ) and are retained as long
as εt > ξb. Newly hired workers’ wage at t and market tightness are exclusively a
function of pt . Lagged realizations of p have no eﬀect on the equilibrium outcome,
once we control for pt , εt .
    Thus, it would appear that our model cannot generate long-lasting eﬀects of shocks,
even under more general productivity processes. However, this is a result of the "purely
multiplicative" specification of our model: the process governing pt is log-linear, and
the workers’ output and outside option at t are proportional to pt . This specification
was motivated by tractability and methodological considerations. It is not essential for
the broad features of our analysis in Section 3. Yet, as we saw, it rules out long-lasting
eﬀects of shocks.
    To illustrate this point, suppose pt = Ψ(pt−1 , ..., pt−K ) + εt , where Ψ is some deter-
ministic function and εt is i.i.d according some symmetric density over [−ξ, ξ]. Con-
tinue to assume G(b) → 1. It can be shown that if ξ is small enough, there is a unique
SPE outcome, which has the following properties. Existing workers are retained at t as
long as εt ≥ b − (1 −b)Ψ(pt−1 , ..., pt−K ), and paid b[Ψ(pt−1 , ..., pt−K ) +ξ]. Note that this
means layoﬀ rates at t are sensitive to pt−K , even if we control for pt , ..., pt−K+1 . In this
sense, K-lagged productivity shocks have an eﬀect on current inflows into unemploy-
ment, even after controlling for current productivity. Newly hired workers’ equilibrium
wage at t depends on the period-t outside option bpt , as well as on the period-(t + 1)
retention threshold b − (1 − b)Ψ(pt , ..., pt+1−K ). Hence, past productivity shocks will
also have a persistent eﬀect on the equilibrium wage of new hires. Recall that tight-
ness at t is determined by the value of a created vacancy conditional on filling it at
the beginning of t + 1. Since layoﬀ rates at t + 2 depend on (pt+1 , ..., pt−K+1 ), it fol-
lows that tightness at t is a function of (pt , ..., pt−K+1 ). Thus, when we depart from
the purely multiplicative specification of our model, long-lasting eﬀects of productivity
shocks emerge.


                                              25
    Long-lasting eﬀects of productivity shocks can also be generated by assuming in-
stead that existing workers’ reference wage at t is defined as the expected wage condi-
tional on the history at the end of period t − K. The treatment of existing workers will
then be sensitive to shocks at period t − K, even when we control for pt , ..., pt−K+1 .


5    Concluding Remarks
Our objective in this paper was to formalize the idea that morale considerations aﬀect
the labor market’s response to macroeconomic fluctuations, in the context of an S&M
model. In our model, as in Akerlof (1982), workers’ productivity is damaged when their
wage falls below a reference point. Following Kőszegi and Rabin (2006), we assumed
that existing workers’ reference point is a function of their lagged wage expectations.
The equilibrium predictions of the model are that existing workers’ wages display down-
ward rigidity with respect to macroeconomic shocks, while entry-level wages are lower
and more flexible, and market tightness is more volatile than in a reference-independent
benchmark. The main open problem is to provide a complete characterization of SPE
under general exogenous separation processes and arbitrary business-cycle magnitudes.
Extending the model to other bargaining protocols is an additional interesting avenue
for future research.
    We believe that the model is capable of producing additional insights, some of which
were suggested informally by Bewley (1999) on the basis of his survey. Here we make
do with a brief description.
Part-time jobs. Suppose that a firm’s hiring/retention decision is not binary, but a
real number r ∈ [0, 1], such that an interior r corresponds to a part-time job. Suppose
further that wages are stated for full-time positions, such that an employed worker’s
total wage earnings are rw. It makes sense to assume that an existing worker’s reference
point will be based on w rather than on rw. This means that if a firm shifts its worker
from full- to part-time employment without cutting w below its lagged-expected value,
this will not be construed as unfair behavior, and the worker will produce normal
output. It follows that after a bad productivity shock, a firm may prefer this option
to the alternative of keeping the worker at full-time employment while lowering his
wage, even when the latter option would have been optimal in a reference-independent
model.
The role of inflation. Discussions of wage rigidity often involve a distinction between
real and nominal wages and the mitigating role of inflation. In a model with reference


                                          26
dependence, this distinction is traced to an assumption as to whether the reference
point is formed in nominal or real terms. If the reference point is stated in terms of
(lagged-expected) nominal wages, it should come as no surprise that unexpected infla-
tion can have real (yet temporary) eﬀects on the labor market, by lowering the reference
point in real terms, thereby making the MH constraint less likely to be binding.
    We would like to conclude the paper with a discussion of alternative reference-
point formation rules. In Appendix B, we examine a close variation on our model,
in which the reference point of workers of any type is equal to their lagged-expected
wage earnings, thus endogenizing the distinction between newly matched and existing
workers. The main qualitative results of our model are reproduced.
    Another variant would abandon the lagged-expectation component, and assume
that an existing worker’s reference point at period t is equal to his actual wage at
period t − 1. This alternative formulation could also generate persistent eﬀects of
productivity shocks: In a model with a long-horizon separation process, the treatment
of existing workers would be sensitive to the value of p when they were originally hired
by the firm, even after controlling for the values of p ever since.
    Finally, the reference point that conditions the worker’s eﬀort decision could be a
function of variables other than the worker’s own (expected) wage. For instance, it
could be the wage earned by his peers, or what he considers to be a fair share of his
output. Analyzing the model under such alternative reference-point rules is important
not only as a robustness check, but also because this may generate new insights into
other aspects of labor relations over the business cycle.


References
 [1] Akerlof, George A. (1982): "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 97, 543-569.

 [2] Akerlof, George A. and Janet L. Yellen (1990): "The Fair-Wage Eﬀort Hypothesis
     and Unemployment," Quarterly Journal of Economics 195, 255-284.

 [3] Anderson, Eric T. and Duncan I. Simester (2010): "Price Stickiness and Customer
     Antagonism," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 729-765.

 [4] Azariadis, Costas (1975): "Implicit Contracts and Underemployment Equilibria,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 83, 1183—202.



                                          27
 [5] Barro, R. (1977): "Long-Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics 3, 305-316.

 [6] Battigalli, Pierpaolo and Martin Dufwenberg (2009): "Dynamic Psychological
     Games," Journal of Economic Theory, 144, 1-35.

 [7] Beaudry, Paul and John DiNardo (1991): "The Eﬀect of Implicit Contracts on
     the Movement of Wages Over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Micro Data,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 99, 665-688.

 [8] Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler (1995): "Myopic Loss Aversion and the
     Equity Premium Puzzle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 73-92.

 [9] Bewley, Truman F. (1999): Why Wages Don’t Fall during a Recession, Harvard
     University Press.

[10] Blinder, Alan S. and Don H. Choi (1990): "A Shred of Evidence on Theories of
     Wage Stickiness," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 1003-1015.

[11] Costain, James and Marcel Jansen (2010): "Employment Fluctuations with Down-
     ward Wage Rigidity: The Role of Moral Hazard," Scandinavian Journal of Eco-
     nomics, 112, 782—811.

[12] Crawford, Vincent and Juanjuan Meng (2011): "New York City Cab Drivers’
     Labor Supply Revisited: Reference-Dependent Preferences with Rational-
     Expectations Targets for Hours and Income," American Economic Review, 101,
     1912-1932.

[13] de Meza, David and David C. Webb (2007): "Incentive Design Under Loss Aver-
     sion," Journal of the European Economic Association, 5, 66-92.

[14] Dittmann, Ingolf, Ernst Maug and Oliver Spalt (2010): "Sticks or Carrots? Op-
     timal CEO Compensation when Managers Are Loss Averse," Journal of Finance,
     65, 2015—2050.

[15] Dufwenberg, Martin and Georg Kirchsteiger (2000): "Reciprocity and Wage Un-
     dercutting," European Economic Review, 44, 1069-1078.

[16] Dufwenberg, Martin and Georg Kirchsteiger (2004): "A Theory of Sequential Reci-
     procity," Games and Economic Behavior, 47, 268-298.



                                        28
[17] Eliaz, Kfir and Ran Spiegler (2012): "Reference Dependence and Labor-Market
     Fluctuations", CEPR Discussion Paper 8997.

[18] Fehr, Ernst and Armin Falk (1999): "Wage Rigidity in a Competitive Incomplete
     Contract Market," Journal of Political Economy, 107, 106-134.

[19] Fehr, Ernst and Simon Gächter (2000): "Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics
     of Reciprocity," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 159-181.

[20] Fehr, Ernst, Goette, Lorenz and Christian Zehnder (2009): "A Behavioral Ac-
     count of the Labor Market: The Role of Fairness Concerns," Annual Review of
     Economics, 1, 355-384.

[21] Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt (2002): "Theories of Fairness and Reciprocity
     - Evidence and Economic Applications," in M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen and St.
     Turnovsky (Eds.) Advances in Economics and Econometrics - 8th World Congress,
     Econometric Society Monographs, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

[22] Geanakoplos, John, Pearce, David and Ennio Stacchetti (1989): "Psychological
     Games and Sequential Rationality," Games and Economic Behavior, 1, 60-79.

[23] Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer (2001): "Loss Aversion and Seller Be-
     havior: Evidence From The Housing Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     116, 1233-1260.

[24] Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari (2009): "Unemployment Fluctuations With
     Staggered Nash Wage Bargaining," Journal of Political Economy, 117, 38-86.

[25] Haefke, Christian, Sonntag, Marcus and Thijs van Rens (2008): "Wage Rigidity
     and Job Creation," Discussion Paper 3714, IZA.

[26] Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii (2008): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium
     Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited," American Economic Review, 98, 1692-
     1706.

[27] Hall, Robert E. (2005): "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stick-
     iness," American Economic Review, 95, 50-65.

[28] Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom (2008): "The Limited Influence of Unem-
     ployment on the Wage Bargain," American Economic Review, 98, 1653-1674.



                                        29
[29] Hart, Oliver and John Moore (2008): "Contracts as Reference Points," Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 123, 1-48.

[30] Herweg, Fabian, Daniel Müller and Philipp Weinschenk (2010): "Binary Payment
     Schemes: Moral Hazard and Loss Aversion," American Economic Review, 100,
     2451-2477.

[31] Herweg, Fabian and Konrad Mierendorﬀ (in press): "Uncertain Demand, Con-
     sumer Loss Aversion, and Flat-Rate Tariﬀs," Journal of the European Economic
     Association.

[32] Holmstrom, Bengt (1982): "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell Journal of Economics,
     13, 324-340.

[33] Kahneman, Daniel, Knetsch, Jack L. and Thaler, Richard (1986): "Fairness as a
     Constraint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in the Market," American Economic
     Review, 76, 728-741.

[34] Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky (1979): "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of
     Decision under Risk," Econometrica, 47, 263-292.

[35] Keynes, John M. (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money,
     Palgrave Macmillan.

[36] Kudlyak, Marianna (2009): "The Cyclicality of the User Cost of Labor with Search
     and Matching," Richmond Fed Working Paper 09-12.

[37] Kőszegi, Botond and Matthew Rabin (2006): "A Model of Reference-Dependent
     Preferences," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 1133-1165.

[38] Kuang, Pei and Tong Wang (2010): "Labor Market Dynamics with Searching
     Friction and Fair Wage Considerations," Discussion Paper, University of Oxford.

[39] Malcomson, James M. and Sophocles Mavroeidis (2010): "Nash Bargaining, Cred-
     ible Bargaining and Eﬃciency Wages in a Matching Model for the US," Economics
     Series Working Paper 511, University of Oxford.

[40] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher Pissarides (1994): "Job Creation and Job
     Destruction in the Theory of Unemployment," Review of Economic Studies, 61,
     397-415.



                                         30
[41] Odean, T. (1998): "Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?" Journal of
     Finance 53, 1775—1798.

[42] Pissarides, Christopher A. (2000): Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, MIT Press.

[43] Pissarides, Christopher A. (2009): "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: Is Wage
     Stickiness the Answer?" Econometrica, 77, 1339-1369.

[44] Rabin, Matthew (1993): "Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Eco-
     nomics," American Economic Review, 83, 1281—1302.

[45] Rubinstein, Ariel and Asher Wolinsky (1985): "Equilibrium in a Market with
     Sequential Bargaining," Econometrica, 53, 1133-1150.

[46] Rudanko, Leena (2011): "Aggregate and Idiosyncratic Risk in a Frictional Labor
     Market," American Economic Review, 101, 2823-2843.

[47] Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1984): "Equilibrium Unemployment as a
     Worker Discipline Device," American Economic Review, 74, 433-444.

[48] Shimer, Robert (2004): "The Consequences of Rigid Wages in Search Models,"
     Journal of the European Economic Association (Papers and Proceedings), 2, 469—
     479.

[49] Shimer, Robert (2005): "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
     Vacancies," American Economic Review, 95, 25-49.

[50] Shimer, Robert (2010): Labor Markets and Business Cycles, Princeton University
     Press.

[51] Solow, Robert M. (1979): "Another Possible Source of Wage Stickiness," Journal
     of Macroeconomics, 1, 79-82.


Appendix A: Proofs
Let us first introduce some notation that will serve us in several proofs. Fix an SPE.
Unemployed workers’ payoﬀ. Recall that for a given firm-worker pair, the only ob-
servable aspect of the history prior to their match is the sequence of realizations of p.
In particular, it does not matter whether the worker’s unemployment at t is due to
a matching failure, a firm’s decision not to hire him, or his own decision to reject a


                                           31
wage oﬀer. Therefore, we can denote an unemployed worker’s equilibrium continuation
payoﬀ at t by W0 (p0 , ..., pt ), without loss of generality.
Employed workers’ payoﬀ. Let ht be the information set of a given firm-worker matched
pair at period t, where the worker is of type i at t. Let (ht , wt ) denote the immediate
concatenation in which the firm hires/retains the worker and makes the oﬀer wt . Let
Wi (ht , wt ) denote the worker’s equilibrium continuation payoﬀ at (ht , wt ), where the
subscript i clarifies the worker’s type at t. Let W0 (ht ) denote his reservation payoﬀ at
ht , namely the continuation payoﬀ if he rejects the wage oﬀer that the firm makes and
thus becomes unemployed at t. By definition, Wi (ht , wt ) ≥ W0 (ht ).
Employed workers’ rent. We define two types of rents. First, let Ri (ht , wt ) = Wi (ht , wt )−
W0 (ht ) be the diﬀerence between the worker’s equilibrium continuation payoﬀ at (ht , wt )
and his reservation payoﬀ at this history. Second, let B(p) denote a worker’s contin-
uation payoﬀ from the strategy of rejecting all wage oﬀers when the current state is
p, and define Qi (ht , wt ) = Wi (ht , wt ) − B(pt ). By revealed preferences, Qi (ht , wt ) ≥
Ri (ht , wt ) ≥ 0. In addition, Q(·) is bounded from above because firms will never make
oﬀers that generate negative profits.

Proof of Proposition 1
Consider some SPE of the game. Define Q∗ as the maximum of Qi (h, w) over all
histories (h, w) and agent types i in this SPE. In general, the maximum need not be
well-defined, and complete rigor demands it to be replaced with the sup. However,
this would complicate our analysis in a way we find superfluous. Thus, to simplify
exposition, we deal with the case in which Q∗ is well-defined and attained in some
finite history (h∗t , wt∗ ) by a worker of some type i∗ .
    If Q∗ = 0 we are done, and so assume that Q∗ > 0. Note that Q∗ = wt∗ − bpt +
δQi∗ (ht+1 , wt+1 ). Suppose that wt∗ = 0 and i∗ accepts the wage oﬀer so that the non-
negativity constraint is binding at (h∗t , wt∗ ). Since wt∗ − bpt < 0 and Q∗ > 0 we have
that Qi∗ (ht+1 , wt+1 ) > Q∗ , a contradiction. Thus, the non-negativity constraint of a
wage oﬀer to worker i∗ must hold with slack at (h∗t , wt∗ ). Similarly, it cannot be the
case that worker i∗ rejects the wage oﬀer wt∗ . It follows that the IR constraint of i∗ ’s
contract (see definition at the beginning of Section 3) is binding at (h∗t , wt∗ ) - otherwise,
the firm can slightly lower the worker’s wage without changing his subsequent behavior
(the reason is that the worker cannot benefit from rejecting the oﬀer; if he does, he
will join the search pool and by assumption, future employers will be unable to adjust
their behavior on this rejection because they do not observe it).


                                              32
    By the definition of Q∗ , Wi∗ (h∗t , wt∗ ) ≥ W1 (h∗t , wt∗ ) and

                     W1 (h∗t , pt+1 , wt+1 ) − B(pt+1 ) ≤ Wi∗ (h∗t , wt∗ ) − B(pt )                (13)

for any realization of pt+1 and a wage oﬀer wt+1 made to a newly matched worker at
t + 1. Observe that

  W0 (h∗t ) = bpt + δ[μt · EW1 ((h∗t , pt+1 , wt+1 ) | pt ) + (1 − μt ) · EW0 ((h∗t , pt+1 ) | pt )] (14)

where μt is the probability that an unemployed worker at t finds a match. The deter-
minants of μt are immaterial for our purposes. Since W0 (h∗t , pt+1 ) ≤ W1 (h∗t , pt+1 , wt+1 ),
we obtain from (14) that

                          W0 (h∗t ) ≤ bpt + δE(W1 (h∗t , pt+1 , wt+1 ) | pt )

Since the IR constraint of i∗ ’s contract is binding at (h∗t , wt∗ ), Wi∗ (h∗t , wt∗ ) = W0 (h∗t ).
Using (13) we may therefore conclude that

          Wi∗ (h∗t , wt∗ ) = W0 (h∗t ) ≤ bpt + δWi∗ (h∗t , wt∗ ) + δEB(pt+1 | pt ) − δB(pt )

Since bpt + δEB(pt+1 | pt ) = B(pt ), we have Wi∗ (h∗t , wt∗ ) ≤ B(pt ), hence Q∗ = 0.
   By the definition of Q∗ , it follows that for any worker type i and any (ht , wt ) along
the equilibrium path, Wi (ht , wt ) = B(pt ). Thus, if the worker accepts the wage oﬀer,
we have

            Wi (ht ) = wt + δE(Wi+1 (ht , pt+1 , wt+1 ) | pt ) = bpt + δEB(pt+1 | pt )

and this implies wt = bpt . Finally, there cannot be a SPE in which a worker rejects
an oﬀer of bpt at some period t because the firm could profitably deviate by slightly
raising the wage.

Proof of Proposition 2
We first prove a pair of lemmas that will serve us in several proofs. In particular, they
hold for any γ. Define Q∗∗ as the maximum of Q(h, w) over all histories (h, w) in which
a newly matched worker responds to a wage oﬀer.
Lemma 2 Let (ht , wt ) be a history in which a newly matched worker responds to a
wage oﬀer, for which Q(ht , wt ) = Q∗∗ . If the IR constraint is binding at (ht , wt ), then
Q∗∗ = 0.

                                                  33
Proof. By the definition of Q∗ , W1 (ht , pt+1 , wt+1 ) − B(pt+1 ) ≤ W1 (ht , wt ) − B(pt ).
The proof that Q∗∗ = 0 reproduces exactly the same steps that led us to conclude that
Q∗ = 0 in the proof of Proposition 1. (Note that here we simply assume that IR is
binding at (ht , wt ), rather than deriving this property.)
    Let w̄it denote the participation wage of a worker of tenure i = 1, 2 at period t
(implicitly, given the history) - that is, the highest wage oﬀer they will accept given that
all agents conform to their equilibrium continuation strategies. The next lemma shows
that a worker’s equilibrium wage at any history cannot exceed the highest participation
wage he could get given the previous-period history.

Lemma 3 In SPE, wi,t ≤ max w̄it | ht−1 .
Proof. Assume the contrary, i.e. e2,t > max w̄it | ht−1 . Since e2,t is a weighted average
of e2,t and realizations of w̄it that are feasible given ht−1 , it is equal to e2,t only if the firm
pays w2,t = e2,t with probability one, conditional on retaining the worker. However,
since e2,t > w̄it with probability one, there exists a value of γ t suﬃciently close to one,
such that for any ht , pt − e2,t < γ t pt − w̄it , in which case the firm can profitably deviate
from w2,t = e2,t to w̄it . By assumption, such realizations of γ t occur with positive
probability, a contradiction.
Lemma 4 In SPE, w1,t > 0 at any period t.
Proof. Recall that W0t is independent of the worker’s type at t, and that Rit is the rent
(i.e., excess payoﬀ above his reservation payoﬀ) that a worker of type i gets at period
t. If the worker is unemployed at t, we write Rit = 0. The following equations hold, by
the definition of these objects:

                        w̄2t + δE(W0t+1 | ht ) = W0t
                        w̄1t + δE(W0t+1 | ht ) + δE(R2t+1 | ht ) = W0t

Therefore,
                                   w̄1t = w̄2t − δE(R2t+1 | ht )                               (15)

Moreover, since
                        W0t = bpt + δE(W0t+1 | ht ) + δμt E(R1t+1 | ht )

we obtain

                       w̄2t = bpt + δμt E(R1t+1 | ht )                                         (16)
                       w̄1t = bpt + δμt E(R1t+1 | ht ) − δE(R2t+1 | ht )                       (17)

                                                34
     If the IR constraint of a wage oﬀer to a newly matched worker is binding at t,
then his period-t wage is equal to his period t reservation wage and R1t = 0. If his MH
constraint is binding at t, then the actual wage at t is zero, and R1t = −w̄1t . If w̄1t < 0
(w̄1t > 0), then the MH (IR) constraint is binding. Therefore, R1t = max{0, −w̄1t }.
     Let R∗ and R∗ denote the maximum and minimum values that R1t can attain at
any t. By definition, R∗ ≥ 0. Assume that R∗ > 0. Let w∗ denote the minimum value
that w̄1t may obtain at any t. Then R∗ = −w∗ , where w∗ < 0. From (17) it follows that

                        w̄1t = bpt + δμt E(R1t+1 | ht ) − δE(R2t+1 | ht )

Observe that R2t+1 | pt = w2,t+1 −w̄2t+1 . By Lemma 3, w2,t+1 ≤ max w̄2t+1 | ht . Therefore,
δE(R2t+1 | ht ) is smaller or equal to the sum

      δ[ max (bpt+1 + δμt+1 E(R1t+2 | ht+1 )) − E(bpt+1 + δμt+1 E(R1t+2 | ht+1 ) | ht )]
        ht+1 |ht


which in turn is lower or equal to

    δb(pβt ξ − pβt E(ε)) + δ 2 max [μt+1 E(R1t+2 | ht+1 )] − δ 2 E[μt+1 E(R1t+2 | ht+1 ) | ht ]
                              ht+1 |ht


Note that

                            max [μt+1 E(R1t+2              |   ht+1 )] ≤ R∗
                           ht+1 |ht

                                E[μt+1 E(R1t+2             |   ht+1 ) | ht ] ≥ 0
                                         μt E(R1t+1        |   ht ) ≥ 0
                                 pβt ξ − pβt E(ε) ≤ pβt (ξ − 1)

Hence, for any t,
                               w̄1t ≥ b[pt − δpβt (ξ − 1)] − δ 2 R∗                               (18)

Since R∗ = −w∗ , inequality (18) holds for every t only if it holds at the lowest possible
value of w̄1t , i.e., only if

                             w∗ ≥ b[pt − δpβt (ξ − 1)] − δ 2 (−w∗ )

which implies
                                           b[pt − δpβt (ξ − 1)]
                                      w∗ ≥
                                                 1 − δ2


                                                      35
Recall that pt follows a log-linear AR(1) process where shocks take values in [ 1ξ , ξ].
                                                 √
A simple calculation shows that since ξ < 12 (1 + 5), the numerator of the R.H.S is
strictly positive. But this contradicts our assumption that w∗ < 0. It follows that
R∗ = 0, and this establishes the result.
   The rest of the proof proceeds in two steps. First, we use the above lemmas to
derive the retention decision, reference point and equilibrium wages for existing workers.
Second, we compute the hiring decision and equilibrium wages for newly matched
workers. Since by assumption e1,t = 0, Lemma 4 implies that the MH constraint of a
wage oﬀer to newly matched workers holds with slack after every history. Therefore,
their IR constraint must be binding after every history.

Step 1: Existing workers
Let us first show that an existing worker at period t will accept a wage oﬀer w2,t if and
only if w2,t ≥ bpt . This is his last period of employment. If he rejects the firm’s oﬀer,
he will be unemployed and earn a payoﬀ of bpt at t. We have seen that newly matched
workers’ IR is binding after every history. By Lemma 2, it follows that the worker’s
equilibrium continuation payoﬀ from period t + 1 onwards is the same as if he were
to receive bps in every period s ≥ t + 1. Therefore, the existing worker’s participation
constraint at t will be binding if he receives a payoﬀ of bpt .
    It follows that if bpt ≥ e2,t , the firm will choose rt = 1 and wt = bpt in equilibrium.
Let us turn to the case of bpt < e2,t . Conditional on playing rt = 1, the firm will
oﬀer wt ∈ {e2,t , bpt } because IR or MH are binding. Retaining the worker at wt = bpt
generates a profit of π = γ t pt − bpt . If γ t < b (γ t > b), then π < 0 (π > 0); and since
this is the last period of the worker’s employment, the firm will choose rt = 0 (rt = 1).
It follows that when γ t < b, the firm will play rt = 0 if pt −e2,t < 0 and rt = 1, wt = e2,t
if pt − e2,t > 0. And when γ t > b, the firm will play rt = 1, and wt = e2,t (wt = bpt ) if
pt − e2,t > γ t pt − bpt (pt − e2,t < γ t pt − bpt ).
    We are now able to provide an expression for existing workers’ reference wage at
period t, which is equal to their expected wage conditional on being retained, according
to their information at the end of period t−1. We use the abbreviated notation e = e2,t ,
p = pt−1 :
            R                           R 1 £R                  R                       ¤
     G(b)   ε>ε∗
                   max{e, bpβ ε}dF (ε) + b ε<ε∗∗ bpβ εdF (ε) + ε>ε∗∗ max{e, bpβ ε}dF (ε) dG(γ)
e=
                                       G(b)(1 − F (ε∗ )) + 1 − G(b)
                                                                                      (19)




                                             36
where the productivity shock cutoﬀs ε∗ and ε∗∗ are given as follows:

                                    pβ ε∗ = e
                              pβ ε∗∗ − e = γpβ ε∗∗ − bpβ ε∗∗

    It is clear from (19) that e2,t ≥ bpβt−1 E(ε). By Lemma 3, e2,t ≤ bξpβt−1 , namely the
highest outside option that is feasible at period t given pt−1 . Our task now is to establish
that the equation (19) has a unique solution e in the interval [bpβt−1 E(ε), bξpβt−1 ]. Rewrite
the equation as eB(e) − A(e) = 0, where the functions A and B are the numerator
and denominator of the R.H.S of (19), respectively. The L.H.S of this equation is a
continuous function of e. Moreover, it is negative for e = 0 and positive for e > bξpβt−1 .
Diﬀerentiating w.r.t e, we obtain [eB(e) − A(e)]0 > 0 for all e in the relevant domain.
Therefore, (19) has a unique solution. Let us guess that the solution has the form
φ · bpβt−1 , where φ is a constant that is a function of F , G and b. Plugging this
expression into (19) and simplifying, we obtain (4)-(5). In particular, ε∗ = ε∗ (γ) for
γ < b, and ε∗∗ = ε∗ (γ) for γ > b. This system has a solution, by the same reasoning
that ensured a solution for (19). Therefore, this solution gives us the unique solution
for (19). We have thus fully characterized the equilibrium retention and wage policies
for existing workers.

Step 2: Newly matched workers
A newly matched worker at period t expects to earn the discounted sum of payoﬀs in
periods t and t + 1:

                       w1,t + δE[r2,t+1 w2,t+1 + (1 − r2,t+1 )bpt+1 | pt ]                (20)

We have already noted that a new worker’s SPE continuation payoﬀ is as if he receives
bpt in every period t. Hence, in any SPE, the expected, discounted sum in (20) must
equal bpt + δE(bpt+1 | pt ). Expression (7) for w1,t thus follows from our characterization
of r2,t+1 and w2,t+1 . To see why r1,t = 1 regardless of the history, note that in the second
period of the interaction between the firm and the worker, the firm necessarily earns
non-negative profits. The newly matched worker at t produces the normal output pt
because as we saw, his MH constraint holds (with slack). Since he is paid at most bpt ,
the firm earns strictly positive profits, and therefore would always prefer to hire the
worker.




                                               37
Appendix B: Endogenous Distinction between Worker Types
    So far, we assumed a reference-point formation rule that imposed an exogenous
distinction between newly matched and existing workers. One could argue that there
are endogenous reasons for such a distinction. In particular, they have diﬀerent em-
ployment prospects: the probability that a newly hired worker at t is employed at t + 1
is a function of his employer’s equilibrium retention policy, while the probability that
an unemployed worker at t is employed at t + 1 is a function of market tightness at t
and firms’ hiring policy.
    In this appendix, we modify the reference-point formation rule in order to capture
this consideration and endogenize the distinction between the reference points of work-
ers of diﬀerent types. For simplicity, we restrict attention to the two-period exogenous
separation process. Assume that at any period t and for any worker type i = 1, 2,
the worker’s reference point is equal to his expected wage earnings conditional on his
information at the end of period t − 1. Specifically, the period-t reference points for
newly matched and existing workers are

                               e1,t = μt−1 · E(r1,t w1,t )
                               e2,t = E(r2,t w2,t )

where the expectation over ri,t , wi,t is conditional on the worker’s information set at
the end of t − 1.
    This reference point formation rule puts newly matched and existing workers on
the same footing a priori. However, their diﬀerent employment prospects translate into
diﬀerent reference points. In particular, if an unemployed worker at period t − 1 faces
a low match probability μt−1 , his reference wage if matched at the beginning of t is
close to zero.
    Our main result in this appendix is that when the matching friction is suﬃciently
high and the magnitude of the business cycle is not too large, there exists an SPE that
mimics the qualitative features of the unique SPE obtained in Section 3.


Proposition 3 If                        ½                      ¾
                                                  c        1
                        m(1, 1) < min        0
                                                 √ ,1− ξ +                         (21)
                                            Π( 1−β
                                                   ξ)      ξ
the game has a SPE with the following properties.




                                             38
(i) An existing worker’s period-t reference point e2,t is

                                              e2,t = φ · bpβt−1

where φ is uniquely given by
                      Z 1Z                                         Z 1Z
               φ =                      max{φ, ε}dF (ε)dG(γ) +                        εdF (ε)dG(γ)
                       0    ε>ε∗ (γ)                                b      ε<ε∗ (γ)
                             φb
          ε∗ (γ) =
                      1 − max{0, γ − b}

(ii) An existing worker is dismissed at period t if and only if γ t < b and εt < φb.
Conditional on being retained at t, his wage is
                                    (
                                        max{e2,t , bpt } if        εt > ε∗ (γ t )
                w2 (pt−1 , pt ) =                                                                    (22)
                                            bpt          if γ t > b and εt < ε∗ (γ t )

(iii) A newly matched worker at period t is always hired; his wage at period t is given
by (7).


Proof. Our method of proof is as follows. First, we construct a unique SPE under the
assumption that w̄1,t > e1,t at any period t, regardless of the history - that is, newly
matched workers’ participation wage exceeds their reference wage. Then, we show that
this assumption holds under (21). Many of the steps in the proof have analogues in
the proof of Proposition 2, and are therefore described briefly.
Step 1: Existing workers
By assumption, newly matched workers’ IR constraint is binding after every history in
equilibrium. Therefore, existing workers’ participation wage at any period t is exactly
the same as in the basic model, namely bpt . For a given reference wage e2,t , the firm’s
retention and wage policy in SPE is the same as in the basic model. Specifically, when
γ t < b, the firm will retain an existing worker at period t if and only if pt ≥ e2,t , and
pay w2,t = max{e2,t , bpt } conditional on retention. And if γ t > b, the firm will always
retain an existing worker, and pay him w2,t = e2,t when pt − γ t pt ≥ e2,t − bpt ≥ 0, and
w2,t = bpt otherwise. Therefore, an existing worker’s reference wage at period t is given
by the following equation:
           Z                          Z 1 ∙Z                               Z                            ¸
                             β                                β                               β
e = G(b)           max{e, bp ε}dF (ε)+                      bp εdF (ε) +              max{e, bp ε}dF (ε) dG(γ)
            ε>ε∗                              b     ε<ε∗∗                   ε>ε∗∗


                                                     39
where the productivity shock cutoﬀs ε∗ and ε∗∗ are given as follows:

                                  pβ ε∗ = e
                            pβ ε∗∗ − e = γpβ ε∗∗ − bpβ ε∗∗

    To establish existence of a solution to this equation, note first that the R.H.S is a
continuous function of e2,t . Second, the R.H.S cannot take values above bξpβ , hence
we can view the R.H.S as a continuous mapping from [0, bξpβ ] to itself. By Brouwer’s
fixed-point theorem, this mapping has a fixed point. To see that this fixed point is
unique, diﬀerentiate both sides of the equation w.r.t e. The derivative of the L.H.S
w.r.t e is 1, while the derivative of the R.H.S w.r.t e is strictly below 1. Therefore,
there can be at most one point in which the functions on the two sides of the equation
intersect, hence precisely one fixed point.
Step 2. Newly matched workers
The derivation is exactly the same as in the basic model
Step 3: Verifying that newly matched workers’ MH holds with slack
By the expression for newly matched workers’ wage,

                             w1,t > b[pt−1 − pβt−1 (ξ − E(ε))]

On the other hand, by the same expression and the definition of newly matched workers’
reference point,
                                e1,t ≤ μt−1 · bpβt−1 E(ε)

In order to prove the result, it suﬃces to show that the lower bound on w1,t is always
higher than the upper bound on e1,t . A bit of algebra gives us the following suﬃcient
condition (using the facts that E(ε) > 1 and p1−β ≥ 1ξ ):

                                                          1
                                    μt−1 < 1 − ξ +
                                                          ξ
                                        √
                                       1−β
The highest value that pt can get is     ξ. By the free entry assumption, the following
inequality holds in any equilibrium:

                                                    c
                                    qt−1 ≥              √
                                             Π0 (   1−β
                                                         ξ)

By the assumption that m satisfies constant returns to scale, qt−1 > m(1, 1) if and only

                                             40
if μt−1 < m(1, 1). Therefore, if m(1, 1) satisfies condition (21), newly matched workers’
participation wage exceeds their reference wage after every history.

    Because the exact equation that describes the reference point for existing workers
diﬀers from its specification in the basic model, the SPE constructed here does not
exactly replicate the SPE in the basic model. However, the qualitative features of
firms’ retention and wage policies for newly hired and existing workers are preserved.
Note that the restriction on ξ required to obtain this result is more severe than in
the basic model, but this diﬀerence vanishes as m(1, 1) gets closer to zero. Given the
specification of φ, we are able to obtain the output constant λ just as in the basic
model, and use it to replicate (qualitatively) the tightness volatility eﬀect.

Appendix C: Reference-Dependent Worker Preferences
Reference dependence of output in our model is interpreted in terms of worker mo-
tivation. This suggests that our model may be viewed as a reduced form of a larger
model in which workers’ preferences are reference-dependent. Indeed, Akerlof (1982)
formulated his model of the labor relation in terms of reference-dependent worker pref-
erences that dictate their choice of unobserved eﬀort, such that when their wage falls
below the reference point, their subjective cost of eﬀort increases. In this appendix we
construct such a model, which can be viewed as a foundation for the reduced form,
reference-dependent output function assumed in the main text.
    The search, matching, separation and bargaining components, as well as the firms’
preferences, are exactly the same as in the basic model. The only diﬀerences are in
the description of workers’ output and their preferences. Suppose that conditional on
accepting an oﬀer, an employed worker is committed to a minimal level of eﬀort. On
top of that, he chooses a level of discretionary eﬀort xt ∈ {0, 1}. We refer to x = 1 as
"normal eﬀort". This eﬀort decision is not observed by the firm. The worker’s output
is yt = pt [γ t + (1 − γ t )xt ]. Under this formulation, γ t is interpreted as an indicator
of the completeness of the labor contract, such that 1 − γ t captures the importance of
discretionary eﬀort in the output function.
    Workers maximize expected discounted payoﬀs. Employed workers’ payoﬀ flow is
modified as follows:
                                      wt − xt · 1[wt < et ]                             (23)

whereas the basic model assumed only the first term. The interpretation is that when
the worker’s wage is below his reference point, he perceives this as unfair treatment; his
intrinsic motivation is damaged, and he strictly prefers not to exert his normal eﬀort.

                                            41
Otherwise, the worker is indiﬀerent between x = 0 and x = 1, and we assume that he
chooses the latter.
   Given the assumption that the worker’s discretionary eﬀort is unobserved, the
worker’s choice of x is entirely myopic in any SPE. At any period t in which he accepts
a wage oﬀer wt , he will play xt = 1 if and only if wt ≥ et . As a result, the worker will
respond to wage oﬀers as if he maximizes the discounted sum of expected wage and
non-market earnings, just as in the basic model. This is the reason that this larger
model collapses to our basic model in equilibrium.
   The value of recasting our model in terms of reference-dependent preferences is
that it clarifies the interpretation of the random parameter γ t . It also suggests new
extensions and raises interpretational questions. We discuss some of them.
The equilibrium concept. Because workers’ preferences in this extended model depend
on their expectations (both of the moves of Nature and of the players’ strategies), this
is not strictly speaking a conventional game, but rather an example of an extensive-
form "psychological game" (after Geanakoplos et al. (1989)).14 In general, extending
standard game-theoretic solution concepts to this class of games may involve subtleties.
However, in the present case, the standard concept of subgame perfect equilibrium
(SPE) is defined and analyzed in a completely standard way.15
Contractual incompleteness. In our model, firms oﬀer flat-wage contracts and do not
observe workers’ eﬀort. The latter assumption may appear strange, because we as-
sume that firms observe pt , γ t , hence assuming that xt is unobservable is tantamount
to assuming that output is unobserved, which may seem odd. However, recall that
although the model is presented in terms of one-to-one matching, this assumption is
purely expositional and the entire analysis is valid for one-to-many matching where
production is separable across vacancies. It is entirely realistic to assume that while
the firm can only observe its aggregate output with some noise, it cannot monitor the
contribution of any individual worker.
    Even under this limited monitoring, one could argue that flat-wage contracts are
too restrictive, and that firms could incentivize eﬀort by conditioning the workers’
compensation on the noisy signal, namely aggregate output. However, as the literature
on moral hazard in teams has demonstrated (starting with Holmstrom (1982)), such
  14
     Rabin (1993) was the first to use the framework of psychological games to model reciprocity
considerations.
  15
     This is due to the fact that in our model, workers incorporate reciprocity considerations into their
eﬀort decision in a myopic way. Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger (2004) and Battigalli and Dufwenberg
(2009) develop tools to deal with more complicated dynamic settings, where reciprocity considerations
may be sensitive to oﬀ-equilibrium events and higher-order beliefs.


                                                   42
incentives are limited in their ability to induce team eﬀort. When these considerations
are combined with reference-dependent worker preferences that exhibit loss aversion,
the limitations are exacerbated and may lead firms to choose flat contracts (see Herweg
et al. (2010), Herweg and Mierendorﬀ (2011)).
    Furthermore, incentivizing team performance may exacerbate morale problems for
reasons that are not captured by our preference model, because it punishes individual
workers for a drop in output which is due to chance or other workers’ eﬀort decisions.
Similar issues arise when the worker has multiple tasks and the firm can only monitor
a subset of those (see Fehr et al. (2009)). Thus, morale considerations and limited
monitoring of workers’ eﬀort complement each other in motivating firms to prefer flat-
wage contracts to elaborate incentive schemes.




                                          43
