                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




USING WEATHER DATA AND CLIMATE MODEL OUTPUT IN ECONOMIC ANALYSES
                       OF CLIMATE CHANGE

                                       Maximilian Auffhammer
                                        Solomon M. Hsiang
                                         Wolfram Schlenker
                                            Adam Sobel

                                         Working Paper 19087
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19087


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




We thank Charlie Kolstad, four referees and Suzanne Leonard for very helpful comments. We acknowledge
support from DOE grant DE-FG02-08ER64640 (Auffhammer & Schlenker), EPA Grant FP-916932
(Hsiang) and NSF Grant AGS-1008847 (Sobel). All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Maximilian Auffhammer, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Weather Data and Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate Change
Maximilian Auffhammer, Solomon M. Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel
NBER Working Paper No. 19087
May 2013
JEL No. Q0,Q54

                                              ABSTRACT

Economists are increasingly using weather data and climate model output in analyses of the economic
impacts of climate change. This article introduces weather data sets and climate models that are frequently
used, discusses the most common mistakes economists make in using these products, and identifies
ways to avoid these pitfalls. We first provide an introduction to weather data, including a summary
of the types of datasets available, and then discuss five common pitfalls that empirical researchers
should be aware of when using historical weather data as explanatory variables in econometric applications.
We then provide a brief overview of climate models and discuss two common and significant errors
often made by economists when climate model output is used to simulate the future impacts of climate
change on an economic outcome of interest.


Maximilian Auffhammer                       Wolfram Schlenker
Agricultural and Resource Economics Department
                                            Agricultural and Resource Economics
University of California, Berkeley          University of California at Berkeley
207 Giannini Hall                           329 Giannini Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3310                     Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                    and NBER
auffhammer@berkeley.edu                     schlenker@berkeley.edu

Solomon M. Hsiang                             Adam Sobel
Woodrow Wilson School of Public & Int'l AffairsDepatment of Applied Physics
Princeton University                          and Applied Mathemati
413a Robertson Hall                           500 West 120th Street
Princeton, NJ 08544                           New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                      ahs129@columbia.edu
shsiang@princeton.edu
1.     Introduction

There is a long history of using weather measures as explanatory variables in statistical
models. For example, Fisher (1925) examined the effects of rainfall on wheat yields and
Wright (1928) used weather as an instrumental variable to identify a demand function for
oils. Because weather is exogenous and random in most economic applications, it acts like
a natural experiment and thus in some settings allows researchers to statistically identify
the causal effect of one variable on an economic outcome of interest (Angrist and Krueger,
2001). The relatively recent literature on the economic impacts of climate change has turned
the spotlight onto quantifying the effect of climate on a number of economic outcomes
of interest (e.g., agricultural yields, mortality rates, electricity and water demand). This
literature has often found a nonlinear relationship between climate and these outcomes,
with extremely warm temperatures being especially important (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts,
2009). Climate is a long average of weather at a given location. To identify the causal effect
of climate on these outcomes, the literature has generally relied on either climate normals
(i.e., long averages of observed weather in a cross sectional setting) or day-to-day (or year-to-
year) fluctuations in observed weather as explanatory variables across time and space. The
econometrician’s choice of a weather versus a climate measure as an explanatory variable
critically affects the interpretation of the estimated coefficients in the econometric model:
that is, whether the outcome is a true climate response or a short run weather elasticity.
       Anyone who has ever struggled with station-level weather data is well aware of the
fact that since the beginning of weather monitoring in the 1800s, stations are born and die
and almost all have a large number of missing observations. Further, there is not necessar-
ily a weather station in each location of interest to the economist. In order to overcome
these issues, a number of gridded weather datasets have been developed; these provide com-
plete coverage over land by extrapolating existing weather information from monitors over
a grid. Although many of these datasets are free and easily imported into formats used by
economists, there are five pitfalls that empirical researchers should be aware of before using

                                               1
these datasets in econometric settings. First, while many of the gridded weather products
that are available reproduce very similar average temperatures for the majority of grid cells,
the derived deviations around the mean can be significantly different. Second, if one is in-
terested in creating a weather series for a geographic region, simply averaging non-missing
weather station data for stations in the region introduces measurement error, which has
well understood econometric consequences. Third, the correlation between weather vari-
ables (e,g., rainfall and temperature) across space varies significantly in sign and magnitude.
This can lead to the classic problem of indeterminate omitted variables bias in applications
that fail to control for the full suite of weather indicators. Fourth, weather indicators of-
ten display significant spatial correlation due to the underlying data generating process as
well as the extrapolation methods employed. This may lead to significant multicollinearity,
which in turn may lead to inflated standard errors on included weather variables. Finally,
because the weather stations used to construct the gridded products come in and out of
existence, there may be artificial variation and breakpoints in the temperature series, which
the econometrician needs to examine, especially when working on a small geographic region.
          The majority of recent economic studies use the statistically estimated causal effect
of weather on the economic outcome of interest to simulate the future impacts of climate
change, based on the output of Global Climate Models (GCMs), on that outcome. GCMs1
are physics-based models that provide long run predictions of climate. These models are
sometimes also called AOGCMs [Atmosphere-Ocean GCMs], or simply, and most commonly,
climate models.
          Economists are increasingly using weather data and climate model output in econo-
metric analyses to simulate future economic impacts of climate change. However, our ex-
perience has been that most economists have little or no understanding of GCMs and that
they often make critical mistakes in using their output. Thus, our goal here is to provide
economic researchers considering the use of weather and climate model output with a guide
  1
      Early on these were known as General Circulation Models (see e.g., Phillips 1956).



                                                      2
to what products are available and, most importantly, with a discussion of the most com-
mon mistakes and how to avoid them. We begin in the next section with an introduction
to weather data, including a summary of the types of datasets available. Next we provide a
more detailed discussion of the five common pitfalls mentioned earlier. This is followed by a
brief overview of GCMs – how they work and what output they provide as well as a number
of suggestions for further reading. Perhaps most importantly, we identify two common and
significant errors that often occur when GCM output is used to simulate the future impacts
of climate change on an outcome of interest, which are related to GCM model selection and
spatial and temporal aggregation of GCM output. We present a summary and conclusions
in the final section.



2.     An Introduction to Weather Data

As noted in the introduction, the difference between weather and climate is basically a matter
of time. Weather is the condition of the atmosphere over a short period of time, while climate
is the behavior of the atmosphere over a relatively long period of time. Since roughly 1850,
weather outcomes have been measured and recorded through a global network of weather
stations and, more recently, satellites. Daily weather data at stations throughout the world
are freely available from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA
2011a). Additional raw station data (with varying degrees of spatial and temporal coverage
and temporal resolution) can be found at NOAA (2011b). However, these sources do not
provide a complete record because many countries regard their weather data as proprietary
and often charge exorbitant fees for such data (e.g., India), thus effectively limiting their
availability. Moreover, the spatial and temporal coverage of weather stations varies greatly
across the globe, with higher spatial density and longer time series at stations in countries
with historically higher incomes (e.g., the U.S. and the EU 15).




                                              3
2.1     Gridded Weather Data Products

Gridded weather data sets use interpolation across space and time to combine available
weather station data into a balanced panel of observations on a fixed spatial scale or grid.
This approach deals with the problem of missing observations at a given station or missing
data because a station does/did not exist at a particular location. One such product, the
Parameter-elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes Model (PRISM, 2009), produces
monthly estimates of weather on a 2.5x2.5 mile scale for the contiguous United States. Each
grid approximates a weather measure for the spatial unit by interpolating the daily station
data while accounting for elevation, wind direction, rain shadows, and many other factors.
This elaborate procedure is possible in the US because there are several thousand weather
stations that produce and make available daily records for many different weather indicators.
        The Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia produces a global gridded
weather data set (CRU, 2013) that provides monthly estimates on a 0.5x0.5 degree scale.
This scale corresponds roughly to grids that are 35 miles across at the equator. Willmott,
Matsuura and Legates (2010) provide another gridded data product (often referred to as
the Delaware or UDEL dataset because it was produced by the University of Delaware),
which has the same spatial and temporal resolution as the CRU (2008) product, but uses
a somewhat different dataset and extrapolation algorithm. Most notably, the CRU product
provides data on both monthly minimum and maximum temperatures (i.e., the average of
all daily minimums and maximums), while the Delaware data set provides only the monthly
average temperature.2
        Many data products include the number of stations and the dates of coverage for
each grid. The most pronounced absence of data is for poor regions whose governments do
not prioritize weather data collection and for regions with few inhabitants, such as deserts
or over oceans. In fact, there are some grids covering land areas that do not have a single
   2
    The CRU dataset (version TS2.1) ended in 2002. The updated dataset version TS 3.2 extends coverage
through 2011. In early 2013, the Delaware dataset coverage ended in 2008, but it is currently being extended.




                                                     4
weather station.


2.2    Data Assimilation

An alternative approach to the spatial extrapolation algorithms just discussed that climate
scientists have developed for filling in the holes for observationally sparse regions is data as-
similation, which produces data sets that the climate community generally calls reanalyses.
Data assimilation is the process by which observational data are combined with a physics-
based model (similar to a climate model, which is discussed later). The model increases the
extent of information from locations where observations exist to more data-sparse regions,
thus providing estimates of weather/climate for data-sparse regions that are based on phys-
ical laws described by the model as well as observations elsewhere. These types of data sets
have been used by applied economists studying the developing world (e.g. Guiteras, 2010,
Schlenker and Lobell, 2010, Hsiang et al., 2011), but they have not been widely adopted.
       The process of data assimilation is not unlike an economist’s use of a structural model
to interpolate missing observations. Data assimilation seeks to minimize a loss function
subject to a large set of difference equations, which are derived from fundamental physical
principles (e.g., the conservation of energy). More recently, such reanalysis efforts have tried
to estimate the state of the global environment over a long sequence of periods by optimally
fitting a single dynamic model to all those periods simultaneously. This process is difficult
and costly, and thus only a few research centers offer regularly updated data sets. The
National Center for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) in the United States (Kistler et al.
2001) and the European Center for Medium-range Weather Forecasting (ECMWF, 2010)
produce the two most commonly used reanalysis products.
       It is important to note that reanalysis output cannot be forced to perfectly match
observational data. This is because reanalysis output has both limited resolution and is
influenced by the GCM even when observations are present. Moreover, reanalysis is con-
ducted with models that, like economic models, are imperfect and contain systematic biases.


                                               5
Constraining these models with the data that are fed into them does not always correct sat-
isfactorily for the model’s built-in biased behavior. Although reanalysis provides estimates
that may be better than what would otherwise be available for regions where observations
are sparse or of poor quality, the reanalysis output for such regions is still basically a model
prediction, which is likely to be less accurate than for more observation-rich regions.



3.     Five Potential Pitfalls

We turn next to a discussion of the five main pitfalls of using these weather data products in
econometric settings and how to avoid them. In order to examine these issues it is important
to understand that studies on the economic impacts of climate change on economic sectors
(e.g., agriculture) have used two distinct approaches to estimate response functions. First,
early studies relied on cross-sectional variation in weather or climate in different locations to
explain variation in the outcome variable of interest (e.g., Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw,
1994, Kelly, Kolstad and Mitchell, 2005). However, one limitation of the cross-sectional
approach is that there may be unobservable variables that vary across these spatial units,
which are likely correlated with the climate/weather indicator used. Therefore, recent stud-
ies have adopted a second approach that focuses on a panel data analysis, which controls
for space and time fixed effects. (e.g., Auffhammer, Ramanathan and Vincent, 2006, De-
schenes and Greenstone, 2007, Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). Fixed effects estimators rely
on variation across time within a spatial unit (e.g., a county) as the source of identifying
variation rather than variation across these spatial units. This means that the underlying
identification relates time series deviations from the location-specific mean in the climate
indicators to deviations in the outcome variable of interest.




                                               6
3.1       Pitfall 1: The Choice Of Weather Dataset

Although the economic implications of either approach (i.e., long-run versus short-run adap-
tation in panel versus cross-sectional studies) have been discussed elsewhere (e.g., Lobell
and Burke, Chapters 5+6, 2010), the practical issue of which weather data set to use has
received no attention in the literature. As we will show here, most gridded weather data sets
agree on the average value of weather variables across space (i.e., places that are on average
hot or cold), but they are not in full agreement about the timing or magnitude of deviations
from this mean, which is the source of identifying variation in panel data studies. This is
a more serious problem for areas with a small number of weather stations because the data
must be interpolated from stations that are further removed and hence might experience id-
iosyncratic shocks. We show this lack of correlation in the deviations using the three global
gridded weather data sets discussed earlier:

   • The CRU data set (version TS2.1), which uses a statistical interpolation procedure
        without reanalysis and gives monthly minimum and maximum temperature as well as
        precipitation on a 0.5x0.5 degree grid (Mitchell and Jones, 2005).

   • The Willmott, Matsuura and Legates (2010) UDEL data set, which uses a statistical
        interpolation procedure without reanalysis and gives monthly average temperature as
        well as precipitation on a 0.5x0.5 degree grid.

   • The reanalysis data from NCEP/National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR)
        (Kistler et al. 2001), which gives daily minimum and maximum temperature and total
        precipitation on a non-uniform grid (1.875 degrees longitude, and roughly 1.90 degrees
        latitude, although the latter is not evenly spaced).3

         CRU and UDEL are statistically interpolated, while NCEP uses data assimilation
with a physical model as discussed earlier. We will focus here on two variables that are
available in all three data sets: average temperature and total precipitation. We calculate
  3
      This data set is sometimes called the NCEP/NCAR/DOE (i.e., U.S. Department of Energy) reanalysis.

                                                   7
country averages by taking a weighted average across grid cells that overlap a country’s
boundary for the months of the primary maize growing season (Sacks et al., 2010). We
define the growing season as extending from the first of the month in which it begins to
the end of the month when it ends because two of the three weather data sets provide
only monthly values. In this way we are able to average observations over the same time
period for all three data sets. Next, we calculate the weight given to each grid in a county
as the share of the country’s land area that the grid covers. This allows us to derive the
average temperature (the average between the minimum and maximum temperatures for
those datasets that report the minimum and maximum) as well as total precipitation by
country over the period 1960-1999. Several recent studies have used similar country-level
aggregates and averages (Dell et al. 2008, Schlenker and Lobell, 2010, Hsiang 2010).


3.1.1    Correlations of country level climate normals across data products

First, we compare average outcomes across locations by deriving average temperature and
precipitation over 1960-1999 to get one observation per country. We find that the correlation
between the data based on the statistical interpolation procedures (CRU and UDEL) for av-
erage temperatures is 0.998, while it is 0.990 between NCEP and either CRU or UDEL. For
total precipitation, the correlation between CRU and UDEL for average season-total precip-
itation is 0.985 and 0.882 between NCEP and CRU (and 0.883 between NCEP and UDEL).
This indicates that the three data sources provide similar estimates concerning which areas
of the world are hot and which are cold on average. This is a reassuring finding for studies
that rely on cross-sectional variation across countries. For both average temperature and
average precipitation, the correlation is slightly lower between the reanalysis data (NCEP)
and the two statistical interpolation techniques (CRU and UDEL).4
   4
     We also examined a fourth dataset, NCC (Ngo-Duc et al., 2005), which is a hybrid of NCEP and CRU.
That is, it scales the NCEP reanalysis output using a constant monthly factor so that the 1948-2000 average
equals the CRU average. Not surprisingly, for our 1960-1999 sample, the correlation between NCC and CRU
for average season-total precipitation exceeds 0.99.




                                                    8
3.1.2    Correlations of country level annual fluctuations across data products

It is difficult to predict how weather variables change year-to-year when weather is not ob-
served in a specific location or time period. To illustrate this point, we construct annual
deviations from the country-specific mean in each data set over the 1960-99 period. This
provides us with a 40-year panel rather than a single cross section of normals. We find
that for average temperature, the correlation coefficients between models are significantly
lower compared to those discussed earlier. The pairwise correlation coefficients are: CRU
and UDEL: 0.917; NCEP and CRU 0.742; NCEP and UDEL: 0.724. For precipitation, the
correlation coefficients across datasets are even lower. This is likely due to the fact that pre-
cipitation is less smooth than temperature in space and time, which makes the extrapolation
algorithm employed more important.5 The pairwise correlation coefficients are: CRU and
UDEL: 0.698; NCEP and CRU: 0.299; and NCEP and UDEL: 0.269. While the correlations
are especially low when we compare deviations in the reanalysis data (NCEP) to the sta-
tistical interpolation methods (CRU and UDEL), the drop to a correlation coefficient below
0.7 for CRU-UDEL is significant as well, because both methods are statistical interpolation
routines using raw station data. So whether an outcome is above or below normal – and by
how much – depends crucially on which weather data set is being used.


3.1.3    Across-country heterogeneity in correlations of annual fluctuations

The average correlations for both cross-section and panel data mask considerable hetero-
geneity by country. To illustrate this point, we construct weather shocks by weighting each
grid cell by the amount of maize that is grown within it (Monfreda et al., 2005), a com-
mon approach for examining the agricultural impacts of climate change. We find that the
pairwise correlation coefficients among weather deviations for season-total precipitation in
the United States are: CRU and UDEL: 0.963; NCEP and CRU: 0.758; and NCEP and
   5
    For some reanalysis products precipitation is generated by the model even if precipitation observations
exist.




                                                    9
UDEL: 0.714. The deviations are much more highly correlated than when all countries are
included, presumably because of the good observational network in the United States. In
contrast, precipitation shocks constructed over the maize growing area in Mexico have pair-
wise correlation coefficients of: CRU and UDEL: 0.726; NCEP and CRU: 0.069; and NCEP
and UDEL: 0.307. This illustrates that in regions with limited monitoring networks, which
is generally the case in the developing world, the weather shock used to identify response
coefficients in econometric estimation varies significantly depending on which data source is
used.
        In summary, when economists are conducting panel studies that rely on deviations
from averages, they should be careful about which data source they use because measurement
errors - and related statistical concerns such as attenuation bias - are amplified by demeaning
explicitly or via fixed effects (Fisher et al., 2012). Conducting sensitivity checks by using
more than one data source can be helpful in determining whether the results are robust.


3.2     Pitfall 2: Averaging Daily Station-Level Data Across Space

Another pitfall of using weather data products in econometric estimation concerns averaging
station level data across space. Several economic studies that link economic outcomes to
weather (or control for weather) use inverse distance-weighted averages for the closest avail-
able weather stations (see e.g., Mendelsohn et al. 1994, Deschenes and Greenstone 2007).
As with the panel versus cross section data issue, such an approach works well for a cross
sectional analysis, but becomes problematic when fixed effects are included in a panel data
setting, especially when both location and time fixed effects are included. This is because
weather station data are notoriously spotty (i.e., not only do weather stations come in and
out of existence, they are also often turned off or values are simply not recorded). A time
series of inverse distance-weighted averages of weather station data is likely to include vari-
ation from the birth and death of stations and observations that are missing for a given
period. When location fixed effects remove average weather outcomes at the interpolated


                                              10
location, and temporal fixed effects are included, the remaining weather variation is greatly
diminished and the variation that is due to stations coming in and out of the sample can
potentially account for a significant share of the overall variance. For example, Fisher et al.
(2012) provide an example where the noise-to-signal ratio after removing location and tem-
poral fixed effects is 7:1, i.e., the measurement error greatly exceeds the variation that is used
in the identification, which is likely to result in significant attenuation bias in estimation.
       A possible alternative to averaging weather station data that report weather indica-
tors on a given day is to first fill in missing weather station data by regressing it on the
closest surrounding stations and then to predict missing observations at a station (Schlenker
and Roberts 2009, Auffhammer and Kellogg 2011). Then the full weather record is derived
by interpolating a balanced panel of patched weather station data. This approach keeps
the set of stations that are used in the interpolation constant and ensures that the resulting
variation is not caused by variation in station coverage.


3.3    Pitfall 3: Correlation of Weather Variables

The third pitfall relates to the classic omitted variables problem. Many economic studies,
including (but not limited to) those estimating climate change impacts, have focused on
the impact of one weather variable in isolation, e.g., regressing income only on precipitation
shocks (Miguel et al., 2004). While precipitation shocks are exogenous and hence a plausible
instrument for income, it is important to note that to the extent that precipitation and
temperature are correlated, the coefficient on precipitation will measure the combined effect
of the two variables. This is particularly important in the climate change context if the
estimated coefficient is used to estimate climate change impacts under a climate influenced by
human activity. In order to obtain unbiased estimates of the effects of changes in precipitation
and temperatures, which are historically correlated, both variables must be included in the
regression equation, especially if the correlation is predicted to change in the future.
       To underline the importance of this observed correlation between different climate


                                               11
indicators, Figure 1 shows the correlation coefficients between annual average temperature
and total precipitation for each of the CRU (version 2.1) time series (TS) grid cells for the
years 1960-1999. The map indicates clearly that the correlations vary greatly and that there
are regions with both significant positive and significant negative correlation between pre-
cipitation and temperature. This implies that if one controls for only one of the two weather
variables in a regression, the sign of the omitted variable bias will depend on the location
under study. Hot areas generally show negative correlation (as high as -0.7) because more
precipitation and the associated evaporation results in cooling and lower average tempera-
tures. On the other hand, a positive correlation is generally observed in cooler areas because
increased precipitation is associated with the import of warm and humid tropical air, and
cloud cover keeps the underlying surface warmer. It is noteworthy that some large and
not-so-large countries have areas of both negative and positive correlation (e.g., US, Russia,
France, Spain).
       It is also important to note that climatic variables other than temperature and precip-
itation (e.g., relative humidity, solar radiation, wind speed and direction) may bias empirical
estimates through the classic omitted variables problem. The existence of these other vari-
ables and their correlation with temperature or precipitation may be location specific. For
example, in a panel regression with country and year fixed-effects and country-specific trends,
Hsiang (2010) finds that exposure to hurricane winds in Caribbean Basin countries is cor-
related over time with a country’s local surface temperature, with each one degree Celsius
increase in a country’s summer surface temperature being correlated with a 2.6 (+/-1.2)
meter per second increase in area-averaged wind exposure in that country. This increase
in wind exposure is substantial, since it raises expected hurricane damages by 20% (Hsiang
and Narita, 2012), suggesting potentially biased estimates of temperature impacts if wind
exposure is excluded from the analysis.
       In summary, if temperature, precipitation and other atmospheric variables are corre-
lated, a study that seeks to extrapolate (based on an estimated response function) potential


                                              12
climate impacts must include all of these variables in order to obtain an unbiased estimate
of the effect of each variable.


3.4     Pitfall 4: Spatial Correlation

Climate variables are inherently correlated across space and time. While variation in weather
is often considered random across time, variation across space displays significantly less
randomness, especially at smaller spatial scales. This means that some of the weather or
climate variables that we use in econometric estimation are highly spatially correlated and
that estimates of standard errors will be biased unless steps are taken to correct for spatial
correlation.
        To provide a sense of the degree of spatial correlation in these datasets, Figure 2
shows the average correlation of annual mean temperature at each CRU (version TS 2.1)
grid cell with the eight surrounding grid cells for the 1960-1999 period. As discussed earlier,
errors might propagate from one grid cell to the next for both interpolated station data
and data assimilation methods. If the model correctly accounts for all weather variables,
the spatial dependence of the regressors will not be a problem. Most economic studies
to date control only for temperature and precipitation. However, other weather variables
such as wind direction, humidity, and vapor pressure might also have an impact, and these
omitted variables are presumably spatially correlated as well. If they have a causal effect on
the outcome of interest, as for example, vapor pressure deficit (which is closely related to
relative humidity) has on crop yields (Roberts et al., forthcoming), then they become part
of the error term, which will then also be spatially correlated. Thus, it is imperative to take
this spatial correlation into account in econometric estimation.6
        There are three main approaches to account for spatial correlation:

   • Use a spatial weighting matrix. This is most efficient when the weighting matrix is
   6
    This will generally result in significantly larger standard errors. For example, Schlenker and Roberts
(2009) find that accounting for spatial correlation increases standard errors by a factor of 6.



                                                   13
       known, but it will result in biased estimates if the weighting matrix is misspecified;

    • Use the nonparametric approach provided by Conley (1991), which does not require
       one to specify a weighting matrix; or

    • Use a grouped bootstrap where years are resampled and replaced. This approach
       requires that year-to-year fluctuations be random, but errors within a year can be
       correlated.7

        Finally, it is important to note that many of the gridded weather data sets we have
discussed simply interpolate station data. In data-sparse regions, several grids might be
linked to the same set of weather stations. This will lead to highly multicollinear weather
variables that do not allow for proper identification (especially in a panel setting where grid
averages are removed) because the remaining variation is simply due to the fact that slightly
different weights have been used for different weather stations.
        In summary, one has to adjust for spatial correlation to obtain unbiased standard
errors and valid confidence bands.


3.5     Pitfall 5: Endogenous Weather Coverage

The final pitfall concerns why weather stations are observed in some areas and time periods
and not in others. One strand of the economics literature examines how the relationship
between weather variables and economic variables of interest might change due to large policy
changes, such as a country becoming independent, or an extreme exogenous shock, such as
a natural disaster (Kahn, 2005). The most obvious method for accounting for such changes
is the now standard difference-in-difference analysis. One concern with this approach is that
if the degree of measurement error varies between the pre and post intervention (or event)
date, the treatment effect estimate will very likely be biased because of classic attenuation
   7
    However, in many areas of the world, the independence of year-to-year variation is questionable because
of planetary-scale climate oscillations, such as the El Nio-Southern Oscillation, which may be autoregressive
(Hsiang et al., 2011).


                                                     14
bias concerns. However, if weather variables are measured consistently, the difference-in-
difference regression design will be free of this bias. Thus it is important that weather
station coverage not change with the policy change (or exogenous shock) because it could
introduce measurement error and result in a downward bias in the estimated coefficients in
the post-intervention period.8
        To examine this issue in more detail, we downloaded daily data from the Global Sum-
mary of the Day database maintained by NOAA’s National Climatic Data Center (NOAA,
2011a), counted the number of days a weather station within a country had non-missing
observations, and summed it across all stations. This provides the total count of daily
station-level observations in a country. While most countries show an upward trend in this
measure over time, the results for some transition countries are striking. For example, Ro-
mania had an upward trend until it peaked at 67,727 station-days in 1988. Following the fall
of the iron curtain in 1989, the number decreased rapidly until it stabilized around 11,000
station-days in 2003-2007, decreasing coverage by a factor of six. This suggests that the
results from a difference-in-difference analysis of how, for example, farmers responded to
weather shocks before and after the fall of the iron curtain would have to be interpreted
with caution.
        In summary, when using any of the gridded data products available, it is crucial to
determine whether the underlying station data have changed over time (i.e., before and after
a major shock or event).



4.      Climate Models and Their Output

If the econometrician has successfully estimated the causal dose-response relationship be-
tween socio-economic outcomes and historical weather or climate data, often the logical next
step is to use that estimated relationship to predict future impacts due to anthropogenic cli-
  8
    This issue is closely related to the discussion about spatial correlation that is due to different interpolation
methods over a sparse data matrix.



                                                        15
mate change. This step requires making forecasts of future climate under the assumption of
heightened atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, which is usually accomplished
by employing output from a spatially-explicit physics-based model of the global climate,
which, as discussed in the Introduction, is known as a Global Climate Model or GCM. This
section provides an overview of GCMs and discusses some of the major potential pitfalls of
using these models in the simulation of future economic impacts of climate change.


4.1     Components and Properties of GCMs

Although GCMs have several components that are parameterized using statistical proce-
dures, the core of every GCM is a set of deterministic mathematical equations that describe
the laws of motion for a fluid. These laws were derived in fluid mechanics laboratories over
centuries and GCMs use numerical approximations of these laws. To solve these equations,
GCMs approximate the atmosphere and ocean, which are continuous fluids, with some form
of numerical discretization. The simplest way to visualize this procedure (though it is less
sophisticated than what is typically used in current practice) is a three-dimensional grid
of boxes, each of which possesses several state variables, for example temperature or air
pressure, which vary across space from one box to the next and evolve over time, but are
uniform within each box.9 Given a three-dimensional structure of these state-variables at
time t, a GCM solves for the variables’ structure at time t+1 using the model’s numerical
representation of fluid-mechanical laws. Following an initialization that specifies the struc-
ture of these variables in the very first time period, GCMs iteratively repeat this calculation
for time-steps of about 30 minutes, gradually constructing a projection for the future state
                10
of the world.
        GCMs typically take forecasts of human activity as exogenous. To make climate
   9
     The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2011a) provides a brief description and graphic
to illustrate this structure.
  10
     For introductory materials on the structure of these models, see Tebaldi C. and Knutti, R. (2010) and
Section 8.1.3 of IPCC (2007). For more advanced descriptions consult Warner (2011) or IPCC (2007).
Donner, Schubert and Somerville (2011), Weart (2008) and Weart (2011) provide detailed histories of GCM
development.

                                                   16
projections across different GCMs comparable, modelers simulate future climate outcomes
under a set of standardized scenarios that exogenously prescribe a time series of future
greenhouse gas emissions, aerosols, and other short-lived pollutants based on demographic,
economic and regulatory assumptions.11
        When the emissions scenario is held fixed, GCMs differ primarily in their numeri-
cal representations of the climate’s state and its various processes. Having discretized the
atmosphere and ocean with grid-cells (the aforementioned boxes) of various resolutions12 ,
GCMs selectively represent processes that occur on spatial scales smaller than these grid-
cells - known as sub-grid scales - using parameterizations, which are formulations that are
not based as directly on the known laws of physics as are the resolved fluid dynamics, but in-
corporate a greater degree of empiricism or theoretical construction. For example, chemical
reactions, vegetation responses, cloud formation, and rainfall are all sub-grid scale processes
whose numerical representations may vary across GCMs (Section 8.2 in IPCC, 2007). Un-
like the core fluid-mechanical equations that have a standard representation in a discretized
global model, there is no standard representation of these sub-grid scale processes, and thus
the improvement of their representation in GCMs continues to be an active area of research.
There have been various community efforts to try to accelerate advances in this area by
comparing the performance of models, most notably the Coupled Model Intercomparison
Project or CMIP (see Meehl et al, 2007), and conducting studies that attempt to score the
forecast ability, known as skill, of different models along various dimensions (see Reichler
and Kim (2008) and Sections 8.3 and 8.4 of IPCC (2007)). Different models have different
skill, and thus we advise economics researchers who are studying specific regions or processes
and are interested in selecting a GCM projection to first consult the appropriate literature
as well as specialists in the field.13
  11
      These assumptions and their resulting scenarios were established in the IPCC’s Special Report on Emis-
sions Scenarios (SRES) (IPCC, 2000) and are summarized in IPCC (2011b).
   12
      See the supplemental tables to Reichler and Kim (2008) or IPCC Scientific Basis Table 8.1 [http://
www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch8s8-2.html] for a concise summary of these climate
model properties.
   13
      For researchers seeking intuition for the numerical setup of GCMs, they can download a one-dimensional


                                                    17
4.2     Differences in Model Predictions

There are over 20 well-known climate models, all with readily available output.14 This section
discusses how the choice of GCM affects estimates of climate impacts. In their survey of
economic assessments of climate change impacts, Burke et al. (2011) found that 50% of the
studies used the model developed by the Hadley Centre to calculate economic climate change
impacts across a variety of sectors, of which 17% used only the Hadley model. Among health
impact studies, 38% relied on the Hadley model alone. However, there is no evidence that
the Hadley model or, in fact, any other model should be the preferred climate model to
use. This is supported by the fact that for some climate indicators, such as precipitation,
the predictions for certain regions vary dramatically across models. In the extreme, some
models predict wetter summers for West Africa and others predict drier summers all using
the same SRES scenarios.
        One way to address the challenge of having to choose one GCM is to use model or
ensemble averages (e.g., Tebaldi and Knutti, 2007). This decreases the reliance on a single
model. However, we believe it is important to either report the impacts for a number of
climate models separately or to average them and indicate the variability in impacts across
models. This is not difficult to do and, given the low costs of data storage on personal
computers and the access to free bandwidth for most academics, there is no reason not to.
Alternatively, if predicted changes within a study area vary more across than within climate
models, then presenting a set of uniform scenarios might be informative and also highlight
the sensitivity of the results.
climate model tutorial built by the Goddard Institute of Space Studies for teaching purposes (http://icp.
giss.nasa.gov/education/geebitt/). More ambitious researchers can download and run a full open source
GCM, the Community Earth System Model, produced by the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(http://www.cesm.ucar.edu/models/cesm1.0/).
   14
      Climate projections from GCMs running IPCC’s Special Report on Emissions Scenarios are available
free of charge, and model output can be downloaded from the IPCC’s data distribution website (http://
www.ipcc-data.org/) or the CMIP data distribution website (https://esg.llnl.gov:8443/index.jsp).
For summaries of climate projections from GCMs running SRES scenarios, see IPCC (2007) chapter 10
for global summaries and chapter 11 for regional summaries. The IPCC also provides an interactive data
visualization application online (http://www.ipcc-data.org/ddc_visualisation.html).




                                                   18
          We next turn to a set of issues that arise when one tries to match the time and spatial
scale of the GCM to that of the econometric model for simulation purposes.


4.3       Aggregation Bias

As described earlier, GCMs effectively divide the earth’s surface into a discrete grid, where
there is variation in climate across discrete grid cells, but climate statistics are homogenous
within each cell. For example, if one uses a climate model that provides output on a monthly
basis, it is assumed that temperatures within the month and among all locations within the
grid cell are constant.15 Such temporal and spatial aggregation might be inappropriate and
produce biased impact estimates. While many models are being run at a resolution that
is higher than 2x2 degree (for the next IPCC (AR5) report), most of the economic impact
studies in the existing literature use model output at a 2x2 degree or coarser resolution.
While a 2x2-degree cell may be small from the perspective of the global climate, it is not
small from the perspective of human systems. For example, a 2x2-degree grid spacing at the
equator is equivalent to a grid width of 222 kilometers (138 miles). It is not hard to imagine
that a stretch of this length will have vastly varying climates (e.g., driving east from San
Diego’s coastal climate to El Centro’s dry and hot desert climate). This aggregation issue
becomes especially problematic if the underlying topography is mountainous or located near
the ocean.


4.3.1      Quantifying Aggregation Bias

To examine the severity of this aggregation bias, we compare average temperatures predicted
by the Hadley III GCM to a fine-scaled (2.5x2.5 mile grid) weather data set (PRISM, 2009)
for the 48 contiguous United States (see Figure 3). Figure 3 shows quite clearly that this
bias is most significant in mountainous areas, which are also usually less populated areas.
At the extremes, we see that the bias can reach +25◦ C at some mountaintops. This is not
 15
      Some models have within-grid deterministic variation, but this is a relatively recent effort.



                                                       19
surprising because surface temperatures tend to fall about 7◦ C per 1000m in elevation, which
means that mountains are much colder than areas at lower elevations in the same grid cell.
The aggregation bias exists not only for remote mountainous regions but also for heavily
populated areas, which are often located near oceans. In fact, figure 3 indicates that the
entire western seaboard has biases, and that those biases are significantly greater than any
predicted warming. The average absolute difference in temperature across the entire United
States is 3.0◦ C and the root mean squared error is 4.0◦ C, which are both significantly larger
than the average predicted changes by the end of the century under the SRES forced climate
change scenarios. This means that if one simply interprets GCM output at a grid cell as an
unbiased forecast of climate at any location in that grid cell, the bias may be a much larger
driver of projected impacts than actual warming.
       Moreover, while the severity of the aggregation bias varies by location, it also varies
by the climate indicator one is using. For example, if we use the annual mean temperature
rather than the average daily maximum July temperature, the absolute error reduces to
1.8◦ C, and the root mean squared error to 2.4◦ C. Thus the magnitude of the bias varies by
location and indicator used.
       This bias is especially relevant for studies of the economic impacts of climate change.
These studies generally parameterize a response function between for example, electricity
demand and temperature, using observations from a weather station-based dataset and ob-
served electricity demand. In order to calculate the counterfactual electricity demand under
a scenario with climate change, one must have a baseline climate and a counterfactual cli-
mate. However, if one uses an average of observed gridded weather products as the baseline
climate and predictions of climate from a GCM as the counterfactual climate at a future
date, the resulting estimated impacts will be due to both the simulated warming and the
bias displayed in Figure 3. If the response function is nonlinear in weather/climate, as has
been shown to be the case in agriculture (e.g., Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) and electric-
ity demand (e.g., Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat 2011 & 2012), then this bias may be


                                              20
amplified or offset depending on the nature of the non-linearity. However, in either case,
the resulting impact estimates will be biased. We next turn to a simple approach, which
overcomes this issue.


4.3.2    Correcting Aggregation Bias

The literature has suggested several ways to correct such biases. In addition to using cli-
mate models with finer resolutions, the most commonly used approach is based on regression
methods, whereby the researcher establishes a correlation between the historical grid values
from the GCM and local station-based data and then uses this fitted regression relation-
ship with future values of GCM output to arrive at downscaled GCM predictions.16 Fowler
et al. (2007) provide a review of the main approaches used in practice and compare their
performance at selected locations. They note that there is a large literature examining the
performance of different downscaling approaches for different regions and climate variables.
They conclude that there is no single best approach for all variables (e.g., maximum tem-
perature, rainfall, wind speed) and locations. Moreover, they find that downscaled versions
of all GCMs at a desired temporal resolution covering all regions of interest are simply not
available. If one is interested in daily values, which are important for many economic appli-
cations, including agriculture and electricity demand, then a downscaled version of a climate
model delivering daily output is needed. Such data sets are available for some regions, such
as California (Cayan, 2009), or at coarser time resolution nationally (e.g., Maurer et al, 2007)
and globally (e.g., Maurer 2009).
        In the absence of an appropriate downscaled dataset for the region and time resolution
of interest, the most common practice is to derive predicted changes for each (coarse) GCM
grid and then add these to an average of the historic baseline data used in the parameteriza-
tion of the response function, thereby preserving within-GCM grid variation. This approach
subtracts out the location-specific bias only if this bias is stationary in time. However, this
  16
   Innovations on this basic approach have involved non-linear estimation, neural networks, and Bayesian
methods.


                                                  21
approach shifts the historic time-series at a location by the predicted change, leaving its
variance unchanged. If researchers are concerned about predicted changes in the mean and
the variance, then the fine-scaled historic deviations from location-specific averages can be
rescaled by the ratio of the predicted variance at the GCM grid in the future relative to
the baseline. It should be noted, however, that there is much less consensus among models
concerning the predicted changes in the variance than in the mean.
       In summary, it is crucial that economists not simply use GCM output as a direct
forecast of future climate when estimating impacts relative to a weather station-based base-
line climate. One simple solution is to simply add the predicted change in weather to the
baseline climate when calculating impacts.



5.     Conclusions

This article has reviewed the most common gridded weather products and outlined five
pitfalls when using them as regressors in econometric models. More specifically, we have
emphasized that weather anomalies (deviations from normal) vary greatly between data
sources, and are highly correlated between weather measures and across space. Researchers
need to address these issues when constructing and using weather shocks. Simply averaging
weather stations without correcting for missing values will result in anomalies that consist
largely of noise. We have also discussed the basic features of Global Climate Models and
examined issues related to spatial scale when using these models in the estimation of the
economic impacts of climate change.
       In closing, we want to emphasize that when using gridded datasets of historical or
future climate, it is important to recognize that both types of datasets are very different from
observed weather. Moreover, although historical gridded data products are very convenient
because they often provide highly disaggregated weather for large geographic regions over
long time periods, this increased coverage comes at a cost. That is, the birth and death of



                                              22
weather stations, the frequent occurrence of missing values, and the spatial correlation in-
troduced by extrapolation algorithms, all create potential biases in the estimated coefficients
and standard errors if one uses these weather products as independent variables in econo-
metric analyses. In addition, when using Global Climate Model output as a counterfactual
of future climate, the choice of model has significant implications for the sign and magnitude
of the estimated impacts. This means it is important to account for the location-specific
biases of each model in order to avoid causing further biases in estimates of the economic
impacts of climate change.




                                              23
References

 [1] Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger. 2001. Instrumental Variables and the Search
     for Identication: From Supply and Demand to Natural Experiments. Journal of Eco-
     nomic Perspectives, 15:69-85.

 [2] Auffhammer, Maximilian and Anin Aroonruengsawat. 2011. Simulating the Impacts
     of Climate Change, Prices and Population on California’s Residential Electricity Con-
     sumption. Climatic Change. 109(S1): 191-210.

 [3] Auffhammer, Maximilian and Anin Aroonruengsawat. 2012. Eratum: Simulating the
     Impacts of Climate Change, Prices and Population on California’s Residential Electricity
     Consumption. Climatic Change. 113(3-4): pp 1101-1104.

 [4] Auffhammer, Maximilian and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. Clearing the Air? The Effects of
     Gasoline Content Regulation on Air Quality. American Economic Review, 101: 2687-
     2722.

 [5] Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David Lobell, Edward Miguel, Shanker Satyanath.
     2011. Incorporating Climate Uncertainty into Estimates of Climate Change Impacts,
     with Applications to U.S. and African Agriculture. NBER Working Paper 17092.

 [6] Cayan, Dan, Mary Tyree, Tapash Das, Mike Dettinger, Hugo Hidalgo, Ed Maurer, Peter
     Bromirski, Nicholas Graham, and Reihard Flick. 2009. Climate Change Scenarios and
     Sea Level Rise Estimates for the California 2009 Climate Change Scenarios Assessment.
     California Energy Commission PIER Program Report CEC-500-2009-014-F.

 [7] Climatic Research Unit (CRU) University of East Anglia. 2013. CRU Time Series (TS)
     high resolution gridded datasets 3.2. NCAS British Atmospheric Data Centre. http:
     //badc.nerc.ac.uk/view/badc.nerc.ac.uk__ATOM__dataent_1256223773328276

 [8] Conley, Timothy G. 1999. GMM Estimation with Cross Sectional Dependence. Journal
     of Econometrics, 92(1): 1-45.

 [9] Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2008. Climate Change and
     Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century, NBER Working Paper 14132.

[10] Deschenes, Olivier, and Michael Greenstone. 2007. The Economic Impacts of Climate
     Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather,
     American Economic Review, 97(1): 354-385.

[11] Donner, L. Schubert W. and Somerville, R. 2011. The Development of Atmospheric
     General Circulation Models. Cambridge University Press, New York.

[12] ECMWF. 2010. IFS Documentation Cy36r1. Part II: Data Assimilation.
     http://www.ecmwf.int/research/ifsdocs/CY36r1/ASSIMILATION/IFSPart2.pdf



                                             24
[13] Fisher, Anthony C., W. Michael Hanemann, Michael Roberts, and Wolfram Schlenker.
     2012. The Economic Impacts of Climate Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output
     and Random Fluctuations in Weather: Comment. American Economic Review, 102.
[14] Fisher, Ronald A. 1925. The Influence of Rainfall on the Yield of Wheat at Rothamsted.
     Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Containing Papers
     of a Biological Character. 213: 89-142.
[15] Fowler, H.J., Blenkinsop, S. and Tebaldi, C. 2007. Linking climate change modelling to
     impacts studies: recent advances in downscaling techniques for hydrological modelling.
     International Journal of Climatology, 27(12), 1547-1578.
[16] Guiteras, Raymond. 2010. The Impact of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture. Work-
     ing Paper.
[17] Hsiang, Solomon M. 2010. Temperatures and Tropical Cyclones strongly affect economic
     production in the Caribbean and Central America. Proceedings of the National Academy
     of Sciences 107(35): 15367-15372.
[18] Hsiang, Solomon M., Kyle C. Meng and Mark A. Cane. 2011. Civil conflicts are associ-
     ated with the global climate. Nature, 476: 438-441.
[19] Hsiang, Solomon M., Daiju Narita. 2012. Adaptation to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from
     the Global Cross-Section. Climate Change Economics, 3(2): 1-28.
[20] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2000. Special Report Emissions Scenarios
     (SRES).
[21] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Working
     Group I: The Physical Science Basis http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/
     ar4/wg1/en/
[22] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2011a. What is a GCM? . http://www.
     ipcc-data.org/ddc_gcm_guide.html
[23] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2011b. Environmental Data and Scenarios.
     http://www.ipcc-data.org/ddc_envdata.html
[24] Kahn, Matthew. 2005. The death toll from natural disasters: the role of income, geog-
     raphy, and institutions. Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(2): 271-284.
[25] Kelly, David L., Charles D. Kolstad, and Glenn T. Mitchell. 2005. Adjustment costs
     from environmental change. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
     50(3): 468-495.
[26] Kistler, Robert, Eugenia Kalnay, William Collins, Suranjana Saha, Glenn White, John
     Woollen, Muthuvel Chelliah, Wesley Ebisuzaki, Masao Kanamitsu, Vernon Kousky,
     Huug van den Dool, Roy Jenne, and Michael Fiorino. 2001. The NCEPNCAR 50-Year
     Reanalysis: Monthly Means CD-ROM and Documentation. Bulletin of the American
     Meteorological Society, 82: 247-267.

                                            25
[27] Lobell, David B. and Marshall Burke. 2010. Climate Change and Food Security. Chap-
     ters 5-6. Springer.

[28] Maurer, Edwin P. 2009. http://www.engr.scu.edu/~emaurer/global_data/

[29] Maurer, Edwin P., Levi Brekke, Tom Pruitt, and Phillip B. Duffy. 2007. Fine-resolution
     climate projections enhance regional climate change impact studies, EOS Transaction
     American Geophysical Union, 88(47): 504.

[30] Meehl Gerald A., Curt Covey, Thomas Delworth, Mojib Latif, Bryant McAvaney, John
     F. B. Mitchell, Ronald J. Stouffer and Karl E. Taylor. 2007. The WCRP CMIP3 Mul-
     timodel Dataset: A New Era in Climate Change Research. Bulletin of the American
     Meteorological Society, 88: 1383-1394.

[31] Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus and Daigee Shaw. 1994. The Impact of
     Global Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis, American Economic Review,
     84(4): 753-771.

[32] Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti. 2004. Economic Shocks and
     Civil Conflict: An Instrumental Variables Approach. Journal of Political Economy,
     112(4): 725-753.

[33] Monfreda, Chad, Navin Ramankutty, and Jonathan A. Foley. 2008. Farming the planet:
     2. geographic distribution of crop areas, yields, physiological types, and net primary
     production in the year 2000. Global Biogeochemical Cycles, 22: 1-19.

[34] Ngo-Duc, T., J. Polcher, and K. Laval. 2010. A 53-year forcing data set for land surface
     models, Journal of Geophysical Research, 110: 1-13.

[35] NOAA. 2011a. Daily Global Historical Climatology Network. ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.
     gov/pub/data/ghcn/daily

[36] NOAA. 2011b. Daily Surface Weather Data.http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/oa/climate/
     climatedata.html#surface

[37] Phillips, Norman A. 1956: The general circulation of the atmosphere: A numerical
     experiment. Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 82 (352): 123-164.

[38] PRISM. 2009. Parameter-elevation Regressions on Independent Slopes Model. Oregon
     State University (http://www.prism.oregonstate.edu/). Accessed: 2009.

[39] Reichler, Thomas and Junsu Kim. 2008. How Well Do Coupled Models Simulate Today’s
     Climate? Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 89: 303-311.

[40] Roberts, Michal J., Wolfram Schlenker, and Jonathan Eyer. Forthcoming. Agronomic
     Weather Measures in Econometric Models of Crop Yield with Implications for Climate
     Change. American Journal of Agricultural Economics.



                                             26
[41] Sacks, William J., Delphine Deryng, Jonathan A. Foley, and Navin Ramankutty. 2010.
     Crop planting dates: an analysis of global patterns. Global Ecology and Biogeography,
     19: 607-620.

[42] Schlenker, Wolfram and David B. Lobell. 2010. Robust negative impacts of climate
     change on African agriculture. Environmental Research Letters, 5(1): 1-8.

[43] Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J. Roberts. 2009. Nonlinear Temperature Effects in-
     dicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields under Climate Change. Proceedings of the
     National Academy of Sciences, 106(37): 15594-15598.

[44] Tebaldi C. and Knutti, R. 2007. The use of the multi-model ensemble in probabilistic
     climate projections. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 365(1857): 2053-
     2075.

[45] Tebaldi C. and Knutti, R. 2010. Climate Models and Their Projections of Future
     Changes in Climate Change and Food Security, eds. Lobell D. and Burke M. Springer.

[46] Warner, T. T. 2011. Numerical Weather Prediction. Cambridge University Press, New
     York.

[47] Weart, S. 2008. The Discovery of Global Warming. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
     MA.

[48] Weart,     S.     2011.     General   Circulation          Models       of     Climate.
     http://www.aip.org/history/climate/GCM.htm

[49] Willmott, C. J., K. Matsuura, and D. R. Legates. 2010. Terrestrial Air Temperature:
     1900-2008 Gridded Monthly Time Series (1900 - 2008) http://climate.geog.udel.
     edu/~climate/html_pages/download.html

[50] Wright, Philip G. 1928. The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils. New York: MacMillan




                                             27
Figure 1: Correlation between Annual Average Temperature and Total Precipitation in
Each Grid Cell (CRU TS 2.1 Data 1960-1999)




Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                        28
Figure 2: Correlation of Average Annual Temperature at CRU Grid with Surrounding Eight Grid
Cells (CRU TS 2.1 Data 1960-1999).




Source: Authors’ calculations.
Notes: We have chosen a highly nonlinear scale (correlation to the power of 100) because all
correlations are extremely close to one.




                                            29
Figure 3: Aggregation Bias: Hadley Grid Averages versus PRISM Grid Averages in Each PRISM
Grid (1961-1999)




Source: Authors’ calculations.
Notes: The figure plots the difference in the average daily maximum temperature in the month of
July in the years 1960-1999 between the GCM (Hadley III), which has the coarser resolution, and
the fine scale weather grid (PRISM 2009). A positive number indicates that the GCM grid average
exceeds the PRISM average, which is based on interpolated station data.




                                              30
