                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            HOW PRO-POOR GROWTH AFFECTS THE DEMAND FOR ENERGY

                                             Paul Gertler
                                             Orie Shelef
                                          Catherine Wolfram
                                             Alan Fuchs

                                         Working Paper 19092
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19092


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2013




We are grateful to Arthur Van Benthem for generously sharing his cross-country data and to Lucas
Davis, Jakob Svensson and Deng Yongheng as well as seminar participants at Iowa State, MIT, Stanford,
University of Toronto, Tufts, Washington University, and attendees of the Energy Institute at Haas
Summer Camp and the Stockholm Climate-Economy conference for valuable comments. We previously
circulated this paper with the title, “Poverty, Growth and the Demand for Energy.” The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Paul Gertler, Orie Shelef, Catherine Wolfram, and Alan Fuchs. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Pro-Poor Growth Affects the Demand for Energy
Paul Gertler, Orie Shelef, Catherine Wolfram, and Alan Fuchs
NBER Working Paper No. 19092
May 2013
JEL No. Q41,Q47

                                                ABSTRACT

Most of the future growth in energy use is forecast to come from the developing world. Understanding
the likely pace and specific location of this growth is essential to inform decisions about energy infrastructure
investments and to improve greenhouse gas emissions forecasts. We argue that countries with pro-poor
economic growth will experience larger increases in energy demand than countries where growth is
more regressive. When poor households’ incomes go up, their energy demand increases along the
extensive margin as they buy energy-using assets for the first time. We also argue that the speed at
which households come out of poverty affects their asset purchase decisions.

We provide empirical support for these hypotheses by examining the causal impact of increases in
household income on asset accumulation and energy use in the context of Mexico’s conditional cash
transfer program. We find that transfers had a large effect on asset accumulation among the low-income
program beneficiaries, and the effect is greater when the cash is transferred over a shorter time period.
We apply lessons from the household analysis to aggregate energy forecast models using country-level
panel data. Our results suggest that existing forecasts could grossly underestimate future energy use
in the developing world.


Paul Gertler                                            Catherine Wolfram
Haas School of Business                                 Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley                      University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                                 Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER                                                and NBER
gertler@haas.berkeley.edu                               wolfram@haas.berkeley.edu

Orie Shelef                                             Alan Fuchs
Haas School of Business                                 United Nations Development Programme
University of California, Berkeley                      304 East 45th Street, FF-1272
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                                 New York, New York 10017
orie_shelef@haas.berkeley.edu                           alan.fuchs@undp.org
Understanding the likely growth in the demand for energy is critical for several reasons. First,
energy use is a key contributor to climate change as energy‐related emissions account for
three‐quarters of worldwide anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions.1 Forecasting the likely
path of greenhouse gas emissions is essential to understanding the range of possible effects of
climate change. And, expected country‐level emissions are critical inputs to any international
climate agreement. Negotiations that aim to include developing countries can break down if
the parties have different expectations about emissions paths. Second, investments in energy
infrastructure require long lead times, and most governments and energy companies base their
investment decisions on demand projections. Incorrect forecasts can lead to energy shortages
that affect both productivity and welfare. On a global scale, faster than anticipated growth in
energy demand can lead to significant increases in energy prices.

Aggregate forecasts of energy use and greenhouse gas emissions suggest that the developing
world will contribute to most of the growth over the next several decades (see, e.g., EIA, 2011).
These forecasts rely on assumptions on the form of the relationship between GDP growth and
energy use. In this paper, we argue that energy use may rise faster in response to GDP growth
when the growth is pro‐poor. Forecasts that ignore this may significantly underestimate the
effect of GDP growth on energy use.2

Today nearly 1.5 billion people live without electricity in their home, most of them in
developing countries. This is likely to change in the near future as wide‐scale poverty alleviation
programs as well as continued economic growth lift the incomes of many of the world’s poor.
As incomes rise and electricity coverage expands, families formerly living in poverty will for the
first time purchase refrigerators, water pumps, air conditioners, washing machines, and other
household electrical appliances, as well light the rooms in their houses. In this paper, we argue
that if the reduction in poverty is rapid, there could be a surge in the demand for energy. Such a
large increase in energy consumption would have broad implications both for energy markets
and for greenhouse gas emissions.

Importantly, increasing the income of the poor moves their demand for energy along the
extensive margin as they buy energy‐using assets for the first time. When a household acquires
an energy‐using asset, like a refrigerator or car, its energy use increases substantially. While
income growth will also affect energy consumption on the intensive margin (i.e., holding asset
ownership fixed), the effect is small compared to the effect of accumulating more energy‐using

1
 See, for example, http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/science/indicators/ghg/global‐ghg‐emissions.html.
2
 In Wolfram, Shelef and Gertler (2012) we elaborate on the potential underestimates in some of the most
prominent energy forecasts.


                                                      1
assets (i.e. the extensive margin). As households come out of poverty, their demand moves
mostly along the extensive margin leading to large discrete jumps in energy consumption.

The discrete jump is suggested by the well‐documented S‐shaped relationship between income
and asset ownership (Koptis and Cropper, 2005; Dargay, Dermot and Sommer, 2007; Letschert
and McNeil, 2007). Figure 1 uses household data from several of the most populous developing
countries to plot the share of households that own refrigerators against per‐person household
expenditures in logs. While the cross‐sectional relationships in Figure 1 are not necessarily
causal, they do show that at a particular income level, which varies country by country, there is
rapid growth in refrigerator ownership with income implying rapid growth in the demand for
energy.

The dashed lines in Figure 1 show the density of households by expenditure level. The three
plots in the top row depict regions that have experienced income growth among the poor,
largely driven by poverty alleviation programs in Mexico and Brazil, and economic growth in
urban China. As a result, a substantial share of the population in these regions has already
moved through the income level associated with the increase in refrigerator ownership. Income
growth beyond this point has less of an effect on energy demand as more of it occurs on the
intensive as opposed to extensive margin. The plots in the bottom row, however, indicate that
there are significant populations poised to buy refrigerators in India, Indonesia and rural China,
which together represent more than two billion people.

We also show that the speed at which poor households come out of poverty affects their
energy demand. In Section 1, we present a simple two‐period model of asset accumulation in
the presence of liquidity constraints such as those faced by most families living in poverty. In
this case, the intertemporal dynamics become important. We show that both income and
savings accumulated from past income drive acquisition. As a result, both income levels and
income growth impact the decision to purchase an energy‐using good such as a refrigerator. In
fact, with growing incomes, we show that it can be in a family’s interest to reduce current
consumption and save in order to acquire the asset sooner.

Our model has important implications for understanding the rate of lumpy asset acquisition in
different countries. For example, it predicts that two countries that are at the same current
level of income per capita may have different asset ownership rates because the country where
recent growth was fast will have a higher ownership rate than the country where recent growth
was slower. Our model also predicts that the design of poverty alleviation policies such as cash
transfer programs will affect asset accumulation. Specifically, we show that the timing of
payments should matter for asset acquisition rates. For instance, a program that distributes


                                                2
transfers on a quarterly basis may lead to more refrigerator acquisition than a program that
distributes transfers bi‐weekly.

In the empirical section of the paper, we examine the causal impact of different income
streams on asset accumulation and energy use in the context of Mexico’s conditional cash
transfer program, Oportunidades. Oportunidades is one of the largest and most generous
programs in the world, covering some five million Mexican families and providing benefits on
the order of a 20 percent increase in income on average. The program provides a unique
empirical setting to examine the relationship between income and asset acquisition both given
the size of the cash transfers and given the heterogeneity in transfer amounts across
households and over time. We exploit several sources of variation in cash transfer amounts,
including the fact that the program was rolled out randomly across villages.

Our results are consistent with the theoretical predictions of the model presented in Section 1.
First, we find that the increase in income through the transfers had a large effect on asset
accumulation. Specifically, we estimate that the median transfer amount led to a seven
percentage point increase in refrigerator ownership over a six‐year period off a four percent
base level of ownership. Second, we show that the effect on asset accumulation is substantially
greater when the cash is transferred over a shorter time period. Specifically, we estimate that
there would have been nearly a 13‐percentage point increase in refrigerator ownership if the
same benefits were delivered in four years instead of six.

We also use data from Oportunidades to estimate a model of electricity demand, separately
identifying the intensive and extensive margins. We find that most of the income effect is
driven by asset ownership as opposed to the income effect on electricity use conditional on
asset ownership. This result is consistent with our hypothesis that a fast reduction in poverty
that leads to massive asset accumulation will have a greater effect on energy demand than a
similar‐sized increase in income for households that already own the assets.

Finally, we return to the aggregate energy forecast models that motivated this analysis, now
incorporating the lessons learned from the causal, household‐level data analysis. We use
country‐level panel data to describe the relationship between GDP and energy consumption.
We show that if a country’s growth has been pro‐poor, the income elasticity of energy is nearly
double that of a country with GDP growth that has been less favorable to the poor. This implies
that not accounting for pro‐poor growth would grossly underestimate future energy use.

The next section presents a simple two‐period model of asset acquisition in the presence of
borrowing constraints and varying rates of income growth. Section 2 describes the

                                               3
Oportunidades program, which we use to test the predictions of our model. Section 3 describes
our data. We present results on asset acquisition by Oportunidades households in Section 4,
and results on energy use, conditional on asset ownership in Section 5. Section 6 explores the
implications of our model for cross‐country estimates of the relationship between GDP and
energy consumption. Finally, Section 7 concludes.

    1. Conceptual Framework
Changes in income affect energy consumption through several channels. In their influential
paper, Dubin and McFadden (1984) emphasized that energy consumption depends not only on
the usual utility‐maximization problem as a function of income and energy prices, but also on
the household’s current appliance holdings. A number of subsequent papers have analyzed
appliance acquisitions, however, few researchers have analyzed the intertemporal dynamics
that may influence these decisions. In fact, most researchers make assumptions that preclude
intertemporal considerations, such as perfectly efficient capital markets.3 While such
assumptions may or may not be appropriate in the developed world, it is clear that capital
constraints are significant among the poor in the developing world.4

To illustrate the impact of capital constraints and to motivate our empirical specification we
develop a simple dynamic model of savings and durable good acquisition. We show that both
current income as well as savings, accumulated from past income, drive acquisition. This
implies that both current income and the speed at which income grows impact acquisition.

Our model has two periods. Consumption is composed of two goods: a non‐durable good,
“food,” that gives per‐period utility    ⋅ with decreasing marginal utility, and a lumpy durable
good, “refrigerator,” that gives static per‐period utility if owned. A consumer has per period
income , no access to credit, and the ability to save an amount ∈ 0, from the first period
to the second. For simplicity, there is no discounting, no interest, no complementarity between




3
  For example, Dubin and McFadden (1984) and, more recently, Bento, Goulder, Jacobsen and von Haefen (2009)
assume a perfectly competitive rental market for durables. This could exist in the presence of efficient capital
markets and an efficient resale market. In recent work, Rapson (2011) and Schiraldi (2011) model dynamic
considerations focusing on, respectively, consumer expectations about future energy (i.e., usage) prices and
heterogeneous consumer transaction costs. No papers, of which we are aware, explicitly model credit constraints
or analyze durable good acquisition in the developing world.
4
  Liquidity constraints and poverty has been explored in Banerjee and Newman (1993), Aghion and Bolton (1997),
Lindh and Ohlsson (1998), Lloyd‐Ellis and Bernhardt (2000), Banerjee (2004), and de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff
(2008) amongst others.


                                                       4
the two assets, and no on‐going energy costs associated with owning the refrigerator.5 We
normalize the price of food to 1, and let the price of the refrigerator be . In our context
refrigerators are large purchases not easily made in one period. In fact, Gertler et al. (2012)
show that low‐income Mexican participants in the Oportunidades program allocate 76% of
transfers towards time‐specific consumption. Reflecting that, we assume that the refrigerator is
too expensive to be purchased in one period:                   .6

Consumers vary in their valuations of the durable good and their incomes . From decreasing
marginal utility of food, it follows that for valuations of the durable good (income) below a
threshold ( ) households do not purchase it. For valuations above that threshold, households
save an amount in the first period and purchase the durable in the second period. Because of
the credit constraints, households cannot borrow to purchase the durable in the first period.
Under reasonable assumptions on the functional form of        and the distribution of then the
share of households with a given income who own a durable at the end of the second period is
S‐shaped.7 Our assumptions thus far are consistent with Farrell (1954) and Bonus (1973) who
assumed distributions of valuation parameters and income thresholds, respectively, and
showed that these lead to S‐shaped logit or probit curves for appliance ownership.

Figure 2 Panel A illustrates the threshold ( ) graphically. The figure plots a household’s per‐
period marginal utility as a function of Y, so the area of the figure represents utility. As there is
no discounting and no other changes to the household across periods, Figure 2 Panel A applies
to both periods 1 and 2. The area under the rectangle with height                   and base       will reflect the
per‐period utility the household receives if it saves in period 1 and purchases the refrigerator
in period 2. The red (dark) shaded area reflects the lost utility of food from purchasing the
refrigerator. As this is exactly equal to the green (light) shaded area, which captures additional
utility from the refrigerator, this household will be just indifferent between saving to acquire
the refrigerator and consuming only food. Households with higher valuations of the refrigerator
(higher , i.e., taller rectangles) or higher incomes (higher , i.e. rectangles shifted to the right)
and therefore lower marginal utility of food, will strictly prefer to purchase the refrigerator.


5
  We show below that our main results are accentuated or unchanged if the two goods are complementary. Also,
for simplicity, we abstract from the energy use by the appliance. One can consider as the net benefit from using
the asset including energy costs. Our main results are robust to this extension.
6
  This simplifies the analysis because no household can purchase the good in one period. Our results are robust to
relaxing this assumption. Alternatively, we can impose restrictions on       ⋅ such that even if a consumer was able
to purchase the refrigerator in one period he or she would choose not to (e.g., by imposing that the marginal utility
from subsistence food levels are sufficiently high). Those restrictions yield similar results.
7
  For example, if is log, and is distributed log normally.


                                                         5
We next extend this framework to consider changes in income period‐to‐period. Since our
empirical setting involves a conditional cash transfer program, we describe the model in terms
of transfer payments, although those could equally be interpreted as expected changes in
income. Consider an increase in household income by a per‐period transfer, , such that the
refrigerator is still unaffordable in one period (             . This increase will cause more
households to acquire the refrigerator. Specifically, all households with purchasing thresholds
between         and now purchase. This leads to our first empirical prediction:

Prediction 1: The larger the increase in income, the more likely the household is to purchase a
durable.

We next consider differences in the rates of change in income. For example, in our empirical
setting, not all households receive transfers at the same rate. Consider a household that
receives the same transfers in total 2 , but receives transfer L         in the first period and
H 2T L in the second period. Suppose that H L                  . Observe that if the household
saves and purchases the durable, the path of consumption is exactly as it was for the household
with even transfers (T), but savings are lower. However, the utility from not purchasing is
reduced because consumption is uneven. The household would prefer to shift consumption
from period 2 to period 1 but cannot because of the credit constraints.8 Instead, additional
households find it preferable to save and purchase the durable good. If H L P, households
do not save and the credit constraint prevents consumption smoothing. Some households who
would prefer to consume more than              and not purchase the asset in the case of even
transfers now find it optimal to purchase the durable in the second period.

This effect is represented in Panels B and C of Figure 2. Panel B is similar to Panel A, except that
total income is equal to Y + T instead of Y. Panel B establishes that for a low enough valuation of
the refrigerator (RL), the household will not purchase the refrigerator in the even transfer case.
Compare this to the case where transfers are uneven, as depicted in Panel C. In order to
purchase the refrigerator, the household now must save only amount S in period 1. The lost
utility from forgoing food consumption in order to save (net of the gain from the refrigerator in
period 2) is indicated by the red (dark) shaded area. In period 2, the household also forgoes the
wedge under the marginal utility of food curve (red/dark shaded area plus dotted area), but
gains the green (light) shaded area. As drawn, the green (light) shaded areas is larger,
suggesting that the household with refrigerator valuation RL will purchase the refrigerator in

8
  While optimal transfer design is not the focus of this simplified model, it is clear that front loading all transfers in
the first period is first best in this simplified context. However, we restrict attention to higher second period
transfers consistent with real world transfer programs and the effects of growth.


                                                            6
the increasing transfer case, whereas it would not have purchased the refrigerator in the even
transfer case.

This result combines a “forced savings” and a “complementary savings” effect. A household
whose transfers are delayed has the same income in each period as a household with even
transfers that was forced to save        . Expecting that it will receive these forced savings in the
second period, it may be willing to complement the forced savings and save an additional
amount (S in Panel C) in order to purchase the lumpy asset in period 2. These two effects cause
some households who would not have purchased the refrigerator with evenly spaced transfers
to buy the asset if transfers are delayed. This provides a second empirical prediction.

Prediction 2: Holding cumulative income fixed, households who gain more income in the
second period (i.e., for whom income growth is faster) will be more likely to acquire assets.

Finally, the model predicts that there will be an interaction effect between the size of
cumulative transfers (T) and the timing of transfers. Specifically, hold the ratio of first to second
period transfers, , constant (the ratio, , is 1 in the even‐transfers case, and between 0 and 1
in the delay case). Consider an increase of total transfers from 2 to 2                  . As long as
delayed households still save to purchase             1       2            2 ′        is a sufficient
condition) and the ratio of transfers is small enough, then the increase in total transfers by 2 ′
decreases the valuation threshold         for delayed households more than households with
constant transfers.

To understand this mechanism, first note that if the household saves and purchases the durable
good it has the same consumption pattern regardless of the pattern of transfers. So we only
need to show that the delayed transfers receive a smaller increase in utility than the even
transfers group from the increase in transfers. This follows from decreasing marginal utility if
is sufficiently small.9 This leads our third empirical prediction:

Prediction 3: The effect of additional income on asset acquisition will be larger for households
whose income is growing quickly.



9
    Formally, we prove this as follows: The increase in utility from not purchasing in the even case is 2
          . For the uneven case it is         2                          1       2            . As       → 0,
    2             → 0 and, from decreasing marginal utility 2                                        2
            1      2             . So, by continuity, for a sufficiently small : 2
    2                          1     2              .


                                                              7
While the model and these three predictions are described in terms of transfers expected by
the households, it could easily be interpreted as additional income expected from economic
growth.10 The model predicts that holding constant total increases in income over some time
period, asset acquisition will depend on the pattern of growth. For example, in Figure 3 at point
t*, the integral under the green (light) line is equal to the integral under the red (dark) line, so
the cumulative income of two sets of households facing these income trajectories would be the
same. Our model suggests that households whose income followed the green line may be more
likely to acquire a refrigerator in period t* because of the forced and complementary savings
effects. While the incomes of households facing the green line are growing slowly, income
levels may be so low that very few are willing to purchase a refrigerator. Fast income growth at
the higher income levels may lead to more asset acquisition following prediction 2 above.

Also, while the model has two periods, the underlying mechanisms are quite general.11 Any
multiple period model of asset acquisition with increasing income has three phases: a savings
phase in which the asset is not owned and weakly positive amounts are saved, an endogenously
determined purchase period when the asset is purchased, and a utilization phase in which the
asset is enjoyed. Our model represents the first two phases, with the final phase held constant.
With more periods, the comparative statics remain: The wealthier is the household, the more
likely they are to purchase (and sooner). The more uneven is income in the savings and
purchase period, the more likely the consumer is to purchase. Similarly, the higher future
income is, the more likely the consumer is to delay purchasing. Finally, holding fixed the
purchase period, the income increases lead to more acquisition the more the savings phase and
purchase period are uneven.

A multi‐period model also suggests interesting conclusions about the shape of the S‐curve. For
instance, if households are credit constrained and incomes are growing, the range of incomes
where asset ownership is increasing narrows. Thus, the S‐curve is steeper than it would be with
either no income growth or no credit constraints. This is because expected income growth leads
some poor households to delay asset purchases while richer households will not be
constrained. As a result, in intermediate periods, there are poor households who are delaying
their purchases because of growth in future incomes.
10
   All of the comparative statics hold if households are uncertain about second period income, but the predictions
are in terms of first‐order stochastically dominated distributions of future income instead of higher income.
11
   Complementarity between the two goods – food and refrigerators – will amplify the results of prediction 1 and
leaves unchanged predictions 2 and 3. Prediction 1 is magnified because the benefit from the refrigerator then
rises with income. Predictions 2 and 3 are unchanged because households who acquire and have the same total
income have the same consumption path regardless of the path of their income. So complementarity changes the
benefit of acquisition in the same way for all acquirers and does not affect the benefit of not purchasing the
refrigerator.


                                                        8
Our model has important implications for thinking about the rate of lumpy asset acquisition in
different countries. Cross‐sectionally, it predicts that two countries that are at the same current
level of income per capita may have very different refrigerator ownership rates because of the
timing and distribution of income growth. In terms of conditional cash transfer programs, our
model also suggests that the rate of the payments may matter for asset acquisition rates. For
instance, a program that distributes transfers on a quarterly basis may lead to more refrigerator
acquisition than a program that distributes transfers bi‐weekly.

     2. Empirical Context
Over the last 15 years, living standards for poor Mexicans have improved substantially in large
part due to the country’s aggressive antipoverty programs. As their incomes have gone up,
many low‐income Mexican households acquired energy‐using assets.

Figure 4 plots the share of households that own refrigerators in Mexico over time by income
decile, where the three poorest deciles are graphed separately, and the seven richest deciles
are grouped together. The poor accounted for most of the asset acquisition between 1996 and
2008, as the share of households in the lowest income quartile that owned refrigerators grew
from 32 percent to nearly 70 percent. Further, in the late 1990s the fastest growth was in the
3rd decile. With income growth, particularly programs targeted at the poor, this acquisition
moves further down the income distribution: in the early 2000s the 2nd decile grows the fastest
until eventually in the later 2000s the bottom decile grows the fastest. This pattern suggests
that more and more of the population was moving through the first inflection point in the S‐
curve depicted in Figure 1.

The same pattern is also reflected in energy demand growth. Figure 5 plots normalized per
capita electricity expenditures across all Mexican households by the same income decile
groupings. Again, the poor had the highest growth rate: between 1996 and 2008, electricity
expenditures nearly doubled for households in the first three income deciles and only grew by
50 percent for households with higher expenditures.12



12
    These trends do not appear driven by changes in relative prices. Over the early part of the sample, through
2002, prices rose more slowly for high‐volume users than for low‐volume users and use is correlated with income.
In the later part of the sample, however, prices rose more slowly for low‐volume users, and this is the period when
expenditures deviated most dramatically between the two groups. This suggests that the differences across
quartiles in the later part of the sample if anything understate different growth rates in consumption.


                                                        9
To better understand the growth in energy demand among low income households, we analyze
asset acquisition in the context of Oportunidades, a conditional cash transfer program in
Mexico that was designed to break the intergenerational transmission of poverty. The program,
originally called PROGRESA, aims to alleviate current and future poverty by giving parents
financial incentives, in cash, to invest in the human capital of their children. Oportunidades was
conceived as a temporary program that would become obsolete over three to four decades as
soon as the initial generation of beneficiary children reached adulthood. The program, which
started in 1997, is one of the largest conditional cash transfer programs in the world
distributing approximately four billion US dollars annually to some five million beneficiary
households, representing approximately 20 percent of the population.13

             a. Program Benefits

Cash transfers from Oportunidades are given to the female head of the household every two
months conditional on two criteria. First, all beneficiary households receive a fixed food stipend
as long as family members obtain preventive medical care and attend “pláticas” or educational
talks on health‐related topics. Program designers expected families to spend this stipend on more
and better nutrition.

Second, households also receive educational scholarships conditional on children attending
school a minimum of 85 percent of the time and not repeating a grade more than twice. The
educational stipend is provided for each child less than 18 years old enrolled in school between
the third grade of primary school and the third grade of high school (12th grade) and varies by
grade and gender. It rises substantially after graduation from primary school and is higher for girls
than boys during high school. Only children who were living in the household when the program
started are eligible for the school transfers in order to prevent migration into the household.
Total transfers for any given household are capped at a pre‐determined upper limit.14

Table 1 describes the benefits to which beneficiary households were entitled in 2003. While the
benefit levels and the grades covered have changed over the course of the program, its basic
structure has not. In 2003, the basic (called ``alimentary'' or ``food'') support was 155 pesos
every two months. The educational scholarship in 2003 ranged between 105 pesos for children
in the third grade to 655 pesos for teenage girls in twelfth grade. Finally, Oportunidades also


13
  http://www.oportunidades.gob.mx/Portal/wb/Web/design_and_operation
14
  Compliance was verified through the clinics and schools, who certified whether households actually completed the
required health care visits and whether kids attended schools. While full compliance varied, only about 1 percent of
households were denied the cash transfer completely for non‐compliance.


                                                       10
provides a yearly stipend to cover the costs of school supplies for children who do not get them
at school.

As Table 1 documents, differently composed households are eligible to receive different transfer
amounts. For example, households with more female children enrolled in higher grades are
eligible for larger educational stipends than similar households with children enrolled in lower
levels or with more male children. We can compute the maximum potential transfer for a family
by applying the values from Table 1 to the following formula:

(1)                                              min            ,

where PTit is the maximum potential transfer that could be received by household i in period t,
      is the program cap on benefits, BTt is the basic transfer amount that all households receive
(the food support), STst is the educational transfer conditional on a child of type s (i.e. based on
grade and sex) attending school, and NKsit is the number of children of type s in household i at
baseline aged forwarded to period t. Because of the cap on total benefits, potential transfers are
a nonlinear function of the number of children at baseline who could attend the grades eligible
for the educational scholarships in period t.

The actual transfers received by a household are less than the potential amount if some children
do not attend school. Thus the actual bimonthly transfer amount received by household i at each
time t, ATit, is computed by applying the values from Table 1 to the following formula:
(2)                                                                 ,

where Ksit is the number of children of type s in household i actually attending school in period
t.15

                b. Eligibility, Enrollment and Duration of Benefits

When Oportunidades was first rolled out in rural areas in 1997, program eligibility was
determined in two stages (Skoufias et al., 2001). First, the program identified underserved or
marginalized communities and then identified low‐income households within those
communities. Selection criteria for marginalized communities were based on the proportion of
households living in very poor conditions, identified using data from the 1995 census (Conteo
de Población y Vivienda).



15
     To simplify notation, equation (2) assumes that all households attend the health care classes and receive BTt.


                                                           11
To select eligible households within marginalized communities, Oportunidades conducted a
socio‐economic survey of all households, the Encuesta de Características Socioeconómicas de los
Hogares (ENCASEH). The Mexican government used the ENCASEH to construct a proxy means
index and classify households as eligible for treatment (“poor”) or ineligible (“non‐poor”). The
original classification scheme designated approximately 52 percent of households as eligible
(“poor”) (Hoddinott and Skoufias, 2004).

Eligible households were offered Oportunidades and a majority (90 percent) enrolled in the
program (Gertler et al., 2012). Once enrolled, households received benefits for a three‐year
period conditional on meeting the program requirements. New households were not able to
enroll until the next certification period, which prevented migration into treatment communities
for Oportunidades benefits. Households in rural areas were “recertified” (re‐assessed with a
proxy means test) after three years on the program to determine future eligibility. If a household
was recertified as eligible, it would continue receiving benefits. If not recertified, the household
was guaranteed six more years of support before transitioning off the program. Thus, households
could expect a minimum of nine years of benefits upon enrollment (Oportunidades, 2003).

           c. Oportunidades Evaluation and Data Collection

The data used in this study were generated for program evaluation. At the outset of the
program, the government randomly chose 320 early intervention and 186 late intervention
communities in seven states. Eligible households in the early intervention communities
received benefits starting in April 1998, while households in the late intervention communities
did not receive benefits until October 1999. No sites were told in advance that they would be
participating in the program, information about timing of program roll‐out was not made
publicly available, and there is no evidence of anticipatory behavior (Attanasio et al., 2011). Our
analysis focuses on these 506 communities and the panel of approximately 10,000 households
that were surveyed from 1997 through 2007.

Treatment and control households, which we will refer to as “early” and “late,” were similar on
a wide array of measured characteristics. Table 2 and Appendix Table 2 summarize a number of
different household‐level attributes separately for early and late households. For nearly all of
the variables, the means are statistically indistinguishable across the two groups, suggesting
that the randomization successfully created comparable groups.

The data used in this study comes from the baseline ENCASEH, described above, and the
Oportunidades Evaluation Survey (ENCEL), which is a panel data set that was gathered over six
rounds. The first survey was administered a year after the program started, during the fall of

                                                12
1998 and the second one in 1999. Similarly, during 2000 two different surveys were conducted,
one in March 2000 and the other one in November 2000. The fifth survey was done in 2003 and
the last in 2007.

The evaluation surveys gather information on a number of potential metrics that the program
may affect, including household and household members’ characteristics, income and labor
supply, expenditure, health and nutritional status, education, among others. Of particular
importance for this study, the survey gathers information on energy‐using household durable
asset possession, such as refrigerators, gas stoves, televisions, and washing machines. For 2007,
the evaluation survey also included questions on electricity expenditures, which we analyze in
Section 5.

     3. Empirical Specification and Identifying Assumptions
In this section, we describe an empirical model that allows us to test predictions of the
conceptual framework in Section 1. Specifically, we examine the causal relationship between cash
transfers, which provide an exogenous shock to income in the Oportunidades context, and asset
accumulation. Durable asset purchases are discrete events that occur very infrequently. Hence,
we model the decision to purchase an asset such as a refrigerator as the probability of purchase
in a particular period given that the household has not purchased the asset so far. Also,
consistent with the conceptual framework in Section 1, the cost of the assets we consider (e.g.
refrigerators) is substantially higher than the monthly transfer amount.16 To test predictions 1‐3,
we will examine the impact of cumulative transfers, the rate of change of transfer payments and
their interaction on asset acquisition.

We estimate a linear discrete‐time hazard specification that takes advantage of the panel
structure of our data. Specifically, we estimate versions of the following equation:


(3)                   Pr          1|          0



where         is the probability that household i acquires appliance in period t, conditional on
not having it in period t‐1. We specify this as a function of cumulative Oportunidades cash
transfers for household in period ,                     , a dummy indicating that the household
was in an early community,          , meaning that it began receiving transfers 18 months before
16
  We examined the prices of a set of refrigerators in Mexico from PROFECO, the Mexican Federal Bureau of
Consumer Interests. The price of the cheapest refrigerator in 2003 was nearly double the bi‐monthly maximum
transfer amount.


                                                      13
the households in the late communities and the interaction between the early dummy and
cumulative transfers.      is a vector of control variables, including household characteristics. In
some specifications, we include a household fixed effect instead of the control variables.         is
a vector of region‐by‐period dummies, separately estimated for seven regions in all five
periods. These help account for any region‐specific changes in asset (for example, refrigerator)
and/or electricity prices.

The model in Section 1 predicts that 1 will be positive (prediction 1) while 2 and 3 will be
negative (predictions 2 and 3). Early households began receiving their transfers eighteen
months before late households, so, conditional on having the same level of cumulative
transfers as a late household, the growth in their cumulative transfers will have been slow and
steady, akin to the red line in Figure 3. It is instructive to consider the variation in our data that
identifies 1, 2 and 3, particularly as we are using both randomized and non‐randomized
variation to establish our counterfactual outcomes.

           a. Sources of Variation in Key Independent Variables

The two key independent variables are            , and                  . Variation in        , is
generated by the randomization that determined which households started receiving transfers
early versus late. It is important to note, however, that we are not using the randomization to
evaluate the impact of Oportunidades by comparing households in treated and control villages.
Instead, we are interested in how the level and timing of transfers affect asset acquisition. The
randomization provides exogenous variation in the timing of transfers, which we will take
advantage of, but because we also model the effect of cumulative transfers directly, we are not
simply comparing treated and control households. To avoid confusion, we have relabeled
treated households “early” and control households “late.”

We see variation in                    both within a given household over time and across
households. The cross‐sectional variation in cumulative transfers at a point in time depends on
when the family entered the program and the rate of accumulation since entry. While the time
the household was incorporated into the program was randomized, the rates at which a
household’s cumulative transfers change over time is a nonlinear function of the grade and sex
of the household’s children who attend school. The nonlinearity arises from the program rules
that pay nothing before grade three or after grade nine, have different rates by grade and
gender, and impose a cap on total transfer payments so that after some point more children
school add nothing to the payments. Rates of accumulation within a household vary with time
as younger children age into the program, as they progress through school, and as children age
out of the program. In addition, in 2000, Oportunidades extended the payments for grade 10‐

                                                 14
12. So long as the variation in the transfer amounts and hence the rate of change of cumulative
transfers is not correlated with the propensity to buy an appliance, our specification will yield
unbiased estimates.

To better understand the extent to which different factors drives variation in                  ,
we decomposed the variance as follows:

(4)                                                            2       ,

where δi and Rrt represent the household and region‐by‐period fixed effects, respectively, and
εit is a random error term. Our calculations suggest that region‐by‐period trends account for
about 60 percent of the variation, household fixed effects account for about 20 percent of the
variation and the covariance between the two terms is effectively zero. This suggests that there
is substantial within household variation to help identify the effects of transfers even in the
specifications with household fixed effects. Because some of our specifications rely on cross‐
household variation, we also estimated the share of the variance accounted for by household
factors that might reasonably impact appliance valuations. When we include indicator variables
for household size and the age structure of household members instead of household fixed
effects, these variables explain less than ten percent of the variation in transfers. Taken
together, this decomposition suggests that the randomization, differences in transfers driven by
the gender and age‐composition of children and the nonlinearities in these transfer schedules
account for a substantial share of our variation.

To understand why transfers are not strongly correlated with the number of children in the
household, compare the following situations: a household with three girls in grade two of
primary school, and a household with three girls in grade eight (junior high school). Both
households have three female children but while the first household will receive no school
transfers in the current period, the latter household will receive a large monthly transfer. In
addition, families with four or more children in junior high school would receive the same
transfer amount as the latter household because the cap on total benefits would be binding.
Thus, we are able to explicitly control for household size and the number of children in the
household in the empirical specification and still have substantial variation in cumulative
transfers to identify the coefficient on that variable.

There may be lingering concerns that household demographic structure is correlated with both
the cumulative transfer amounts and the propensity to purchase appliances. For instance,
households with older girls may have systematically different refrigerator valuations than
households with younger girls. We also explicitly test to see whether baseline appliance
ownership is correlated with future cumulative transfers and therefore with household
                                               15
demographic structure imbedded in the transfer formula. Specifically, we will present results
from placebo tests that suggest that the nonlinear function that translates family structure to
cumulative transfers does not predict appliance ownership at baseline (i.e., before the program
started). So, as long as any changes in the propensity to buy a refrigerator after the baseline
survey were similar across households with different family structures, our specification will
yield unbiased estimates of 1. Finally, we will address other threats to identification in Section
4a, including potential differences in non‐transfer income across treatment and control
households, differences in expected future transfers and household preferences that change
over time.

Because we are controlling for cumulative transfers,       describes differences in refrigerator
acquisitions between early and late households who have had the same level of cumulative
transfers. To obtain valid estimates of 2, we want to be sure that the distributions of
cumulative transfer levels overlap between the early and late groups. Otherwise, 2 (and 3)
could simply be picking up nonlinearities in the relationship between cumulative transfers and
appliance acquisition.

Table 3 reports cumulative transfer amounts over time for households in the early and late
groups that are at different parts of the transfer distribution. We see that households at the
75th percentile of the late group had higher cumulative transfer amounts than households at
the 25th percentile of the early group by late 2000 and higher amounts than households at the
median of the early group by 2003. This suggests that we will have considerable overlap
between the distributions of cumulative transfers by 2003.

Although there will be more overlap in the distributions in later years, we focus on observations
through 2003, as in later years, differences between the early and late groups will be smaller
relative to their accumulated transfers. For example, Table 3 shows that by 2007 the early
group’s median actual transfers only exceeded the late group’s median actual transfers by less
than ten percent, while in 2003, the early group’s median was almost 25 percent higher. If we
include later years in our estimates of equation (3), the coefficients on the early dummy and
the interaction term (2 and 3) are negative but are attenuated to zero, as we would expect
with more noise relative to systematic differences between the groups.

Finally, we note that previous related papers have examined the impact of income on appliance
acquisitions (Dubin and McFadden, 1984) and ownership (Dargay, Dermot and Sommer, 2007).
All of these papers have relied on cross‐sectional variation in income and have limited controls
for household demographics, meaning that unobserved differences may be correlated with
income and taste for appliances. One substantial advantage of our empirical setting is that we

                                                16
can take advantage of the large shocks to income that households received via the transfers,
and we use both within‐household differences brought on by the nonlinear transfer schedule
and cross‐household difference driven, among other things, by randomization. We opt not to
estimate an income elasticity for several reasons. First, we are primarily interested in the timing
of income shocks and not the absolute level of income. Also, our data best measure transfers
and not total income, as the Oportunidades households have substantial informal and non‐
monetary income sources. By examining household responses to transfers, however, we can
identify the effects predicted by the model in Section 1.
           b. Potential Endogeneity of Transfers

As the actual cumulative transfers that a family receives are determined by choices about
whether or not to keep children in school, it is conceivable that the decision to purchase an
appliance would be correlated with household‐level shocks that altered the parameters of
these choices. For instance, if the household experienced a large positive income shock to its
non‐transfer income, it might be more likely to leave children in school instead of working. The
positive income shock could simultaneously make the household more likely to acquire an
appliance. This would lead to a positive bias in the coefficient on actual cumulative transfers. In
practice, Parker and Skoufias (2000, 2001) find that the program reduces child labor and
increases enrollment in junior high (secondary) schools as the opportunity cost of these
children being in the labor force is now higher. Schultz (2004) also finds positive effects for
primary school and junior high school enrollment for boys and girls. These findings suggest that
economic incentives influence schooling decisions, so concerns about potential endogeneity are
real.

We address this problem by instrumenting for cumulative transfers with the potential
cumulative transfers that a family could achieve if the maximum number of eligible children in
the household attended school. At each time t, we compute a family’s maximum potential
transfer assuming that all eligible children that were enrolled at baseline have advanced one
grade per year and met attendance thresholds. Potential transfers are a nonlinear function of
the number of children at baseline who could be enrolled in school in period t. This is true
because total benefits are capped, the transfer schedule is nonlinear (as in Table 1) and
transfers are zero for the first 3 years of school.

Potential cumulative transfers are likely to be valid instruments for three reasons. First, they
are a strong predictor of the actual transfers. Second, maximum potential transfers are unlikely
to be correlated with asset accumulation via other pathways such as additional income sources.
Indeed, they are uncorrelated with changes in children’s labor supply due to the program as
they are computed assuming that all eligible children enrolled at baseline are still in school and

                                                17
have advanced one school grade per school year. Nonetheless, the transfers could also affect
leisure by reducing adult labor supply, which would reduce household income and therefore a
household’s propensity to purchase assets. Everything else held constant, this would imply a
downward biased estimate of 1. Parker and Skoufias (2000) show that there is no effect of the
program on adult labor supply, so we can safely assume that the transfer variables are not
correlated with other earned sources of income.

   4. Empirical Results on Asset Acquisition
We begin with a preliminary description of the variation in our dependent variable by plotting
cross‐sectional refrigerator ownership as of 2003 on cumulative transfers through 2003 (Figure
6). We focus on refrigerator acquisitions, by far the most expensive and most energy‐intensive
household appliance for the Oportunidades population. Following Prediction 1 we expect
upward‐sloping ownership curves (           0 . Prediction 2 suggests that the line for early
households is below the line for late households         0 , while Prediction 3 implies that the
line for early households is less steep than the line for late households (      0 . We see all
three of these relationships in the figure. While Figure 6 is consistent with our predictions,
estimating the discrete‐time hazards described in ( 3 ) allows us to include controls and use
within‐household variation.

Table 4 presents several specifications of equation ( 3 ) that focus on prediction 1, the income
effect. We estimate ( 3 ) using a linear model and report robust standard errors clustered at the
village level, i.e. the level of randomization. All specifications include state‐by‐round fixed
effects and either include a number of household controls (detailed in the footnotes to the
table) or household fixed effects.

In the first column, the coefficient on cumulative transfers (1) is positive as predicted and
highly statistically significant. The magnitude of the coefficient suggests that for every ten
thousand pesos increase in a household’s cumulative transfers, the probability that it acquires a
refrigerator goes up by more than two percent. By 2003, the early household at the 75th
percentile of cumulative transfers had 20,000 pesos more than the early household at the 25th
percentile and only 20 percent of households with median cumulative transfers owned
refrigerators, suggesting that differences in cumulative transfers explain important differences
across households.

Column (2) instruments for cumulative transfers with a household’s potential cumulative
transfers in a given period. The instrument is extremely strong, and the first‐stage f‐statistic,
reported at the bottom of column (2), exceeds one thousand. The coefficient estimates are very

                                               18
similar to the OLS estimates in column (1). If anything, the coefficient on cumulative transfers is
slightly higher. Column (3) includes household fixed effects, which allow us to control for any
remaining differences across households not picked up by the household controls included
columns (1) and (2).17

Columns (4) to (6) repeat the specifications but separately estimate the transfer effect for
households in the top 25% of animal asset ownership at baseline. This is essentially a proxy
means test that allows us to identify the Oportunidades households that are relatively better
off. Indeed, animal assets were part of the proxy means test used to determine eligibility into
the program (Skoufias, et al., 1999). As we explained in Section 1, a positive α1 is consistent with
an S‐shaped relationship between income and asset ownership. In addition, if α1 is increasing in
income or wealth, meaning that better off Oportunidades households are more likely to use
additional transfers to purchase an asset, the S‐shaped relationship will be even more
pronounced. Since all the included households are poor, they are all generally below their
acquisition threshold. However, those that enter the program slightly better off should be more
likely to acquire at a given level of transfers than those that are poorer. We see this effect in
columns (4) to (6) as the transfer effect is larger for households that started off richer.

We should note that baseline animal assets are not subject to the randomized treatment and
may have various endogeneity concerns. For example, households with more animals may
simply value assets more. However, columns (4) and (5) include an indicator identifying
households in the top 25% of baseline assets. Column (6) uses household fixed effects, thus
controlling for all time invariant household characteristics. Also, specifications using other
measures to identify households that are relatively better off, such as total household
consumption or consumption per capita, yield similar differences between the relatively better
off and other households.

Table 5 presents several specifications of equation ( 3 ) focusing on the effect of transfer timing.
The first column, repeated from column ( 1 ) of Table 4, reports the basic cumulative transfer
effect. When we include the early dummy in column (2), the coefficient on cumulative transfers
is virtually unchanged, and the coefficient on early is negative, as predicted, and highly
significant. The magnitude suggests that receiving transfers as part of the late group is
equivalent to an almost 6,000 pesos increase in cumulative transfers. When we include the
interaction between early and cumulative transfers in column (3), the interaction term is

17
  The coefficient on cumulative transfers is larger in column (3), perhaps in part because the household fixed
effects capture whether or not the household was in the early or late wave of program treatment, which we show
below is an important factor in determining refrigerator purchases.


                                                      19
negative and statistically different from zero, while the coefficient on the early dummy drops in
absolute value. As the coefficient on the early dummy in column (3) reflects the early effect at
zero cumulative transfers, which is outside the range of our data, we also report the net early
effect at median 2003 transfers.

Column (4) instruments for both cumulative transfers and cumulative transfers x early with a
household’s potential cumulative transfers in a given period and potential cumulative transfers
x early. The instruments are extremely strong, and the first‐stage f‐statistics, reported at the
bottom of column (4) exceed one thousand. The coefficient estimates are very similar to the
OLS estimates in column (3). If anything, the coefficient on cumulative transfers is slightly
higher.

In column (5), we include household fixed effects, which allow us to control for any remaining
differences across households not picked up by the household controls included in columns (1)
through (4). For example, while the household controls include the number of children, we do
not include precise variables measuring their exact gender and age makeup. If across
households with the same number of children, the households with older girls, for instance,
had higher valuations for refrigerators than the households with younger boys, the coefficient
on cumulative transfers might be biased positive. This could in turn lead to a negative bias on
the early dummy as, for a given level of cumulative transfers, the early households are more
likely to be comprised of young boys.

With household fixed effects, we can control for any time‐invariant differences within a
household. We have within‐household variation in cumulative transfers because of the
nonlinear increases in transfers depicted in Table 1 and because children age into or out of the
program. We cannot, however, estimate the early dummy as this is a time‐invariant household
characteristic. The specification in column (5) uses instrumental variables estimation, and is
therefore comparable to the results in column (4). The coefficient estimates on cumulative
transfers and cumulative transfers x early are remarkably similar across columns (4) and (5)
suggesting that our household controls pick up most cross‐household differences in tastes.

Table 6 presents results from specifications comparable to those reported in columns (4) and
(5) of Table 5 for two additional appliances that require large upfront investments: washing
machines and stoves. For comparability, we reproduce the results for refrigerators in the top
two rows of the table. The net early effect at the median level of cumulative transfers is
negative and statistically significant for both of the additional assets. Early x cumulative
transfers is negative across both specifications for all the additional assets in Table 6. It is



                                               20
statistically smaller than zero for stoves. While it is hard to draw strong inferences from only a
few assets, the results in Table 6 are generally supportive of our model.

           a. Alternative Explanations

The results presented so far are consistent with the model presented in Section 1. They suggest
that households are more likely to acquire appliances the higher is their transfer income and
the lumpier were their transfer payments. Also, the effects of the lumpy payments are stronger
at higher cumulative transfer amounts.

The results may also be consistent with other explanations, however, the most obvious of
which we address in this subsection. First, the early dummy is identified by considering
households with the same cumulative income, some of whom received transfers steadily at low
rates and some of whom received no transfers for eighteen months and then high transfers
once they began the program. These households are by construction different from one
another, so a natural question is whether the differences are systematically correlated with the
household’s value for appliances. For example, do households with more female children have
higher valuations for refrigerators than households with more male children? The fact that the
specifications estimated with household fixed effects are similar to the results that simply
include household‐level controls gives us some reassurance that the differences across
households are not driving our results.

As an additional robustness check, we estimated cross‐sectional placebo specifications using
data from the baseline survey that was conducted in 1997, before any of the households were
receiving transfers. These specifications test whether the particular nonlinear relationship
between family structure and transfers embodied in cumulative transfers through 2003
predicts appliance ownership at baseline. The results are presented in the left‐hand column of
results in Table 7. Each specification is estimated using instrumental variables and including
household controls, comparable to the specification reported in column (4) of Table 5. The
coefficients on cumulative transfers, early and early x cumulative transfers are insignificantly
different from zero, except for cumulative transfers for stoves. This provides additional
reassurance that the differential transfer rates experienced by households under
Oportunidades are not systematically correlated with the propensity to acquire appliances.

Since the specifications at baseline in Table 7 are cross sectional while the results in Table 5 and
Table 6 were estimated as discrete time hazards, we estimated similar specifications for 2003
by way of comparison. These are presented to the right of the baseline specifications for each
appliance. These specifications confirm the results in Table 5 and Table 6. In all specifications,

                                                21
the coefficient on cumulative transfers is positive and usually significant, while early and early x
cumulative transfers are generally negative.

We also estimated another variant of the placebo test that predicted asset ownership in the
period just before a household entered the program (baseline for treated households and
round 1 for control households) as a function of the household’s first period transfers. This test
does not capture the variation induced by the randomization, but it does use transfers in a
period closer to the period when households’ baseline asset ownership is measured. Though
noisier, these similarly showed no statistically significant impact of first period transfers. This
test also refutes the hypothesis that household preferences for appliances change over time in
a manner correlated with the transfer schedule, which would happen, if for instance,
households with nine‐year‐old boys had similar preferences to households with nine‐year‐old
girls, but preferences diverged when the children were in their teens.

A second concern is that early is an indicator for lower expected future transfers and thus the
negative coefficient simply represents lower expected income. Specifically, among early and
late households with the same cumulative transfer levels at a given point in time, early
households might expect lower transfers in the future since their average transfer rate is lower
than the late households.18 For instance, late households may simply have more girls than early
households who are at the same level of cumulative transfers in 2003. Table 8 presents results
from several specifications that include future transfers as additional explanatory variables.
Column (1) of Table 8 reproduces column (4) of Table 5, and then columns (2) and (3) add
information about the household’s actual future transfers through 2007. With rational
expectations, realized future transfers proxy for expected transfers.

The alternative hypothesis put forward above would suggest that the coefficient on future
transfers should be positive. In fact, we find that it is either undetectably different from zero or
statistically significant and negative. A negative coefficient is consistent with the intertemporal
optimization underlying our framework in Section 1, as it suggests that households expecting
higher transfers in the future are less likely to buy an asset now, presumably because they are
waiting to buy it when their income is higher.




18
  Because transfer rates vary over time within a household, increasing as younger children enter higher grades
and decreasing as older children age out of the program, it is possible that an early household will have the same
cumulative transfers as a late household, but will have higher expected transfers. For example, the early household
could have begun with younger children, accumulating slowly, while the late household began with older children
– accumulating quickly at first, but then slowly later when its children age out of the program.


                                                        22
We also considered the possibility that the difference in acquisition is driven by a lack of self‐
control. Particularly, the logic of the intertemporal optimization in Section 1 suggests that early
households have the ability to replicate through saving the time path of transfers of the late
households, but instead choose to allocate transfers differently. However, if these households
lack self‐control or are otherwise myopic it is possible that the temporal effects we observe are
the consequence of households spending the transfers as they receive them, rather than
optimizing considering both current and future transfers. The negative coefficients on future
transfers in Table 8, however, are not consistent with lack of self‐control or other myopic
behavior.

A final concern is that late households might have earned more non‐transfer income than early
households during the period before they began receiving transfers, for instance from child
labor, which is not reflected in the potential transfers instrument. To allow for this, we
estimated the household fixed effect model of Table 5, column (5), excluding the rounds in
which the late households did not receive transfers. The estimates are not statistically different
from column (5).19

     5. Empirical Results on Energy Consumption
We next examine the relationship between income and household energy use in order to
evaluate the extent to which growth in electricity consumption is driven by households’ asset
acquisitions. Specifically, we examine whether higher household income, driven by
Oportunidades transfers, leads to increased electricity consumption conditional on appliance
holdings. We compare the conditional income effect to estimates of the effect of an appliance
acquisition on electricity use. While previous research suggests that the response of energy use
to income conditional on assets is small, those studies are from the developed world.20 Our
data allow us to obtain estimates from low‐income households in Mexico.

Using cross‐sectional data from the 2007 ENCEL, we estimate:




19
   The coefficient on Cumulative Transfers is 0.065*** [0.008] and the coefficient on Cumulative Transfers X Early is
‐0.014* [0.008]. Note that this specification also addresses concerns about whether the control households would
behave according to the framework presented in Section 1 if they did not anticipate program transfers for the 18
months before they were enrolled. Without anticipating transfers, the model still predicts increased asset
acquisitions via the forced savings effect, but households would not have complementary savings from the period
in which they were not enrolled.
20
   See, e.g., Dubin and McFadden, 1984; Hsiao and Mountain, 1985; Reiss and White, 2008.


                                                        23
(5)


where electricity usei is household ’s bi‐monthly expenditure for electricity and current
transfersi is the average Oportunidades bi‐monthly cash transfer in 2007 for household . is a
measure of assets – either a variable that takes a value of either 0 or 1 to indicate refrigerator
ownership by household , or an energy‐use‐weighted sum of electricity appliances owned by
household (described in the appendix).21 X i is a vector of household covariates,                            captures
village‐level fixed effects and  i is the error term.22


Note that we observe only whether or not a household owns a particular type of appliance (e.g.
a refrigerator or washing machine) and have no information on its purchase or usage price, nor
on any of its other characteristics. We do estimate village‐fixed effects, which control for much
of the cross‐household variation in energy prices, as electricity prices in Mexico are regulated at
the regional level. We also observe electricity use only once, in 2007, so our analysis of energy
use is purely cross‐sectional.

As described in Section 3, transfers vary across households as a nonlinear function of family
structure. So long as the variation in the current transfer amounts is not correlated with the
propensity to use energy or own an appliance, conditional on household controls, our
specification will yield unbiased estimates. On the other hand, unobservable household
characteristics may be driving appliance use and acquisition decisions. For example, a negative
health shock within a household may increase the utility from a gas stove, and may also make
the household more likely to use it.

To address the endogeneity concerns, we instrument for appliance ownership using
specifications analogous to those described in Section 3 and presented in Section 4. We
instrument for asset ownership with potential cumulative transfers, potential cumulative
transfers interacted with early status, and asset ownership in 1997.23 This means that our first
stage is essentially a cross‐sectional version of the asset acquisition specifications discussed in
Section 4. As such, our specification is identified by variation in potential cumulative transfer
21
   With some assets, such as air conditioning, fans, and lighting, the consumer has considerable latitude to adjust
usage, suggesting that income might affect that decision. For other assets, like water heaters and refrigerators,
the consumer has less control over how much energy it uses.
22
   Although this equation is similar to specifications used to estimate an income elasticity, we did not use a log‐log
specification since transfers represent a varying share of total income (transfer plus earned) across our
households. Results are qualitatively similar when we use a log‐log specification.
23
   We do not use the early indicator by itself as an instrument because it is collinear with the village fixed effects.
We obtain similar results if we estimate state instead of village fixed effects and include early as an instrument.


                                                          24
amounts and randomized early status. So long as that is not correlated with energy utilization
conditional on asset ownership, our specification yields unbiased estimates.

It is conceivable, however, that there is additional endogeniety if the age structure and gender
of children influences the value of using and/or owning assets. Because our data is only cross‐
sectional, we cannot employ the fixed‐effects approach in the acquisition estimation. However,
the similarity between the estimates of the asset acquisition models using household controls
and those using fixed effects suggest that the included household controls capture the relevant
variation in the value of owning an asset. So, we include the same set of household controls as
we did in Tables 4‐7. In addition, because of the same endogeniety concern described with
respect to asset acquisition regarding actual transfers, we instrument for current transfers
using potential current transfers.

Table 9 presents several specifications of equation ( 5 ) using a linear model. As above, we
report robust standard errors clustered at the village level. Columns (1) and (2) do not control
for asset ownership, and estimates suggest a marginal propensity to consume electricity out of
transfers of about 1%. Columns (3) adds a control for asset ownership, and the coefficient
suggests that for every additional aggregated 100‐kWh per month of energy‐using assets a
household owns, bi‐monthly energy expenditure increases by 43 pesos.24 Once we control for
assets, the marginal propensity to consume electricity is not significantly different than zero.
When we instrument to allow for potential endogeniety, the estimated effects of asset
ownership are larger and the marginal propensity to consume is even smaller. Columns (5) and
(6) report the same specifications but replace the asset aggregate with a dummy for
refrigerator ownership with similar results. Using the coefficients in Column (5) adding a
refrigerator to a household has the equivalent energy expenditure effect of increasing their
transfers by 7,900 pesos. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that the main
pathway by which increases in income lead to energy use is through appliance acquisition, not
through increased usage of existing appliances.

     6. Aggregate Energy Use
We next consider the implications of our model for aggregate, country‐level energy
consumption. Figures 4 and 5 suggest that the trends identified in the Oportunidades sample
are representative of the overall Mexican population: at a threshold income level, reached by



24
  The implied retail cost of electricity suggested by this coefficient is lower than the rates faced by even low
consuming Mexicans, though the coefficient could be biased downwards by measurement error.


                                                          25
households in lower and lower deciles over time, refrigerator ownership and household
electricity consumption increase rapidly.

Yet, on its face, it may seem implausible that the household‐level patterns we have described
will influence macro‐level energy use since residential energy use (not including transportation)
accounts for only about 15 percent of total energy use in the developing world (EIA, 2011). By
comparison, the residential sector accounts for over 20 percent of all energy used in the United
States (EIA, 2011). While this difference is certainly consistent with the hypothesis that
economic growth will lead to large gains in residential sector energy use as a country develops,
the residential share in the U.S. is still a relatively small component of overall energy use. On
the other hand, beyond residential energy use, many commercial and industrial activities are at
least indirectly supplying local consumer demand. So, as more consumers buy refrigerators and
air conditioners as well as cell phones and other electronics, local industry will use more energy
to produce at least part of the value‐chain and the commercial sector will grow to supply them
(Wolfram, Shelef and Gertler, 2012). For these reasons, we believe it’s worthwhile to examine
how income growth at different points on the income distribution impact growth in aggregate
energy demand.

To evaluate whether our model of household behavior has implications for aggregate, country‐
level energy consumption, we follow several papers that have analyzed the relationship
between aggregate energy consumption and GDP, showing that the “income elasticity” is
higher when countries are at low income levels (Galli, 1998) and that the income elasticities at a
particular income level have if anything increased over time, contrary to energy “leapfrogging”
and possibly reflecting changes in consumption bundles (Van Benthem, 2010). We disagree
with the interpretation of the estimates as income elasticities for reasons explained below, and
consistent with concerns expressed in some of the previous literature, such as Van Benthem
(2010).

Forecasts from basic estimates of the relationship between income and energy use, however,
have been influential in policy debates about how economic growth is likely to affect both the
demand for energy and climate change. So, while we do not favor the causal interpretation of
the models, we believe that it is useful to ask how these forecasts might vary when accounting
for possible differences across countries with more or less pro‐poor growth. This serves as an
additional check on our model and provides preliminary evidence on the size and importance of
the effects we have identified.

Following the existing literature, we begin with a simple specification:



                                                26
(6)                    ln                     ln                    ln


for country in year , where energy is total final energy consumption per capita, income is
measured as GDP per capita and price is either oil price adjusted for exchange rates and the
local CPI or a constructed price index, incorporating, for instance, local taxes.25     captures
country‐level fixed effects, reflecting factors such as climate and natural resource endowment
and captures worldwide trends, for instance, in technology.

α is usually described as the income elasticity, although since there are no controls for supply‐
side factors and price is measured with considerable imprecision, it is best thought of as a
descriptive parameter which captures the correlation between income and energy use.26 We
drop the price term, as, consistent with previous estimates from the developing world, we find
the coefficient on price to be either zero or positive, suggesting that the variable is picking up
something other than a price response. Because we allow for a time trend and estimate country
fixed effects, this coefficient could capture responses to country‐specific price shocks, which
are likely endogenous to local demand and regulation.

The first prediction of the model in Section 1 is that households at higher income levels will be
more likely to acquire energy‐using assets. At a macro level, this suggests that asset ownership,
and hence energy use, will be positively related to GDP per capita. This is a very straightforward
prediction, and, at the most basic level, is confirmed by all the existing papers in the literature
as they estimate positive coefficient on logged income.

However, our model also suggests that the coefficient on logged income should be higher in
countries that have experienced pro‐poor growth than in countries that have lifted few
households out of poverty. Our model suggests that countries where GDP growth mainly
benefits the wealthy, who already own most energy‐using assets, will not experience the same
growth in energy use. Pro‐rich growth that does not lead to substantial asset accumulation
moves energy demand along the intensive margin, which is small. Indeed, using the Mexican
data, our results in Section 5 indicate that the response of energy use to transfers, conditional
on asset ownership, is very low. However, as pro‐poor growth lifts households out of poverty to



25
   Data were generously provided by Arthur Van Benthem and are described in Van Benthem (2010). “Final”
energy consumption covers energy supplied to the final consumer for all energy uses. It does not include, for
instance, coal burned to create electricity, but it does include electricity.
26
   Several recent papers explore the impact of electrification on various measures of economic development,
suggesting causality could run from energy use to income (Dinkelman, 2011 and Lipscomb et al., 2011).


                                                        27
an income level where they begin to acquire energy‐using assets like refrigerators, the demand
for energy moves along the more explosive extensive margin.

To test whether prediction 1 is more relevant in countries with pro‐poor growth, we estimate:

(7)    ln                    ln                    ln


To estimate ( 7 ) we use data for 37 developing countries over 27 years, from 1980 to 2006. Our
main results define the variable ProPoorGrowth at the country level as the decrease in the
average Gini coefficient from the beginning of the sample (1980‐1993) to the end of our sample
(1994‐2006). On average, inequality is increasing in the countries in our sample, as the mean of
ProPoorGrowth is ‐1.25, but there is a wide range from ‐13 to 13.27 Our prediction is that γ will
be positive.

Prediction 2 of our model is that faster growth will lead to more asset acquisition. To evaluate
this prediction, we include a variable measuring the percent change in per capita GDP as well as
its interaction with ProPoorGrowth:

(8)     ln                    ln


Our model predicts that  will be positive. Previous literature has included lagged GDP per
capita on the hypothesis that energy use might adjust slowly to income. This would suggest a
negative estimate of the parameter . In the end, the estimates will reflect the net of (at least)
these two effects. Because our model relies on credit constraints and high assets prices relative
to current income, it is most relevant for households at the lower end of the income
distribution meaning the effect will be stronger in countries with ProPoorGrowth, suggesting
that will be positive.

Finally, prediction 3 of our model is that the effects of faster growth will be more pronounced
at higher income levels. We evaluate this hypothesis by estimating:

         ln                    ln
(9)                          ln                   ln
                                                                                    ln



27
  Data on Gini coefficients and other measures of ProPoorGrowth are from the World Bank Development
Indicators. We include countries for which both energy use and multiple GINI measures are available.


                                                     28
Our model predicts that    will be positive.

The results reported in Table 10 are consistent with our model. In the first column, we find that
      0. In the second column, we find that       0 and in the third column, we find       0. The
sizes of the coefficients suggest that the effect we have identified is quite large. Consider, for
instance, the results in column (1). The income response for a country such as Brazil, which is at
the 75th percentile of ProPoor Growth is over 1, while a country such as Argentina, which is at
the 25th percentile of Pro Poor Growth has an income response almost half the size.

We have performed several robustness tests, including re‐estimating the specifications in Table
10 on a balanced sample, measuring income growth over a longer time period, varying the cut‐
off date used to determine changes in inequality and replacing ProPoorGrowth with a dummy
variable indicating that the country had above the median changes in inequality. The results are
all very similar to those reported in Table 10.

Though consistent with the hypothesis that countries with pro‐poor growth have much larger
energy income elasticities, the results in this section should be viewed as suggestive. We have
discussed how the coefficient on income should not be interpreted causally. Equally, the
interactions with pro‐poor growth could reflect an omitted variable. It is possible, for example,
that countries that pursue pro‐poor growth policies also promote energy use, for instance,
through electrification projects.

A final concern is that our results may simply reflect the fact, already established in the
literature, that income elasticities vary with income. Considering the results in column (3), this
is more likely to be the case in countries with pro‐poor growth, which provides support for our
model over other explanations offered for income elasticities that vary with income.

We were motivated to explore the relationship between income and energy use because it
appears to be an important component of energy growth projections. Our results suggest that
energy growth will be considerably faster in countries with more pro‐poor growth. If China and
India, the two largest developing countries, continue successfully bringing families out of
poverty, this finding suggests that current energy forecasts could be underestimates (Wolfram,
Shelef and Gertler, 2012). Clearly, more work remains to be done to establish this important
relationship.

   7. Conclusion
Accurate forecasts of energy demand are critical as investments in energy infrastructure
require long lead times. If the global demand for energy increases faster than anticipated, there
                                               29
could be significant shortages and increases in energy prices. In addition, country‐specific
energy forecasts are critical inputs into international climate agreements. And, international
climate negotiations can break down if the parties have different expectations about emissions
paths.

Much of the future increase in the demand for energy will come from low‐ and middle‐income
countries (EIA 2010). We show that there will likely be a surge in the demand for energy as
more and more households currently living in poverty gain from overall economic development
or explicit anti‐poverty programs and enter the middle class. The primary reason is that raising
the income of the poor moves their demand for energy along the extensive margin as they buy
energy‐using assets for the first time. Acquiring an energy‐using asset for the first time leads to
a considerable increase in a household’s energy use. While income growth also affects energy
consumption on the intensive margin, the effect is trivial compared to the effect of
accumulating more energy‐using assets. As the poor come out of poverty their demand moves
mostly along the extensive margin leading to a large discrete jump in demand for energy.

We also show that the speed at which the poor come out of poverty affects the size of this
increase in energy demand, which has important implications for different countries. For
example, we show that two countries that are at the same current level of income per capita
may have different refrigerator ownership rates, with the country where recent growth was
fast having a much higher ownership rate than the country that grew more slowly. Our model
also has implications for how poverty alleviation policies such as cash transfer programs affect
asset accumulation. Specifically, we show that the rate of the payments should matter for asset
acquisition rates. For instance, a program that distributes transfers on a quarterly basis may
lead to more refrigerator acquisition than a program that distributes transfers bi‐weekly.

We provide empirical support for these conclusions from an investigation of the causal impact
of an increase in the stream of income on asset accumulation and energy use in the context of
Mexico’s conditional cash transfer program, Oportunidades. We find that the increase in
income through the transfers had a large effect on asset accumulation, and that effect on asset
accumulation is substantially great when the cash is transferred over a shorter time period.

Finally, we applied the lessons learned from the household to the aggregate energy forecast
models using country‐level panel data. We show that if a country’s growth has been pro‐poor,
the income elasticity of energy is nearly double that of a country with GDP growth that has
been less favorable to the poor. These results suggest that not accounting for pro‐poor growth
would grossly underestimate future energy use.



                                                30
                                         REFERENCES


Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton. 1997. “A Theory of Trickle‐Development.” Review of
Economic Studies, 64(2):151‐172.

Attanasio, Orazio, Costas Meghir and Ana Santiago. 2012. “Education Choices in Mexico: Using
a Structural Model and a Randomized Experiment to Evaluate Progresa.” Review of Economic
Studies, 79(1): 37‐66.

Banerjee, Abhijit. 2004. “Contracting Constraints, Credit Markets, and Economic Development.”
In Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, VIII World Congress of
the Econometric Society, 3: 1‐46, Mathias Dewatripoint, Lars P. Hansen and Stephen J.
Turnovsky, eds. Cambridge University Press.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew F. Newman. 1993. “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development.” Journal of Political Economy, 101(2):274‐298.

Bento, Antonio, Larry Goulder, Mark Jacobsen, and Roger von Haefen. 2009. “Distributional and
Efficiency Impacts of Increased U.S. Gasoline Taxes." American Economic Review, 99(3): 667‐
699.

Bonus, Holger. 1973. “Quasi‐Engel Curves, Diffusion, and the Ownership of Major Consumer
Durables.” Journal of Political Economy, 81(3): 655‐677.

Dargay, Joyce, Dermot Gately and Martin Sommer. 2007. “Vehicle Ownership and Income
Growth, Worldwide: 1960‐2030.” Energy Journal, 28(4): 143–170.

Dargay, Joyce and Dermot Gately. 1999. “Income's Effect on Car and Vehicle Ownership,
Worldwide: 1960‐2015.” Transportation Research, Part A 33: 101‐138.

de Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital in
Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4):
1329–72

Dinkelman, Taryn. 2011. “The Effects of Rural Electrification on Employment: New Evidence
from South Africa.” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3078–3108..

Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Daniel L. McFadden. 1984. “An Econometric Analysis of Residential Electric
Appliance Holdings and Consumption.” Econometrica, 52(2): 345‐362.

Energy Information Administration. 2011. International Energy Outlook 2011. Washington, DC.
Available at: www.eia.gov/oiaf/ieo/index.html

Energy Information Administration. 2010. World Energy Projection System Plus: Residential
Model. Washington, DC.


                                              31
Farrell, M. J. 1954. “The Demand for Motor‐Cars in the United States.” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society. Series A (General), 117(2): 171‐201.

Galli, Rossana. 1998. “The Relationship between Energy and Income Levels: Forecasting Long
Term Energy Demand in Asian Emerging Countries.” Energy Journal, 19(4): 85‐105.

Gertler, Paul, Sebastien Martinez and Marta Rubio‐Codina. 2012. “Investing Cash Transfers to
Raise Long‐term Living Standards.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(1): 164–92.

Hsiao, Cheng and Dean Moutain. 1985. “Estimating the Short‐Run Income Elasticity of Demand
for Electricity.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 80: 259–265.

Hoddinott, J. and E. Skoufias. 2004. “The impact of Progresa on Food Consumption,” Economic
Development and Cultural Change, 53(1).

Kopits, Elizabeth and Maureen L. Cropper. 2005. “Traffic Fatalities and Economic Growth,”
Accident Analysis and Prevention, 37(1):169‐178.

Letschert, Virginie and Michael McNeil. 2007. Coping with Residential Electricity Demand in
India’s Future – How Much Can Efficiency Achieve? Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
(LBNL 63199).

Lindh, Thomas and Henry Ohlsson. 1998. “Self‐employment and wealth inequality”. Review of
Income and Wealth, 44(1):25‐42.

Lipscomb, Molly, A. Mushfiq Mobarak and Tania Barham. 2011. “Development Effects of
Electrification: Evidence from the Geologic Placement of Hydropower Plants in Brazil.” Working
paper.

Lloyd‐Ellis, Huw and Dan Bernhardt. 2000. “Enterprise, Inequality and Economic Development”.
The Review of Economic Studies, 67(1):147‐168.

Parker, Susan and Emmanuel Skoufias. 2000. “The Impact of Progresa On Work, Leisure, and
Time Allocation,” International Food Policy Research Institute Discussion Paper.

Procuraduria Federal del Consumidor. 2010. “Dato Agregado Historico, Precios Promedio
Mensales.” Customized report.

Rapson, David. 2011. “Durable Goods and Long‐Run Electricity Demand: Evidence from Air
Conditioner Purchase Behavior,” UC Davis Working Paper.

Reiss, Peter and Matthew White. 2008. “What Changes Energy Consumption? Prices and Public
Pressures,” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(3):636‐663.

Schiraldi, Pasquale. 2011. “Automobile Replacement: A Dynamic Structural Approach,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 42(2), Summer: 266‐291.




                                              32
Schultz, T. Paul. 2004. “School Subsidies for the Poor: Evaluating the Mexican Progresa Poverty
Program,” Journal of Development Economics, 74 (1), June: 199‐250.

Skoufias, E. 2001. Progresa and Its Impacts on the Human Capital and Welfare of Households in
Rural Mexico: A Synthesis of the Results of an Evaluation by IFPRI. International Food Policy
Research Institute Discussion Paper.

Skoufias, E., B. Davis and S. Vega. 2001. Targeting the Poor in Mexico: an Evaluation of the
Selection of Households for Progresa. International Food Policy Research Institute Discussion
Paper No. 103.

Skoufias, E. and S. Parker. 2001. “Conditional Cash Transfers and Their Impact on Child Work
and Schooling: Evidence from the PROGRESA Program in Mexico,” Economía, 2(1), Fall: 45‐86.

Skoufias, E., B. Davis and J. Bereman. 1999. An Evaluation of the Selection of Beneficiary
Households in the Education, Health, and Nutrition Program (PROGRESA) of Mexico.
International Food Policy Research Institute.

Van Benthem, Arthur. 2010. “Has Energy Leapfrogging Occurred on a Large Scale?” United
States Association for Energy Economics and the International Association for Energy
Economics, Working Paper 10‐047.

Wolfram, Catherine, Orie Shelef and Paul Gertler. 2012. “How Will Energy Demand Develop in
the Developing World?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(1): 119‐138.




                                               33
             Figure 1: Refrigerator Ownership and Household Expenditure Level




Sources: Mexico, 2008, Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso y Gasto de los Hogares. Brazil, 2009,
National Household Sample Survey – PNAD. China, 2002, Chinese Household Income Project.
India, 2008, National Sample Survey. Indonesia, 2004, National Socio‐Economic Survey –
Susenas. Annual Expenditure and Income Per Person calculations divides household
expenditure and income by the number of adult equivalents in the household, where each
household member less than 12 years of age is treated as half an adult. Frequency weights are
used for all surveys other than China, which do not report weights.




                                              34
                                      Figure 2
                     Panel A: Basic Model: Indifferent Consumers
Marginal
Utility




                                                                                    Income
                                  2
           Panel B: Model with Transfers: Low Valuation Consumers Do Not Purchase
Marginal
Utility




                                                                                    Income
                                      2
            Panel C: Model with Different Per‐Period Transfer Levels: Consumers Save
Marginal
Utility




                                                                                    Income
                                        35
Figure 3: Hypothetical GDP Paths




                        t*




              36
                                        Figure 4: Growth in Refrigerator Ownership by Consumption Quartile for Mexico

                                        100%
                                         90%
Share of Households with Refrigerator



                                         80%
                                         70%
                                         60%
                                         50%
                                         40%
                                         30%
                                         20%
                                         10%
                                          0%
                                                1994        1996    1998     2000        2002     2004    2005      2006      2008

                                                       1st Decile     2nd Decile         3rd Decile      4th‐10th Deciles

                      Source: Mexico Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso y Gasto de los Hogares (1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008).




                                                                                    37
 Figure 5: Growth in Electricity Expenditures by Consumption Quartile for Mexico


      Normalized Electricity Expenditure Per Capita   2.5



                                                       2



                                                      1.5



                                                       1



                                                      0.5



                                                       0
                                                            1996        1998    2000         2002       2004     2005       2006      2008

                                                                   1st Decile   2nd Decile          3rd Decile     4th‐10th Deciles


Source: Mexico Encuesta Nacional de Ingreso y Gasto de los Hogares (1996, 1998, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008).




                                                                                       38
Table 1: Oportunidades Bi‐Monthly Support Levels in 2003 (pesos)
                 Basic Support:               155

                 Educational Scholarship:
                 Grade                        Boys    Girls
                 Third                        105     105
                 Fourth                       120     120
                 Fifth                        155     155
                 Sixth                        205     205
                 Seventh                      300     315
                 Eighth                       315     350
                 Ninth                        335     385
                 Tenth                        505     580
                 Eleventh                     545     620
                 Twelfth                      575     655

     A household can receive a maximum of 1,025 pesos with children
     through 6th grade or 1,715 pesos with children in 7th grade or
     higher.

     An additional 200 pesos for children in 3rd‐6th grades and 250 pesos
     for children in 7th grade or higher are provided once a year for
     school supplies.




                                     39
                              Table 2: Summary Statistics: Dependent Variables

                                  Late Households             Early Households          Difference
                                  Mean       SD      N        Mean        SD     N      Mean       P‐Value
Assets ‐ Dependent Variables At Baseline
  Refrigerator                    0.038      0.191   3341     0.044      0.205   5185   ‐0.006    0.540
  Washing Machine                 0.012      0.109   3342     0.014      0.119   5184   ‐0.002    0.600
  Stove                           0.165      0.371   3342     0.158      0.364   5186   0.007     0.777




                                                         40
Table 3: Summary Statistics: Cumulative Transfers (Ten Thousands of Pesos (2003))
                           Late Households                Early Households
                    25%        Median      75%     25%         Median      75%
      1998                                         0.09          0.13      0.21
      1999                                         0.24          0.38      0.61
      2000m         0.06        0.09      0.16     0.32          0.51      0.82
      2000n         0.18        0.33      0.53     0.45          0.79      1.23
      2003          0.93        1.69      2.63     1.24          2.19      3.36
      2007          2.36        3.89      5.67     2.63          4.33      6.35




                                          41
                Figure 6: Refrigerator Ownership and Cumulative Transfers in 2003




Lowess regressions. Excludes the bottom and top 2% of cumulative transfers in each group.




                                                      42
                          Table 4: Basic Results ‐ Refrigerator ‐ Income Effects


                               (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)           (6)
                               OLS          IV             IV            OLS         IV             IV
                            Discrete Time Hazard     Household FE     Discrete Time Hazard     Household FE
 Cumulative Transfers       0.023*** 0.029***          0.048***
                             [0.004]     [0.005]        [0.005]
 Cumulative Transfers X                                               0.020***     0.024***      0.043***
 Bottom 75% of                                                         [0.004]      [0.005]       [0.005]
 Baseline Assets
 Cumulative Transfers X                                               0.032***     0.040***      0.058***
 Top 25% of Baseline                                                   [0.006]      [0.007]       [0.007]
 Assets


 N                           30,414       30,414         30,258        30,414       30,414         30,258
 R‐squared                   0.100                                     0.100

 F Stat on Excluded Variables ‐            3,156         2,262
 Cumulative Transfers
 F Stat on Excluded Variables ‐ Cumulative Transfers X Bottom 75%                   3,161           3,767
 F Stat on Excluded Variables ‐ Cumulative Transfers X Top 25%                      1,635           1,596
 Number of Households                                  6,655                                        6,655
Note: All specifications include state by round‐ fixed effects. All rounds through 2003 included. Specifications in
columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) include household controls including number of children seven and younger, number
of children 8 to 17, number of males 18 to 54, number of females 18 to 54, number of adults 55 and over, number
of individuals with unreported ages, head of household’s gender, head of household’s and spouse’s age, and
education, and whether the household owns the house they live in, farm assets at baseline, number of other social
programs the household is the beneficiary of, and village characteristics including migration intensity,
marginalization and distance to nearest city. Columns (4) and (5) also include an indicator if the household is in the
Top 25% of baseline animal assets. In column (2) and (3), instruments include Potential Cumulative Transfers. In
column (5) and (6), instruments include Potential Cumulative Transfers X Bottom 75% of Baseline Animal Assets
and Potential Cumulative Transfers X Top 25% of Baseline Animal Assets. Column (6) including household fixed
effects drops 156 singletons.
Robust standard errors clustered by village in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                         43
                          Table 5: Basic Results ‐ Refrigerator – Timing Effect

                                       (1)         (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)
                                       OLS         OLS           OLS           IV            IV
                                                      Discrete Time Hazard                   Household FE
       Cumulative Transfers             0.023***   0.028***      0.039***      0.056***      0.061***
                                        [0.004]    [0.004]       [0.007]       [0.007]       [0.007]
       Early                                       ‐0.016*** ‐0.007            ‐0.009*
                                                   [0.005]       [0.005]       [0.005]
       Cumulative Transfers X Early                              ‐0.015**      ‐0.021***     ‐0.018**
                                                                 [0.006]       [0.007]       [0.007]

       Net Early Effect at 2003                                  ‐0.025***     ‐0.033***
       Median Cumulative Transfers                               [0.008]       [0.008]

       N                                30,414     30,414        30,414        30,414        30,258
       R‐squared                        0.100      0.100         0.101

       F Stat on Excluded Variables ‐ Cumulative Transfers                     1,554         1,226
       F Stat on Excluded Variables ‐ Cumulative Transfers X Status            1,974         1,889
       Number of Households                                                                  6,655

Note: All specifications include state by round‐ fixed effects. All rounds through 2003 included. Specifications in
columns (1) – (4) include household controls including number of children seven and younger, number of children
8 to 17, number of males 18 to 54, number of females 18 to 54, number of adults 55 and over, number of
individuals with unreported ages, head of household’s gender, head of household’s and spouse’s age, and
education, and whether the household owns the house they live in, farm assets at baseline, number of other social
programs the household is the beneficiary of, and village characteristics including migration intensity,
marginalization and distance to nearest city. In columns (4) and (5), instruments include Potential Cumulative
Transfers and Potential Cumulative Transfers X Early. Column (5) including household fixed effects drops 156
singletons.
Robust standard errors clustered by village in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                       44
                                   Table 6: Basic Results ‐ Other Assets

               Cumulative Transfers       Early X                     Early                Net Early Effect     N
                                          Cumulative Transfers
Refrigerator
   DTH       0.056*** [0.007]             ‐0.021***     [0.007]       ‐0.009* [0.005]      ‐0.033***[0.008] 30,414
   HH FE     0.061*** [0.007]             ‐0.018**      [0.007]                                             30,258
Washing Machine (ex 99)
   DTH       0.018*** [0.005]             ‐0.005        [0.004]       ‐0.004     [0.004] ‐0.011** [0.005] 26,166
   HH FE     0.021*** [0.005]             ‐0.007        [0.005]                                           26,035
Stove (LP Gas)
   DTH       0.029*** [0.008]             ‐0.017***     [0.006]       ‐0.008     [0.006] ‐0.027***[0.008] 26,007
   HH FE     0.031*** [0.008]             ‐0.016**      [0.007]                                           25,798

Note: All specifications include state by round‐ fixed effects and household controls, as described in the notes to
Table 4. Instruments include: Potential Cumulative Transfers and Potential Cumulative Transfers X Early. All rounds
through 2003 included except where noted. Washing machine not reported in 1999. Refrigerator entry repeats
results from Table 4. Net early effect is estimated at 2003 median cumulative transfers. DTH indicated Discrete
Time Hazard. HHFE indicated Household Fixed Effects. Cross Section indicates that the regression is a cross section
of all households with asset at baseline as a control.
Robust standard errors clustered by village in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
F‐stat on excluded variables not reported. All exceed 200.




                                                        45
      Table 7: Placebo Test: Do Cumulative Transfer Predict Asset Ownership at Baseline?
                                                        Baseline Asset                    2003 Asset
                                                         Ownership                        Ownership
      Refrigerator
         Cumulative Transfers in 2003               0.006        [0.006]            0.055***       [0.011]
         Early                                      0.005        [0.012]            0.028          [0.026]
         Cumulative Transfers X Early               ‐0.001       [0.005]            ‐0.030***      [0.011]
         Net Early Effect                           0.004        [0.008]            ‐0.007         [0.018]
      Washing Machine
         Cumulative Transfers in 2003               0.003        [0.004]            0.009          [0.007]
         Early                                      0.007        [0.007]            ‐0.025         [0.016]
         Cumulative Transfers X Early               ‐0.001       [0.004]            0.004          [0.014]
         Net Early Effect                           0.005        [0.003]            ‐0.022**       [0.011]
      Stove
         Cumulative Transfers in 2003               0.045***     [0.012]            0.041***       [0.012]
         Early                                      ‐0.005       [0.026]            0.013          [0.032]
         Cumulative Transfers X Early               ‐0.015       [0.011]            ‐0.029**       [0.012]
         Net Early Effect                           ‐0.022       [0.018]            ‐0.021         [0.023]

Note: For each asset, we report results from two different specifications, one estimated using asset ownership
data at baseline and the other using data from 2003. All specifications include state fixed effects and household
controls, as described in the notes to Table 4. All specifications estimated using IV with Potential Cumulative
Transfers and Potential Cumulative Transfers X Early as instruments. Net early effect is estimated at 2003 median
cumulative transfers.
Robust standard errors clustered by village in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
F‐stat on excluded variables not reported. All exceed 400.




                                                       46
                         Table 8: Future Transfers and Refrigerator Acquisition
                                           (1)                (2)                 (3)
                                           OLS                OLS                 IV

                Cumulative Transfers       0.039***           0.040***            0.084***
                                           [0.007]            [0.007]             [0.011]
                Early                      ‐0.007             ‐0.008              ‐0.015***
                                           [0.005]            [0.005]             [0.005]
                Cumulative Transfers X     ‐0.015**           ‐0.015**            ‐0.026***
                Early                      [0.006]            [0.006]             [0.007]

                Net Early Effect at 2003   ‐0.025***          ‐0.025***           ‐0.045***
                Median Cumulative          [0.008]            [0.008]             [0.009]
                Transfers

                Future Cumulative                             <0.001              ‐0.047***
                Transfers X 03                                [0.004]             [0.011]
                Future Cumulative                             ‐0.004***           ‐0.013***
                Transfers X 00n                               [0.001]             [0.003]
                Future Cumulative                             <0.001              ‐0.006**
                Transfers X 00m                               [0.001]             [0.002]
                Future Cumulative                             >‐0.001             ‐0.003
                Transfers X 99                                [0.001]             [0.002]
                Future Cumulative                             <0.001              ‐0.001
                Transfers X 98                                [0.001]             [0.002]

                N                          30,414             30,414              30,414
                R‐squared                  0.101              0.101

Note: All specifications include state by round‐ fixed effects and household controls described in the notes to Table
4. All rounds through 2003 included. Instruments include Potential Cumulative Transfers, Potential Cumulative
Transfers X Early, and Potential Future Cumulative Transfers by round. Column (1) repeats results from Table 5.
Robust standard errors clustered by village in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10
F‐stat on excluded variables not reported. All exceed 200.




                                                        47
        Table 9: Effect of Transfers on Energy Demand Oportunidades Households (2007)
                                            Dependent Variable: Bi‐Monthly Electricity Expenditures
                                          (1)         (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)         (6)
                                          OLS         IV            OLS             IV           OLS         IV
Appliance Aggregate                                               432.1***      687.6***
                                                                   [41.4]        [254.0]
Refrigerator                                                                                   54.2***    103.0**
                                                                                                [5.4]      [44.4]
Current Transfers                        94.6**      200.6          62.2          ‐37.0         68.8        ‐30.3
(Bi‐Monthly, 10,000 2007 pesos)          [45.5]     [197.0]        [43.9]        [213.5]        [43.9]     [218.7]


N                                        3,960       3,960         3,960          3,960         3,960      3,960
 2
R                                        0.256                     0.507                        0.261


First‐stage F‐stat (Asset Index/Refrigerator)                                     36.97                    22.55
First‐stage F‐stat (Current Transfers)               24.93                        24.85                    24.61



Note: All specifications include village fixed effects and household controls described in the notes to Table 4. IV
instruments include: Potential Current Transfers, Potential Cumulative Transfers, Potential Cumulative Transfers X
Early, Asset Aggregate in 1997 (4 only), Refrigerator Ownership in 1997 (6 only). Includes only households with
reported positive electricity expenditures. Asset Aggregate scaled to estimated MWhr/month.
Robust standard errors clustered by village in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                                             48
               Table 10: Aggregate Country‐Level Energy Consumption
                                                (1)          (2)        (3)

Income (log)                                 0.925***      0.856***   0.909***
                                              [0.087]       [0.104]    [0.088]
Income Growth                                               ‐0.324      0.307
                                                            [0.201]    [0.726]
Income (log) X Income Growth                                            0.097
                                                                       [0.116]
Income (log) X ProPoorGrowth                 0.073***                 0.057***
                                              [0.017]                  [0.016]
Income Growth X ProPoorGrowth                              0.122**    0.893***
                                                           [0.053]     [0.233]
Income (log) X Income Growth X                                        0.146***
ProPoorGrowth                                                          [0.037]

Country Fixed Effects                           YES          YES        YES

Year Fixed Effects                              YES          YES        YES

Observations                                    907          892        892
R‐squared                                      0.981        0.981      0.983
Robust standard errors clustered by country in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.10.




                                               49
                                                         APPENDIX

Appendix Table 1 describes the weights used to create the asset aggregate reflected in Table 9:
Effect of Transfers on Energy Demand Oportunidades Households (2007) above. The aggregate
was constructed using data from two sources. The first is a document from the Mexican
Ministry of Social Development based on data from the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE).
The document estimates average monthly electricity consumption of a typical Mexican
household through the use of appliances and the time spent in their use. They consider the
average power needed for each appliance, as well as the average time a typical Mexican
household (not necessarily a poor household) uses each appliance per month. We use the
average monthly electricity usage to assign each appliance a KW‐hour value in the aggregate
and then use data from the ENCEL to select the appliances that the population of interest
possesses. Thus, if a household owns all of the appliances in the table and lives in a 3 room
house, the corresponding asset aggregate for that household would be equal to 199. However,
if the household lives in a one room house and only owns a TV and a refrigerator, the
corresponding aggregate would be equal to 158.

Appendix Table 1: Asset Aggregate Construction: Household Appliance Use and Average
Monthly Kilowatt Consumption in Mexico

                                            Average Power                            Time use      Kilowatts hours
                                                             Time use per day
                                            in Watts                                 per month     per month
             Refrigerator                   500 watts        8 hours/day             240 hours     120
             Light bulbs (1 + 1 per room)   60 watts         5 hours/day             150 hours     9
                               1/
               Washing Machine               400 watts           1.3 hours/day      32 hours       13
               TV                            50 watts            6.3 hours/day      180 hours      10
               Radio/ Stereo/CD Player       50 watts            5 hours/day        150 hours      8
               Blender                       400 watts           10 minutes/day     5 hours        2
       1/ The use of the washing machine is 4 hours twice per week.
       Source: “Tabla de consumo” (2010), http://www.cfe.gob.mx/sustentabilidad/ahorroenergia/Paginas/Tabladeconsumo.aspx, Federal
       Electricity Commission (Comisión Federal de Electricidad, CFE).
       Note that these numbers were obtained assuming average electricity consumption for typical Mexican households, not necessarily
       for households living in poverty.




                                                              50
                                      Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                 Late Households                Early Households          Difference
                                 Mean          SD        N      Mean      SD       N      Mean       P‐Value
Panel A: Household Socio‐Economic Characteristics at Baseline
  Age of Head of Household       42.287        13.906 3336      41.575    13.337   5168   0.711     0.119
  Male Head of Household         0.929         0.257     3342   0.929     0.256    5187   <0.001    0.947
  Home Owner                     0.929         0.256     3342   0.944     0.229    5187   ‐0.015    0.094      *
  Age of Spouse                  36.422        11.753 3017      36.244    11.793   4664   0.178     0.661
  Spouse Education ‐             0.609         0.488     3020   0.633     0.482    4676   ‐0.024    0.374
  Incomplete Primary
  Head of Household Education 0.666            0.472     3342   0.668     0.471    5187   ‐0.002    0.902
  ‐ Incomplete Primary
  Spouse Education ‐ Primary     0.028         0.165     3020   0.025     0.157    4676   0.003     0.573
  Head of Household Education 0.029            0.167     3342   0.035     0.183    5187   ‐0.006    0.259
  ‐ Primary
  Spouse Education ‐ More        0.002         0.045     3020   0.003     0.058    4676   ‐0.001    0.272
  Than Primary
  Head of Household Education 0.006            0.075     3342   0.008     0.087    5187   ‐0.002    0.304
  ‐ More Than Primary
  Indigenous Spouse              0.315         0.465     3008   0.334     0.472    4651   ‐0.019    0.686
  Indigenous Head of             0.400         0.490     3330   0.384     0.486    5161   0.016     0.762
  Household
  Number of Other Social         0.600         0.689     3253   0.468     0.591    5096   0.132     <0.001     ***
  Programs
  Number of children 7 and       1.744         1.276     3235   1.721     1.285    5055   0.024     0.571
  under
  Number of children 8 to 17     1.905         1.561     3235   1.865     1.559    5055   0.040     0.396
  Number of Males 18‐54          1.039         0.594     3235   1.042     0.606    5055   ‐0.003    0.852
  Number of Females 18‐54        1.128         0.555     3235   1.123     0.570    5055   0.005     0.783
  Number of adults 55 plus       0.355         0.660     3235   0.337     0.637    5055   0.018     0.358
  Number of Age unknown          <0.001        <0.001 3235      <0.001    0.001    5055   >‐0.001   0.317
  Electricity                    0.652         0.476     3236   0.618     0.486    5062   0.034     0.453
  Horses                         0.281         0.701     3232   0.283     0.692    5051   ‐0.002    0.947
  Mules                          0.322         0.701     3229   0.332     0.712    5054   ‐0.010    0.808
  Oxen                           0.053         0.412     3230   0.083     0.458    5055   ‐0.031    0.034      **
  Goats                          0.856         3.374     3233   1.085     3.962    5054   ‐0.229    0.214
  Cows                           0.574         1.945     3230   0.607     1.857    5058   ‐0.032    0.708
  Chickens                       6.476         6.337     3224   5.891     6.083    5051   0.584     0.073      *
  Pigs                           1.126         1.934     3226   0.971     1.777    5052   0.155     0.279
  Rabbits                        0.175         1.690     3231   0.121     1.474    5061   0.055     0.317
  Hectares Irrigated             0.035         0.349     3236   0.037     0.340    5061   ‐0.002    0.902
  Hectares                       1.778         2.715     3227   1.669     2.603    5047   0.109     0.427
  Hectares Grazing               0.121         1.149     3236   0.164     1.329    5062   ‐0.043    0.378
  Baseline Animal Assets         2372          4555      3236   2462      4473     5062   ‐89.780   0.690



                                                          51
     Appendix Table 2: Summary Statistics (Continued)
                                   Late Households                Early Households          Difference
                                   Mean       SD       N          Mean        SD      N     Mean      P‐Value
Panel B: Village Characteristics
  Migration Intensity              0.056      1.024    168        0.039      0.991    272   0.017    0.864
  Degree of Marginalization        0.077      0.267    168        0.091      0.288    274   ‐0.014   0.608
  Low or Moderate
  Degree of Marginalization        0.756      0.430    168        0.719      0.450    274   0.037    0.389
  High
  Degree of Marginalization        0.167      0.373    168        0.190      0.393    274   ‐0.023   0.536
  Very High
  KM to Nearest City               101.033    43.548   171        102.285    41.002   275   ‐1.252   0.763




                                                             52
