                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    FLIGHTS TO SAFETY

                                         Lieven Baele
                                        Geert Bekaert
                                       Koen Inghelbrecht
                                           Min Wei

                                      Working Paper 19095
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w19095


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                             May 2013, Revised May 2019




The authors greatly benefited from discussions with seminar participants at Antwerp University,
the National Bank of Belgium, the University of the Basque Country, Tilburg University, the
Spring 2014 Inquire Europe-UK conference in Vienna, the 2014 Bank of Canada/Banco de
España Workshop on “International Financial Markets,” and the 2015 American Finance
Association in Boston, and in particular with Hans Dewachter, Frank de Jong, Joost Driessen,
Eric Ghysels, Campbell Harvey, Philippe Mueller, Laurens Swinkels, Allan Timmermann, and
Mathijs van Dijk. We are particularly grateful to Frank de Jong for sharing his corporate bond
market dataset with us and Zilong Niu for his excellent research assistance with the construction
of the quality/liquidity sorted equity portfolios. Baele, Bekaert, and Inghelbrecht gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the National Bank of Belgium and Inquire Europe. Bekaert
acknowledges financial support from Netspar. The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect views of the National Bank of Belgium, the Federal Reserve
System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2013 by Lieven Baele, Geert Bekaert, Koen Inghelbrecht, and Min Wei. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Flights to Safety
Lieven Baele, Geert Bekaert, Koen Inghelbrecht, and Min Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 19095
May 2013, Revised May 2019
JEL No. E43,E44,G11,G12,G14

                                         ABSTRACT

We identify flight-to-safety (FTS) days for 23 countries using only stock and bond returns and a
model averaging approach. FTS days comprise less than 2% of the sample, and are associated
with a 2.7% average bond-equity return differential and significant flows out of equity funds and
into government bond and money market funds. FTS represents flights to both quality and
liquidity in international equity markets, but mainly a flight-to-quality in the US corporate bond
market. Emerging markets, endowment funds, and hedge funds all perform poorly during FTS,
while hedge funds appear to vary their systematic exposures prior to a FTS.


Lieven Baele                                    Koen Inghelbrecht
Tilburg University                              Department Finance
5000 LE Tilburg                                 Faculty of Business Administration
The Netherlands                                 and Public Administration
Lieven.Baele@uvt.nl                             University College Ghent
                                                Voskenslaan 270
Geert Bekaert                                   B-9000 Gent, Belgium
Graduate School of Business                     Koen.Inghelbrecht@hogent.be
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, 411 Uris Hall                    Min Wei
New York, NY 10027                              Federal Reserve Board
and NBER                                        Division of Monetary Affairs
gb241@columbia.edu                              Mail stop 74
                                                Washington, DC 20551
                                                min.wei@frb.gov
1       Introduction

In periods of market stress, the financial press often refers to extreme and inverse movements in

bond and equity markets as flights-to-safety or flights-to-quality1 .

    There is an active theoretical literature studying such phenomena. Traditional representative-

agent consumption based asset pricing models (Barsky (1989) and Bekaert et al. (2009), for ex-

ample), define a flight-to-safety as the joint occurrence of higher economic uncertainty (viewed as

exogenous) with lower equity prices (through the cash flow and/or risk premium channel) and low

real rates (through the precautionary savings channel). More recent papers examine how market

dynamics might cause or exacerbate such a phenomenon. In Vayanos (2004), investors behave like

fund managers and their fear of redemptions during high volatility periods cause them to reduce

holdings of less liquid assets, resulting in a flight-to-liquidity. The same fear also raises investors’

effective risk aversion, leading to a flight-to-safety that pushes up risk premiums and drives down

the prices of risky assets (a flight-to-quality). In Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2008), Knightian

uncertainty leads agents to shed risky assets in favor of safer claims when aggregate liquidity is

low, thereby provoking a flight-to-quality and safety. Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) study a

model in which speculators, who provide market liquidity, face margin requirements that increase

in asset price volatility. They show that following a bad shock, the margin requirements can cause

not only a liquidity spiral, with liquidity deteriorating across markets, but also a flight-to-quality,

with a sharper drop in liquidity provision for the higher margin, more volatile assets.

    To test such a diverse set of theoretical models, an empirical characterization of flight-to-safety

episodes is essential. For that purpose, this paper defines, detects, and characterizes flight-to-safety

episodes for 23 countries, using daily data on only two types of assets: the prototypical risky asset

(a well-diversified equity index) and the prototypical safe and liquid asset (the benchmark Treasury

security). We define a flight-to-safety, referred to as FTS henceforth, as an episode that satisfies

three criteria: 1) a large, positive bond return accompanied by a large, negative equity return,

2) negative high-frequency correlations between bond and stock returns, and 3) elevated market

stress, as demonstrated by a high equity market volatility. To identify FTS, we employ a bivariate

regime-switching (RS) model for bond and equity returns that allows FTS events of varying degrees
    1
   In particular, between August 2004 and June 2015, a period marred by a global financial crisis, the Financial
Times alone referred 538 times to Flight(s)-to-Quality and 464 times to Flight(s)-to-Safety.


                                                       1
of persistence. Economic restrictions on risk premia in different regimes aid in the identification.

The specification and parameter estimates of this model are discussed in Section 2. A key finding

is that relative risk premiums increase substantially during FTS events. We also formulate two

alternative models, a “threshold model” inspired by the concept of exceedance correlation in Bae

et al. (2003), and an “ordinal index model”, similar to the model used by Hollo et al. (2012) to

measure financial instability. Applying model averaging techniques to these three models provides

our preferred, robust estimates of the FTS events. The two alternative models, the construction of

the preferred FTS measure, and the empirical results are discussed in Section 3.

  Section 4 examines the identified FTS episodes across all 23 countries. Section 4.1 shows that FTS

episodes comprise less than 2% of the sample, and are predominantly short-lived, with about 94% of

the FTS episodes lasting 3 days or less. During those episodes, bond returns exceed equity returns

by about 2.72% on average. Section 4.2 shows that FTS episodes are also associated with decreases

in consumer sentiment, increases in implied volatilities for major stock indices, and appreciations of

the so-called “safe-haven” currencies – the Japanese Yen and the Swiss Franc. Although asset prices

could change without large portfolio re-allocations or trading volumes, Section 4.3 documents that,

at least in the US, FTS events are accompanied by significant flows out of equity funds and into

government bond and money market funds. Section 4.4 addresses the question whether the FTS is

best characterized as a flight-to-quality or a flight-to-liquidity. Safety and quality are mostly used

interchangeably in this context, referring to a preference for less risky assets, but as the theories we

discussed earlier illustrate, in times of stress investors may also demand liquidity and the benchmark

safe assets tend to be highly liquid as well. To differentiate the two, we examine returns to corporate

bonds (for the US) and equities (for all other markets), double sorted on measures of quality and

liquidity, during FTS episodes. While we find a strong flight-to-quality effect in both the corporate

bond and equity markets, we find evidence for a flight-to-liquidity effect only in the equity market.

  Section 5 considers the global nature of FTS events, using data from a larger set of emerging

markets. We find that emerging equity and bond markets are both exposed to global FTS events

beyond their usual exposures to a benchmark global portfolio. In addition, the FTS exposure of

emerging equity markets appear to be lower for more integrated markets.

  Section 6 investigates whether some popular investment strategies can “hedge” against FTS

events. First, we consider the benefits of diversification into different geographic areas, alternative

                                                   2
asset classes, or alternative investment vehicles, strategies reportedly followed by major US endow-

ments such as Yale and Harvard. We find that proxies of asset allocations used by the average

endowment as well as that of Harvard and Yale still exhibit negative exposures to FTS events. In

addition, we find that nearly all hedge fund styles demonstrate negative FTS betas. Inspired by

Patton and Ramadorai (2013)’s analysis of changing market exposure of hedge funds, we show that

the systematic exposures of hedge fund returns slowly increase until about 60 days before a FTS

event and then steeply decrease until shortly before the event.

    A number of previous empirical studies touch on one or more aspects of the FTS phenomenon,

though none as systematically as the current paper. Baele et al. (2010) show that stock-bond

illiquidity factors (potentially capturing “flights-to-liquidity”) and the VIX (potentially capturing

“flights-to-safety”) help capture episodes of negative stock-bond return correlations. Connolly et al.

(2005) and Bansal et al. (2010) show that periods of higher stock market volatility are associated

with lower correlations between stock and bond returns and with higher bond returns. Goyenko

and Sarkissian (2012) show that higher illiquidity of non-benchmark US Treasury bills, possibly

associated with a flight-to-liquidity and/or quality, reduces future stock returns around the globe.

Beber et al. (2014) identify “risk-off” episodes based on correlations between foreign exchange

returns, while Baur and Lucey (2009) define a flight-to-quality as a period of declining correlation

between stock and bond returns amid a falling stock market and differentiate such episodes from

contagion. In addition, the recent financial crisis sparked a literature on indicators of financial

instability and systemic risk, which are related to our FTS indicator. The majority of those articles

use data from the financial sector only (see e.g. Acharya et al. (2017); Adrian and Brunnermeier

(2016); Allen et al. (2012); Brownlees and Engle (2011)), whereas Hollo et al. (2012) and Aikman

et al. (2017) use a wider set of stress indicators.



2     A Dynamic Model of Bond and Stock Returns with FTS

Recall that we identified three “symptoms” of a FTS: 1) a large, positive bond return accompanied

by a large, negative equity return, 2) negative high-frequency correlations between bond and stock

returns, and 3) elevated market stress, represented by a high equity market volatility. To avoid

relying on arbitrary parameter choices determining what constitutes “stress” and how negative the


                                                      3
stock-bond correlations ought to be, we specify a RS model that embeds these three symptoms but

allows the data to speak to the exact magnitude of stress and return differentials between bonds

and equities on FTS days and of the difference in stock-bond correlations between FTS and non-

FTS days. The model is flexibly parameterized so that it can accommodate FTS episodes of any

duration, including very short-lived ones. Moreover, the model yields estimates of expected returns

in different regimes, which we exploit to impose economic restrictions that aid the identification.

Section 2.1 discusses the model in detail; Section 2.2 reports the estimation results.


2.1       The Model

2.1.1      General Model Structure

The model features three regimes: an equity regime denoted by Ste ; a bond regime denoted by Stb ;

and a FTS regime denoted by StF T S . Each regime variable takes the value 0 or 1. For the bond

and equity regimes, which are assumed to be independent, values of 1 correspond to high volatility

regimes. For the FTS regime, a value of 1 indicates we are on a FTS day, and identifying this

regime is the main goal of the paper. We assume that these variables are not observed by the

econometrician and must be inferred from the data. As in the Hamilton (1989) tradition, the bond

and equity regime variables follow Markov chains with constant transition probabilities:

                   P e = P rob Ste = 0|St−1
                                        e
                                            =0 ,                 Qe = P rob Ste = 1|St−1
                                                                                     e
                                                                                         =1                 (1)
                                                                                          

                   P b = P rob Stb = 0|St−1 =0 ,                 Qb = P rob Stb = 1|St−1 =1 .               (2)
                                   h                     i                  h                 i
                                        b                                            b


FTS events are assumed to only occur in periods of equity market stress; we therefore impose

P rob StF T S = 1|Ste = 0 = 0. Conditional on being in the high equity regime, the switching and
      h                    i


staying probabilities for the FTS regime are denoted by:

          P rob StF T S = 1|Ste = 1, St−1 =0 =A                  P rob StF T S = 1|Ste = 1, St−1 = 1 = B.   (3)
              h                                i                      h                            i
                                      FTS                                                    FTS


The parameters A and B play a critical role in determining the persistence of FTS events.

  We consider the following model for equity (re,t ) and bond (rb,t ) returns:

            re,t = α0 + α1 Je,t + α2 Je,t + αF T S JtF T S + ve StF T S + αF T R JtF T R + he,t εe,t        (4)
                                                                               
                            lh        hl


            rb,t = γ0 + γ1 Jb,t + γ2 Jb,t + γF T S JtF T S + vb StF T S + γF T R JtF T R + hb,t εb,t .      (5)
                                                                           
                            lh        hl



The model features several “jump” terms, indicated by the letter J, that play critical roles in


                                                             4
determining the relative values of expected returns in the various regimes, as discussed below in

Section 2.1.2. The normalized shocks εe,t and εb,t are assumed to be distributed N (0, 1) and can be

correlated. The volatilities of the shocks are indicated by he,t and hb,t and are time-varying. More

details on the volatilities and the correlation are provided in Section 2.1.3.


2.1.2    Expected Returns

In this model, time variations in expected returns arise because of the various “jump terms” and

the FTS regime, which we discuss in turn. The non-FTS-related jump term, Ji,t
                                                                          jk
                                                                              , takes the value

1 when the equity (i = e) or bond (i = b) market switches from a high to a low volatility regime

(j = l, k = h) or from a low to a high volatility regime (j = h, k = l), and is zero otherwise. The

jump terms are designed to capture the large negative (positive) returns observed when the regime

unexpectedly switches from low (high) to high (low) volatilities. Therefore, following Mayfield

(2004), we impose α1 , γ1 < 0 and α2 , γ2 > 0. These sign restrictions imply that, for either market

and for a given FTS regime, returns are expected to be higher in the high than in the low volatility

regime, because investors perceive a positive probability of switching to the other regime.2

  The FTS-related terms, JtF T S and StF T S , capture the notion that equity (bond) returns are

negative (positive) during FTS episodes, with the effect being particularly pronounced on the first

day of the episode. Here, JtF T S is a jump term that equals 1 on the first day of a FTS-regime and

zero otherwise. We impose that ve , vb > 0, αF T S < 0 (stock markets fall during FTS episodes), and

γF T S > 0 (bond prices increase during FTS). On the first day, the negative (positive) FTS effect on

equity (bond) returns is at its maximum at (1 + ve ) αF T S ((1 + vb )γF T S ), while on subsequent FTS

days the magnitude of the effect is allowed to decline to ve αF T S (vb γF T S ). Finally, the jump term

JtF T R is equal to 1 on the day when the FTS regime is switched off, representing a “Flight-to-Risk”

(FTR). We impose that αF T R > 0 and γF T R < 0, so that equity (bond) returns react positively

(negatively) to the end of a FTS regime.

  Because by assumption a FTS regime cannot coincide with a low equity volatility regime, there are

three possible combinations of the equity regime Ste and the FTS regime StF T S , with the following

expected returns:
   2
    Estimation of standard RS models (see Ang and Bekaert (2002), for example), in which the drift term is simply a
function of the contemporaneous regime, often generates a counter-intuitive pattern of a negative (positive) expected
return in the high (low) volatility regime, partly because these jump terms are not accounted for.


                                                         5
     ERe0,0 = E[re,t+1 |Ste = 0, StF T S = 0; It ] = α0 + α1 (1 − P e ) + αF T S (1 + ve ) (1 − P e ) A
     ERe1,0 = E[re,t+1 |Ste = 1, StF T S = 0; It ] = α0 + α2 (1 − Qe ) + αF T S (1 + ve ) Qe A
     ERe1,1 = E[re,t+1 |Ste = 1, StF T S = 1; It ] = α0 + α2 (1 − Qe ) + Qe BαF T S ve
                                                         + [(1 − Qe ) + Qe (1 − B)] αF T R                     (6)

where It represents the information set at time t. When the economy is in the low-equity-volatility,

non-FTS regime, the expected equity return is pulled below the constant term α0 , because the

prospect of switching into the high-equity-volatility and/or FTS regimes bring with it the possibility

of negative return jumps (α1 and αF T S < 0). When the economy is in the high-equity-volatility,

non-FTS regime, there is a tension between the possibility of moving back to a low-equity-volatility

regime, inducing a positive jump in returns (α2 (1 − Qe )), and the possibility of moving to a FTS

regime, inducing a negative jump in returns (αF T S (1 + ve ) Qe A). Finally, when the economy is

already in the FTS, and hence high equity volatility regime, there is a chance of moving back to the

low-equity-volatility state and thus also out of the FTS regime, triggering a positive Flight-to-Risk

jump in returns3 as well as a chance of staying within the FTS regime, inducing further negative

returns through Qe BαF T S ve .

  To help identifying the regimes, we impose the additional restriction that expected equity returns

are the highest in the FTS regime, followed by the non-FTS, high-equity-volatility regime, with the

low-equity-volatility regime featuring the lowest, yet still positive, expected return, i.e. ERe1,1 >

ERe1,0 > ERe0,0 > 0. The restriction ERe1,0 > ERe0,0 requires:
                                   α1 (1 − P e ) − αF T S (1 + ve ) A [Qe + P e − 1]
                            α2 >                                                                               (7)
                                                       (1 − Qe )
while the restriction ERe1,1 > ERe1,0 requires:

                   ve Qe αF T S (A − B) ≤ [(1 − Qe ) + Qe (1 − B)] αF T R − Qe AαF T S .                       (8)

Given that αF T R > 0 and αF T S < 0, the right hand side of Equation (8) is guaranteed to be

positive. There are therefore two cases. If B > A, the condition is automatically satisfied and

the estimation must simply ensure ve ≥ 0. If A > B, however, ve is constrained from above by

the expression implicit in (8). Finally, we impose that all expected equity returns are positive by

imposing a restriction on α0 such that ERe0,0 ≥ 0 (see Equation (6)).
   3
     The flight-to-risk term applies whether the equity regime stays in the high volatility state (with probability
Qe (1 − B)) or not (probability 1 − Qe ).



                                                        6
  Analogously, for bond returns, we impose the restriction that expected bond returns must be

lower in the FTS regimes, regardless of the bond volatility regime. We do, however, not rule out

negative bond returns. We refer to the online appendix for more details.


2.1.3   Volatility and Correlation Dynamics

The volatilities of the stock and bond return shocks are modeled as the product of their long and

short term components:

                                hz,t = mz,t × gz,t ,         z = {e, b} .                                 (9)

The long-term component mz,t captures secular changes in stock and bond return volatilities,

possibly associated with secular changes in the overall economic environment. We model this

component using a backward looking Gaussian kernel with a bandwidth of 360 days, excluding the

last 5 days to avoid contamination by recent FTS events (see Appendix B for details on the kernel

method). The bandwidth of 360 days was chosen to reflect macro-economic cyclical variation; it

implies that the kernel’s half life corresponds to the average length of US postwar recessions (11

months).

  The short-run component gz,t follows a two-state RS model that either lowers or increases the

daily equity (bond) volatility relative to its long-term component:

                                   az < 1 if Stz = 0
                                    (
                           gz,t =                          , z = {e, b} .                             (10)
                                   bz ≥ 1 if Stz = 1
The conditional correlation between the return residuals is specified as:
                                                                               

                         ρt = −1 + 2 f θtLR +               θij + θF T S StF T S                    (11)
                                                       X

                                                 i,j={L,H}

where f (.) is the logistic function. The correlation has three components. First, θtLR is a long-

run component reflecting slow-moving macroeconomic developments. For example, the subsiding

importance of aggregate supply shocks might have contributed to the switch in the sign of stock and

bond return correlations (see e.g. Ermolov (2017)). We specify θtLR as ln             1 + ρLR / 1 − ρLR        ,
                                                                                  h                    i
                                                                                           t         t

where ρLR
       t  is calculated using a backward-looking kernel method with a bandwidth of 360 days

(again lagged 5 days). The second component of the correlation takes one of four values depending

on the bond and equity regimes: θij = θ Ste = i, Stb = j . Finally, the third term with θF T S < 0
                                                            


imposes that the stock-bond return correlation is particularly low, or even negative, during FTS


                                                   7
episodes.

  The conditional return volatilities in this model are not simply a function of the shock volatilities

but also a function of the jump terms. Similar to the conditional expected returns, there are 3 and 6

different regimes to consider for the conditional volatilities of equity and bond returns, respectively.

The expressions are shown in Appendix C. The derivations, which are available upon request, take

into account the covariance between the regime variables and the jump terms.


2.2     Estimation and Empirical Results

Our dataset consists of daily stock and 10-year government bond returns for 23 countries over the

period January 1980 till June 2015. Our sample includes two countries from North-America (US,

Canada), 18 European countries (Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Finland,

Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzer-

land, UK), as well as Australia, Japan, and New-Zealand. We use Datastream International’s total

market indices to calculate daily total equity returns, and their 10-year benchmark bond indices to

calculate government bond returns, both denominated in local currencies. For countries in the euro

zone, we use returns denominated in their original (pre-1999) currencies (rather than in synthetic

euros). For all European countries except Denmark, Norway, Switzerland, and the UK, German

government bonds serve as the benchmark; for all other countries, local government bonds serve as

the benchmark.


2.2.1      Estimation Methodology

We estimate the RS model, specified in Equations (1) through (11), by maximum likelihood follow-

ing Hamilton (1994). We assume that the agents in the model observe the true regimes while the

econometrician does not. To identify the regimes, we use the smoothed regime probabilities, which

represent regime probabilities conditional on full sample information (see Kim (1994); Hamilton

(1994)).

  RS models have likelihoods that are not globally concave and may possess multiple local optima.

Apart from using multiple starting values, we mitigate this estimation problem by imposing several

reasonable economic restrictions on the model. First, as discussed in Section 2.1.2, we impose a

number of economic restrictions on the relative expected returns across regimes. Second, we fix the

                                                   8
constants (α0i and γ0i ) in the RS model for each country to be a weighted average of the sample

mean and the expected return implied by the CAPM. This procedure is meant to address the

problem that historical averages are poor estimates of expected returns, a problem that is further

exacerbated by the different sample periods across countries in our analysis. The procedure is

detailed further in the Online Appendix.

  Because the model remains heavily parameterized, our benchmark estimation considers the joint

likelihood for all 23 countries, assuming that the parameters are the same across countries (except

for α0i and γ0i , which are determined as indicated above), but with country-specific regime variables.

The construction of the likelihood assumes that shocks and regime variables are uncorrelated across

countries. We refer to the appendix in the NBER version of Bekaert et al. (2001) for a detailed

derivation of the joint likelihood function for a similar model. The parameter estimates can there-

fore be viewed as “pooled” estimates reflecting 23 different draws from a worldwide population

distribution. In population, the duration of a FTS regime and the differences in conditional ex-

pected returns between a FTS and a non-FTS regime are identical across countries. However, many

country-specific features remain: the regime variables are country-specific, and so is the timing of

regime switches; shock volatilities and correlations vary across countries as they contain long-run

components that are estimated using data for each country; finally, the unconditional means of the

returns are also different across countries.

  We also estimate the model country-by-country to check the robustness of our results. However,

because the parameter estimates and their implications appear remarkably robust, we focus our

discussion on the all-country model, relegating the discussion of country-by-country models to the

Online Appendix.4 In Section 5, we also consider a “global” version of the model.


2.2.2    Parameter Estimates

Table 1 (Panel A) reports the parameter estimates at the global optimum.5 The first set of param-

eters are the transition probabilities. Both equity and bond volatility regimes are highly persistent,

with the low volatility regimes slightly more so (Pi > Qi ; i = e, b). The expected durations of
  4
    For example, Figure 1 in the Online Appendix shows for the US that the smoothed FTS probabilities from the
pooled model are nearly identical to those from a bivariate RS model using US data only.
  5
    All the best runs featured A < B, but we did find some local optima with A > B. One local maximum (with
A < B and B relatively low) implies very ephemeral FTS, and would produce a very low number of FTS days. Not
imposing the expected return constraints delivers the same global optimum.


                                                      9
high equity and bond volatility regimes are 32.1 and 31.6 days, respectively. Conditional on being

in the high equity volatility regime but not in a FTS the day before, the probability of switching

to the FTS regime is slightly below 1% (A = 0.9%). Once in the FTS regime, the probability of

staying is high at B = 98.8%. The average FTS regime lasts on average 23.19 days (1/ (1 − Qe B)).

As a result, the population FTS incidence implied by the model, reported in Panel B of Table 1, is

relatively high at 4.66% (3.31%+1.35%). Later in Section 3, we use this population FTS incidence

of 4.66% to discipline the two alternative models.

  The next set of parameters govern the conditional mean of bond and equity returns and we

discuss the economic implications in more detail in the next sub-section. The pure regime shift

effects for both bonds and equities (α1 , α2 ; γ1 , γ2 ) are smaller than the FTS related jump effects.

For example, the onset of a FTS or a FTR is accompanied by significant changes in equity returns

(αF T S (1+νe ) = −5.58%, αF T R −αF T S νe = 3.59%), much larger in magnitude than those associated

with switches between equity volatility regimes (α1 = −0.91%; α2 = 1.22%). The FTR is also

associated with a notable decline in expected bond returns (γF T R − γF T S νb = −1.46%), larger in

magnitude than the jump effects associated with the onset of a FTS (γF T S (1 + νb ) = 0.42%) or

switches between bond return volatility regimes (γ1 = −0.82%; γ2 = 0.09%). The return effect on

subsequent days of a FTS are estimated to be much smaller for both equities (αF T S νe = −0.13%)

and bonds (γF T S νb = 0.05%).

  The last set of parameters characterize the volatility dynamics. First, the equity stress regime has

a volatility that is 55.4% (be ) above the long-run volatility component, while the low equity volatility

regime has volatility only 69.1% (ae ) of the long-term level. The corresponding statistics for bond

return volatilities are 43.6% and 71.9%, respectively. Second, stock-bond return correlations are

substantially lower during FTS episodes (θF T S = −1.338). The economic effect depends on the

value of the long-run correlation and the regime constellation and appears large. For example,

if the long-run correlations and regime dependent correlation parameters were all zeros, the FTS

regime would feature a stock-bond return correlation of -56.8%. We do note a moderate increase

in stock-bond correlations when both equity and bond volatility are in the high volatility regime

(θHH = 0.349)6 .
   6
    We verified that the parameter estimates are remarkably robust to variations in the kernel bandwidth and length
of exclusion window. With only one exception, all parameters are within 95% confidence intervals of the original
estimates when the bandwidth (exclusion period) is set to either 250 or 500 days (10 days).


                                                        10
2.2.3   Expected Returns and Return Dynamics during FTS events

The RS model provides estimates of expected equity and bond returns across regimes. An accurate

assessment of the risk premiums is of paramount importance in finance; however, the high volatility

of equity returns and the potential time variations in conditional risk premiums make it a challenging

task. Merton (1980)’s seminal article proposes to impose positivity on risk premiums and link

them to asset return variances. Our RS model follows a similar approach. First, the economic

restrictions imposed ensure that risk premiums are higher in high volatility and FTS regimes.

Second, by linking the constants in the model to weighted averages of average historical returns

and CAPM-based estimates of expected returns, we impose overall positivity (see Table 1 in the

Online Appendix).

  The last column of Panel A in Table 2 presents the expected returns conditional on each of

the three possible combinations of equity and FTS regimes for the US. Note that these expected

returns vary from country to country reflecting the country specific means, α0i . However, the return

differences between regimes are identical across countries reflecting the joint estimation. We find

expected equity returns to be around 10% both in the high equity volatility, non-FTS regime and

in the low equity volatility regime, but rise sharply to 28% when the economy moves into the high

volatility, FTS regime.

  The preceding columns decompose the total expected equity returns into different components

(as given by Equation (6)). The expected equity return in the low equity volatility regime is 2.73%

below the country-specific estimate of the average annualized return (α0i ), primarily because of the

prospect of moving into the high volatility regime (with probability (1 − P e )), which lowers the

return by 2.59%, but also due to the possibility that such a move is accompanied by an onset of a

FTS (with probability (1 − P e ) A), which reduces the average return further by 0.14%.

  The expected equity return in the high equity volatility, FTS regime is boosted by the possibility

of switching to the low equity volatility state (with probability (1 − Qe )) and that of moving out

of the FTS regime but staying in the high volatility regime (with probability Qe B), as both are

associated with positive return impact (of α2 and αF T R , respectively). In contrast, the prospect

of staying in the FTS regime (with probability of Qe B)) lowers the expected equity return. The

first effect (in total +47.19%) dominates the second (-31.95%), leading to an expected return that



                                                 11
is 15.24% above the country-specific mean. Our findings are therefore in line with Martin (2017),

who finds the (option-implied) market risk premium to be very volatile and above 20% in periods

of market stress, and with similar results in Ait-Sahalia et al. (2018), our findings suggest that

not all equity stress periods are created equal: only FTS events generate steep, though short-lived,

spikes in expected equity returns.

  Panel B of Table 2 reports expected bond returns conditional on each of the six possible regime

combinations as well as the contributions of individual components (see equations in Section 1.2 of

the Online Appendix). We highlight three key findings. First, irrespective of the equity volatility

and FTS regime, expected bond returns are about 3% higher in the high relative to the low bond

volatility regime. Second, our estimates imply expected bond returns to be about 2.60% lower in

the FTS regime, as the negative return impact (γF T R ) from a switching out of a FTS regime (with

the probability (1 − Qe ) + Qe B) outweighs the positive impact (γF T S vb ) from a continuation of the

FTS regime (with the probability Qe B). Finally, as indicated by the final rows of Panel B, expected

equity returns are slightly lower (-0.40%) than expected bond returns in the more common, low

equity and bond return volatility regimes, but are much higher (16.24%) in the FTS regime.


2.2.4   Conditional Return Volatilities

Table 3 reports model-implied annualized return volatilities across regimes for equities (first two

columns) and bonds (last two columns), calculated using the expressions in Appendix C. The eq-

uity return volatility only depends on the equity and FTS regimes, while the bond return volatility

depends on all three regimes. Equity volatility is substantially higher in the high equity volatil-

ity regime than in the low volatility regime, regardless of the FTS regime (25.36% and 27.66%,

compared with 16.18%). For given equity volatility and FTS regimes, bond return volatility in the

high bond volatility regime exceeds that in the low bond volatility regime by around 2%, with the

highest bond return volatility obtained when equities are in the FTS (and hence high volatility)

regime (9.63%). The conditional bond return volatilities in this model can be decomposed into

four components, deriving from (1) the volatility jump terms; (2) the FTS jump term, the FTS

regime variable, and their interaction; (3) the covariance between the volatility jump terms and the

FTS jump and regime terms; and (4) volatilities of the shocks. The Online Appendix provides a

full decomposition, which shows that the variances of the shocks typically account for the bulk of

                                                  12
the conditional variances of the returns. The jump term and its covariance with the FTS variables

have small contributions overall, but the FTS component contributes over 10% to the equity return

variance and over 20% to the bond return variance in FTS regimes.


2.2.5   Characterizing FTS Days in the RS Model

Despite the “pooled” nature of our estimation, each country has its unique realizations of regimes,

and the conditional volatilities are estimated using information from the realized returns (see Section

2.2.1). Therefore, the in-sample estimates of the FTS incidence, the return impact, conditional

return volatilities, and bond-equity return correlations can all differ across countries. The second

column of Panel A of Table 4 shows that FTS days make up on average 4.73% of our sample, with

a narrow interquartile range (IQR) of 4.03-5.48%. Detailed country-by-country results reported in

the Online Appendix shows that the US has the highest FTS incidence (6.74%) and New Zealand

the lowest (1.06%). The next 6 columns show that equity (bond) returns are on average much more

negative (positive) on first days of FTS spells (-0.91% vs average of -0.33% over all FTS days for

equities; 0.19% vs 0.11% for bonds).

  The next two columns report the ratio of return volatilities on FTS days to those on non-FTS

days. Equity volatility is on average 95% higher in the FTS state, while bond volatility is about

23% higher. The final three columns report daily stock-bond return correlations using FTS days

only (column 11), the full sample (column 12), and using non-FTS days only (column 13). On

non-FTS days, stock-bond return correlations are on average slightly positive for countries with

data available since the early 1980s, but slightly negative for countries with shorter (more recent)

samples. Across all countries, the average stock-bond correlation is -4.18% on non-FTS days, with

an IQR of -8.67% to 2.08%. On FTS days, stock-bond correlations are considerably more negative

with an average of -58.5% and a relatively tight IQR of -57.0% to -62.5%.

  One might be tempted to identify FTS episodes simply based on these symptoms, including neg-

ative equity returns accompanied by positive bond returns, high equity return volatility, and a low

correlation between bond and stock returns. Compared with such a naive approach, using a more

structured RS model provides us with a richer characterization of the FTS episodes. For example,

the FTS regime is estimated to be quite persistent, even though we impose no a priori restrictions

on its persistence. In addition, the exact nature of the “equity market stress” is endogenously

                                                  13
determined by the model rather than exogenously specified. We find that bond returns are also

more variable in FTS regimes, even though the model did not impose this condition, and that the

correlations between bond and stock returns are dramatically lower in FTS regimes. Finally, the

model differentiates between the FTS regime and a non-FTS, equity market stress regime. We find

that the FTS regime is associated with sizable risk premiums, while risk premiums associated with

the “non-FTS” equity market stress regime are trivial.



3     A FTS Measure

Our key idea is to identify the “symptoms of a FTS”—in terms of its effect on asset returns,

correlations and volatilities—and then use ONLY data on bond and stock returns to identify those

events. Because our goal is to document empirical regularities associated with FTS that can be used

to guide theoretical research on FTS, we seek to be conservative in our estimates of the FTS events.

We do so by averaging across multiple models. We start from a baseline model, the bivariate RS

model, discussed above in Section 2. We then develop two alternative statistical models to capture

the FTS symptoms and describe them in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 below. We calibrate both models to

deliver the same average FTS incidence as that implied by the bivariate RS model (4.66%). The

model averaging procedure is detailed in Section 3.3.


3.1     A Threshold FTS Model

3.1.1    The Model

Bae et al. (2003) (BKS henceforth) study contagion across emerging markets by counting co-

exceedance events, defined as joint occurrence of extreme returns beyond a certain threshold, and

assess the significance by comparing the actual count to what can be expected under certain stan-

dard (such as Gaussian) distributions. Our first alternative model is specified in a similar fashion,

by counting the joint occurrence of some or all FTS symptoms stated earlier for given thresholds.

Denote rt = (re,t , −rb,t )T and assume that rt ∼ N (µ, Ωt ). We first define the threshold. Using

the cumulative normal distribution, we calculate the probability that the equity return and the

negative of bond return will both be κ standard deviations below their mean as:



                                                 14
                                  "            #         !               "                               #
                                      −κσe,t                                     2
                                                                                σe,t      ρLR
                                                                                           t σe,t σb,t
             P robths,t = Ncdf                     , 0, Ωt ,      Ωt =        LR              2
                                      −κσb,t                                 ρt σe,t σb,t    σb,t

where σe,t and σb,t are time-varying equity and bond market volatilities and Ωt the time-varying

variance-covariance matrix. We implicitly assume zero mean daily returns for both equities and

bonds. As in the RS model, the slow-moving time-variation in volatilities and correlations is

computed using a backward kernel methodology, with a 360-day bandwidth excluding the last 5

days. The parameter κ controls how “extreme” bond and equity returns need to be to qualify as

FTS events. P robths,t gives us the probability threshold that all FTS observations must surpass.

For each day in our sample, we then compute the joint probability of observing an equity return

at least as negative, and a bond return at least as positive, as the realized returns, under a normal

distribution7 with the prevailing variance-covariance matrix:

                                          P robobs,t = Ncdf (rt , 0, Ωt ) .

An observation is deemed “extreme” if this probability falls below the threshold probability, P robobs,t <

P robths,t . The FTS probability on day t is then computed as:
                   b > 0 × I r s < 0 × I {P rob
                                               obs,t < P robths,t } × (1 − P robobs,t ) .                      (12)
                 n         o      n         o
                I ri,t        i,t

The first two indicator functions impose the requirement that equity (bond) returns are negative

(positive); the third indicator function guarantees that the observed combination of negative equity

and positive bond returns is an extreme outcome. The last term ensures that a more extreme

combination of bond and equity returns is assigned a higher probability of FTS .


3.1.2    Calibration results

Figure 1 plots cross-country averages of the FTS incidence (left axis) and the return impact (defined

as the difference between bond and equity returns; right axis) for various levels of κ. The dashed

lines show the associated IQRs. The FTS incidence decreases, and the return impact increases,

with κ. The blue horizontal line indicates the target FTS incidence of 4.66%; we reach this target

at κ = 1.26, when the return impact averages 2.72% with a tight IQR of 2.46-2.98%.
   7
    The actual returns exhibit fat tails. We therefore redid the threshold model assuming a t-distribution that
accommodates fat tails. This exercise is described in the Online Appendix. The alternative distributional assumption
does not materially affect the identification of FTS events.




                                                             15
3.2     The Ordinal FTS Model

3.2.1     The Model

Our third model builds on the “ordinal” approach in Hollo et al. (2012), which proposes a com-

posite measure of stress in the financial system. The methodology uses the empirical cumulative

distribution of several stress indicators and then aggregates these ordinal numbers into one sum-

mary stress indicator. Analogously, we select three FTS indicators, based on the FTS symptoms

we listed before:

    i. The difference between the bond and stock return (“return impact”);

   ii. The difference between the long- and short-term stock-bond return correlation (“correlation
       dip”);

  iii. The difference between the short- and long-term equity return volatility (“volatility spike”).

We measure long and short-term volatilities and correlations using a backward looking Gaussian

kernel with bandwidths of 360 and 7 days, respectively, and exclude the most recent 5 days when

calculating the long-term measures.

  The three indicators above are continuous variables, with higher values typically observed during

a FTS. We convert these continuous variables to ordinal numbers by replacing each observation

by its ranking (in ascending order) over the sample period, normalized by the total number of

observations; a value close to one (zero) is therefore associated with a higher (lower) likelihood of

FTS. For instance, a value of 0.95 for, say, the return impact implies that only 5 percent of the

observations over the full sample have a return impact larger or equal than the value observed on

that day.

  To further convert those ordinal numbers to a measure of the FTS probability, we proceed in two

steps. First, we create a composite “ordinal” index that takes values in the [0,1] interval, denoted

OIt , by averaging the three ordinal numbers at each point in time.8 This yields a number for each

day that can be interpreted as a cumulative density function probability. Numbers very close to

one, such as 0.99, can be viewed as a strong indicator of a FTS; however, it’s less clear how to

assess the FTS probability for numbers further away from one.
   8
    We also considered taking into account the correlation between the various variables as suggested by Hollo et al.
(2012), where higher time series correlations between the stress-sensitive variables increase the stress indicator’s value.
However, our inference regarding FTS episodes was not materially affected by this change.


                                                            16
  To solve this problem, in the second step, we transform the ordinal index into an ordinal measure

of FTS probability by imposing the requirement that all FTS events need to satisfy some “weak”

FTS symptoms, including: (1) a strictly negative equity return and a strictly positive bond return;

(2) a negative short-term bond-equity return correlation that is below the long-term level; and (3)

a ratio of short-term to long-term equity return volatility that is larger than κ ≥ 1. The parameter

κ determines the incidence of FTS events in this model (see Section 3.2.2 below). To implement

this requirement, we first collect the ordinal numbers from all days that satisfy those three “weak”

FTS symptoms for a given κ. We view the minimum of this set of ordinal index values, denoted

OIths , as a threshold: All observations with an ordinal number below this threshold (OIt < OIths )

are assigned a FTS probability equal to zero. For observations with an ordinal number above the

threshold, we set the ordinal measure of FTS probability to one minus the percentage of “false

positives” (F P ), calculated as the percentage of observations with an ordinal number above the

observed ordinal number that do not match our “weak” FTS criteria. The number of false positives

will be substantial for observations with ordinal numbers that are relatively low, though still above

the minimum threshold, but will be close to zero for observations with ordinal numbers close to

one. To summarize, the ordinal measure of our FTS probability is constructed as

                              P robFOI,t
                                     TS
                                         = I {OIt ≥ OIths } × (1 − F P ) .                        (13)

As an illustration, suppose that the lowest ordinal value among all observations satisfying the three

“weak” FTS criteria is 0.75. This procedure will assign zero FTS probability to all observations

with ordinal values below 0.75. Now consider an observation with an ordinal value of 0.84. Suppose

20% of the observations with ordinal values above 0.84 do not satisfy the “weak” FTS criteria. This

procedure will assign a FTS probability equal to 1 − 20% = 80%.


3.2.2   Calibration results

Figure 2 plots cross-country averages of the FTS incidence (left axis) and the return impact (right

axis) for various levels of κ, the minimum ratio of short- to long-term equity volatilities. The dashed

lines show the associated IQRs. Again, FTS incidence decreases, while return impact increases,

with κ. The target FTS incidence of 4.66% is reached when κ is set to 1.72. The average return

impact at this value of κ is 2.32%, with an IQR of 1.98-2.54%.



                                                  17
  Table 5 provides some insights into the calculation of the ordinal FTS measure. The second

column shows that the threshold level, the minimum value of the ordinal index among all obser-

vations that satisfies the three “mild” FTS conditions, is on average 68% with an IQR of [66.5%,

69.7%]. The third column shows that the percentage of observations with ordinal indices above the

threshold averages 15.61% with an IQR of 13.54%-17.50%. The tight IQRs in both cases indicate

that the raw ordinal indices behave consistently across countries. Our measure is also heavily in-

fluenced by the number of false positives, the fraction of observations with ordinal numbers above

the threshold but not satisfying the weak symptoms. Once those are taken into account, the fourth

column shows that among the observations with ordinal indices above the threshold, on average

31.1% (with an IQR of 26.7%-35.5%) have an ordinal measure of FTS probability above 50% and

hence would be classified as a FTS according to this measure. Multiplying this number with the

percentage number of observations above the threshold essentially produces the FTS probability.

The cross-country average FTS incidence is close to the 4.66% target.9


3.3    Aggregate FTS Incidence

So far, we have three models that can be used to assess the probability that a given day is experi-

encing a FTS. The FTS incidence is endogenously determined within the RS model. By contrast,

the FTS incidence in the two other models depends on the κ parameters, which we calibrate to

deliver the same average FTS incidence as the benchmark RS model. We now use averaging across

the three models to derive our preferred, conservative estimates of the FTS events.

  To aggregate information across the three models, we rely on the existing literature on regime

classification based on qualitative variables (see e.g. Gilbert (1968)).10 We view the three methods

as yielding a multivariate Bernouilli draw at each point in time on FTS events with probabilities

to be estimated. We extract the joint probability that the RS model and at least one of the

threshold and ordinal models identify a FTS for a particular day based on a multivariate Bernoulli

distribution using the method proposed by Teugels (1990) (see Appendix D for technical details).

This computation requires not only the probabilities of the three Bernoulli random variables at each

point in time but also their covariances. Obviously, inference based on the 3 different measures
   9
   We selected κ from a two digit grid to minimize the distance with the target regarding FTS incidence.
  10
   We also considered a naive aggregator which simply averages the probabilities at each point in time, and sets the
FTS dummy to 1 when that average is above 0.5. Both procedures largely select the same periods as FTS episodes.


                                                        18
is positively correlated. In these day-by-day computations, we use full sample estimates of the

covariances between the different FTS dummies (the underlying Bernoulli variables). Following the

standard classification rule, we identify a FTS event when the joint FTS probability exceeds 50%.

More specifically, define pk1 ,k2 ,k3 = P rob (IRS = k1 , IT r = k2 , IOrd = k3 ), with k1 , k2 , k2 ∈ {0, 1} and

I an indicator function that equals one when the RS, the threshold (Tr), or ordinal (Ord) model

indicates a FTS. We then set the aggregate FTS dummy equal to one when either p1,1,1 +p1,1,0 > 0.5

or p1,1,1 + p1,0,1 > 0.5, and zero otherwise.

  Model averaging is important. Figure 3 illustrates this for the US, showing estimates of the FTS

probabilities from the three models as well as the aggregate measure. Although the RS model clearly

identifies many FTS episodes, it remains inconclusive on many days by assigning FTS probabilities

above 0.5 but below 0.9. Relative to the RS model, the two other models identify more FTS days

with very short durations as well as more days with FTS probabilities between 0.5 and 0.9. By

comparison, the joint measure retains some relatively longer-lasting FTS episodes (e.g. around

October 2008) as well as some short-lived ones (e.g. during October 1987). Except for the 1987

stock market crash and a short spell preceding the 1990 recession in the US, our measure identifies

very few FTS in the pre-1995 period. By contrast, the post-1995 period is marred with FTS spells,

including the 1997 Asian crisis, the Russian crisis and LTCM debacle in 1998, the 2007-08 global

financial crisis, and the subsequent European sovereign debt crisis. Outside those well-known major

crises, this measure also picks up some spells that are not as easily recognized as FTS. For example,

a FTS appeared to occur on 13 October 1989, when a large leveraged buyout deal for the UAL

corporation collapsed with negative ramifications for the junk bond market. On June 29, 2015,

fears about Greece defaulting on its sovereign bonds also seemed to trigger a FTS event.

  The first rows of Table 6 show that the cross-country FTS incidence equals 1.74%, with an

interquartile range of 1.55-2.09%. During FTS days, equities drop on average 2.29% (IQR of

[-2.50%; -2.02%]) while Treasury bonds increase on average with 0.43% (IQR of [0.39%; 0.46%]).

  Our methodology is intricate and requires non-linear estimation. However, by aggregating in-

formation from three different models, we obtain a plausible, conservative way of identifying FTS

events that is more systematic and reliable than simply eyeballing the data and handpicking the

dates. Our methodology does not merely identify high volatility periods in equity markets either.

To see this, Table 6 looks at the overlap between our FTS days and stress times in equity markets.

                                                       19
To identify the latter, we measure equity market volatility using a backward-looking Gaussian ker-

nel with bandwidths of either 5 or 25 days for a given day. For each country, we then select the same

number of days with the highest equity market volatilities as the number of FTS days we identify

for that country. The table reports the percentage of days that fall into both sets. The overlap

using the shorter 5-day window averages 21.6%, with an IQR of 14.9-28.0%, and is never higher

than 35% (reached by Portugal). Using the longer 25-day bandwidth reduces the average overlap

to less than 20%. Even though some overlap between the two sets is expected as “equity market

stress” is one of our FTS symptoms, this exercise shows that our method cannot be replicated by

looking at equity volatility alone.

  Our methodology also does not simply select “market downturns”. Of course, by its very defini-

tion, a FTS event will often coincide with an equity market downturn, but not all equity market

downturns are FTS events. In fact, the percentage of days with negative, respectively minus 2

standard deviations, equity market returns that are also FTS is only 3.8% (IQR 3.38-4.58%), re-

spectively 25% (IQR of 21.5%-30.3%). In addition, we also find little overlap between our FTS

days and recession periods. For the US, only 21% of FTS days occur during NBER recessions. For

other countries, only 15% of FTS occur during recessionary periods, defined as two consecutive

quarters of negative real GDP growth.


3.4   Robustness

The intricate nature of our methodology does raise the concern of whether it is robust to different

parameter choices and whether its results are stable over time. To address the first question, we

verify whether the FTS incidence is robust to three parameter choices governing the computation of

long and short-term volatilities. In particular, we consider two alternative bandwidths in computing

the long-term component of volatility (250 and 500 days, instead of 360 days in the baseline),

one alternative bandwidth for the computation of the short-term volatility (10 days instead of 7

days), and a longer exclusion window (10 days instead of 5 days) to prevent FTS events from

contaminating the computation of the time-varying volatilities and correlations. This yields a total

of 11 alternative parameter configurations. For each alternative configuration, we re-estimate the

RS model, re-calibrate the threshold and ordinal models to fit the new FTS incidence given by the

RS model, and then re-compute the aggregate FTS incidence. Detailed results are available in the

                                                 20
Online Appendix, but we summarize the main findings below:

  1. The FTS incidence is little affected overall, with the dispersion of the median FTS incidence

     across countries being only 0.16% across all parameter specifications. The FTS incidence is

     weakly increasing in the length of the bandwidth used to compute the long run volatilities.

     This is expected because FTS events tend to happen during stress periods with persistently

     higher volatility; therefore, a shorter long-run volatility window would lead to higher long-

     run volatility estimates and a higher volatility threshold for FTS events, decreasing the FTS

     incidence.

  2. Similarly, the estimated median return impact on FTS days shows little variation across

     parameter configurations, with the dispersion across specifications being 7.1 basis points for

     equities and only 1.4 basis points for bonds.

  3. The identified FTS days are also similar across different parameter specifications. According

     to the cross-country median estimates, more than 95% of the FTS days identified by our

     benchmark model are also identified as FTS days using any of the 11 alternative parameter

     configurations when the long-term bandwidth is set to 360 or 500 days, irrespective of other

     parameter values. The median percentages range between 84% and 88% when the long-run

     volatility bandwidth is 250 days, as this shorter window raises the volatility threshold for

     FTS events. Conversely, the bulk (between 93.9% and 99.6%) of the FTS days identified by

     the alternative models are also FTS days under the benchmark model when the long-term

     volatility bandwidth is 250 or 360 days, with the overlap dropping slightly to about 86% when

     the bandwidth is 500 days.

We also examine whether our results were robust to parameter stability concerns. To do this,

we re-estimate the RS model excluding either the first 15 or the last 10 years, and then examine

the robustness of the FTS incidence and other statistics across different sample periods. The

parameters of the RS model are remarkably robust across these three different samples, resulting

in quite similar FTS evidence for the overlapping years. More details are given in the Online

Appendix, and we come back to the question of parameter stability in Section 4.2.




                                                21
4      The Economics of a FTS

Now that we have identified the FTS event days, this section tries to characterize a typical FTS

event. Section 4.1 examines the return profile and persistence of a FTS spell. Section 4.2 considers

how correlated our FTS measure is with alternative indicators of market stress and risk aversion and

whether FTS is associated with large real (macro-economic) consequences. Section 4.3 examines

whether the large changes in asset prices during FTS spells are accompanied by large fund flows

using US data. Finally, Section 4.4 tries to shed light on whether a FTS is primarily a flight-to-

quality or to liquidity by looking at price responses of corporate bonds and equities with different

quality and liquidity characteristics.


4.1     Impact and Persistence

Figure 4 summarizes the average returns on equities and bonds as well as the bond-equity return

differential (“return impact”) before, during, and after FTS events. The horizontal axis records 7

stages on a time line, including 5 to 1 day before, 1 day before, the first day of, the second through

the second to last day of, the last day of, and 1 to 5 days after a FTS spell. Returns on the vertical

axis are expressed in percent terms. The dashed lines connect the average returns across countries,

while the vertical bars represent the IQRs across countries.

    The graphs clearly show the key characteristics of a FTS spell. Outside FTS spells, equity

and bond returns are statistically indistinguishable from zero. Equity returns are slightly but

significantly positive, while bond returns slightly but significantly negative, on the day before the

start of a FTS spell. The FTS spells itself are associated with sharply negative (positive) equity

(bond) returns, with the effects slightly larger in magnitude in the beginning and towards the end

of a spell. To see how large these impacts are, we note that the 2.79% return impact on the first

day of a FTS represents a 2.3 standard deviation move above its daily average of 0.013%, based on

the ensemble standard deviation of return impact in the sample.

    Intuitively, FTS spells are mostly short-lived. Expressed in fractions over all countries, we find

that 62% of the spells last 1 day, 23% last two days, 9% last three days, and 6% last longer than

4 days, but none last longer than 10 days. In the Online Appendix, we show how this distribution

differs across the three models, with the threshold model delivering very short-lived spells (never


                                                  22
longer than 5 days) and the RS model delivering more persistent spells (because regime identification

often relies on second moments, which tend to be highly persistent).


4.2    Alternative Market Stress Indicators

In Table 7, we investigate the comovement between our FTS dummies and five types of alternative

stress indicators, consumer confidence, safe-have currencies, the TED spread, the price of gold,

and option-implied equity volatility. We regress those indicators on our FTS dummy for each

country and a constant, and report the slope coefficients for the US, Germany and the UK, as

well as the average, standard deviation, and top/bottom quartiles of those parameter estimates

across all available countries. The second to last column shows the number of countries for which

the parameter estimates are significant, using White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard

errors. The last column shows the number of countries for which data is available. From now

onward, many of our cross-country tables will have this format.

  The first set of stress indicators comprises sentiment/confidence indices. Many types of such

indices have been developed in the literature (see e.g. Bekaert and Hoerova (2016)). We use the

(seasonally-adjusted) OECD consumer confidence indicators, because they are county-specific and

available for all countries in our sample except for Norway. Because these sentiment variables are

only available on a monthly basis, we regress their monthly changes on the fraction of FTS days

within the month. The FTS beta is significantly negative in 19 of the 22 countries. The average

effect, -0.389, implies that for a month with a FTS incidence equal to the average value among all

FTS months, 0.22, on average we observe a 8.5 percentage point drop in consumer confidence.11

  Second, we regress percentage changes in the values of three safe haven currencies—the Swiss

Franc, the Japanese Yen, and the US Dollar, measured in units of local currency per unit of the safe

currency—on the country-specific FTS dummies using daily data for all but the three safe currency

countries. On average over a FTS day, the three safe currencies appreciate by 0.33% (Swiss Franc),

0.44% (Yen), and 0.07% (US Dollar), respectively. The appreciation of the Swiss Franc and Yen

following a FTS are significant in 20 or more countries. The evidence for the US dollar is less strong,

with significant depreciations observed in almost as many countries (6) as significant appreciations
  11
     We also find that the well-known Baker and Wurgler (2006) sentiment indicator (purged of business cycle fluc-
tuations) and the Michigan consumer sentiment index decrease significantly when there is a FTS in the US, as does
the famous German Ifo business cycle indicator with high FTS incidence in Germany.


                                                       23
(7) following a FTS.

  The third indicator is the TED spread, the difference between the three-month LIBOR rate in

the local currency and the corresponding three-month T-bill rate.12 The TED spread is a direct

measure of the perceived default risk in the banking sector and also a frequently used indicator of

the perceived credit risk in the broader economy, and it tends to spike up at times of crises (see

Brunnermeier (2009) for its role in the 2007-08 global financial crisis). We regress daily TED spread

changes on the country-specific FTS dummies. For the US, the TED spread on average increases 5

basis points (bps) on a FTS day. On average across all countries, the TED spread only edges up 1

basis point on a FTS day, and the increase is only significant in 5 out of 19 countries. This finding

suggests that the FTS episodes identified here are not always a credit event.

  The fourth indicator we consider is the price of gold, and we measure its changes using daily

returns on the S&P GSCI gold index (in US dollar and percentage terms). The average daily

return on a FTS day is only 3 bps and almost never significant. However, the FTS beta of gold

returns becomes positive and statistically significant for half the countries, averaging 0.20% per

day, once we control for global equity market exposure. In other words, gold appears to provide

some hedge against FTS events, after adjusting for its positive market exposure. Relatedly, Baur

and McDermott (2010) show gold to be a safe haven and hedge for the European and US stock

markets.

  The final indicators are implied volatilities on major stock indices. The VIX index on the US’s

S&P 500 index is often viewed as a “fear” index, and is an important input in a number of risk

aversion indices (see Bekaert and Hoerova (2016)). We use the VIX for the US and Canada. In

addition, we use the VFTS (on the FTSE100) for the UK; VDAX on Germany’s DAX index for

Germany and all the non-UK European countries, and the VJX on the Japanese Nikkei 225 index

for Japan, Australia and New Zealand. Daily changes in those indices constitute the dependent

variable in the regressions. The VIX increases on average by 3.18% on a US FTS day. The volatility

effect is significant at the 5 percent level in all countries, averaging 2.25%. Bekaert and Hoerova

(2014) decompose the squared VIX into a variance risk premium, which is particularly sensitive to

changes in risk aversion, and the “physical” conditional variance for the US stock market. When

we examine the variance risk premium and the conditional volatility separately, both have FTS
 12
      We have TED spread data for 19 countries but not for Ireland, Austria, the Czech Republic and Poland.


                                                        24
betas that are positive and statistically significant, suggesting that both risk aversion and expected

stock market volatility increase on FTS days.

  To check the robustness and stability of our inference, we recalculate these comovements for the

last 10 years of our sample, using FTS identified out-of-sample. To do so, we first re-estimate the

regressions shown in Table 7, using the last 10 years of data and our full sample FTS estimates.

The results are very similar to what is reported in Table 7, except that the US dollar has become

a genuine safe haven currency over the last 10 years. Second, as discussed before, we re-estimate

the RS model excluding the last 10 years of data. Keeping these parameters fixed, we then repeat

our FTS identification procedure and re-estimate the regressions in Table 7 over the last 10 years.

The results are reported in the Online Appendix. Both the magnitudes and the significances of

the various coefficients are similar across the two sets of regressions. In addition, for all dependent

variables except for the two gold variables, the number of countries for which the coefficients are

significant is identical.

  The VIX plays a critical role in studies that link economic uncertainty to real activity (see e.g.

Bloom (2009)). Increased uncertainty associated with a FTS may lead companies to defer their

investment and hiring decisions, weakening the economy. In the Online Appendix, we assess the

link between current FTS incidence and future inflation and economic activity. We confirm that for

the US, a higher FTS incidence in the current month is statistically significantly associated with

lower inflation, lower industrial production growth, higher unemployment, and lower investment to

GDP ratios in the future. Future real GDP growth is also lower but the decline is not statistically

significant. The results are weaker when all countries are considered and significant in less than

half of the countries. We also investigate whether FTS episodes affect investor expectations about

the macro-economy, by examining the mean and dispersion of survey forecasts from Consensus

Economics for inflation, industrial production, real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and

investment growth in the quarter following FTS episodes. With the caveat that these data were

only available for a subset of countries, we do not find a strong association between FTS episodes

and those macro forecasts. Finally, we regress three-month changes in the OECD leading indicator

over the next three months on the FTS incidence within the current month. The OECD indicator

is explicitly designed to provide early signals of turning points in business cycles, with a targeted

lead time of about 6 to 9 months. Here, we find consistent and strong results: the FTS “beta” for

                                                  25
the OECD leading indicator is on average about -1% and the effect is statistically significant in 16

out of 23 countries. Overall, there appears to be some, albeit mixed, evidence that FTS episodes

are associated with future declines in economic activity.


4.3   FTS and Mutual Fund Flows

The parameter estimates of the RS model suggest that FTS episodes are typically associated with

dramatic yet short-lived changes in expected returns on equities and bonds. Of course, these price

changes need not be accompanied by active trading and/or risk transfer between different investors.

Kelley and Tetlock (2013), for example, show that US equity returns during extended trading hours

are as volatile as during regular trading hours, even though trading volumes are much lower during

extended trading hours. The international contagion literature has also allowed price spillovers

to happen without capital flows, as in the “wake-up call” hypothesis, see Bekaert et al. (2014a).

However, it is conceivable that in a FTS, more risk averse investors (e.g. retail investors) rebalance

their portfolios towards safe assets, while less risk averse or more sophisticated investors provide

the insurance the other type of investors seek, earning elevated risk premiums in the process.

  To conclusively confirm or refute this conjecture requires detailed data on flows between different

investment vehicles and on the ownership of these vehicles, and is beyond the scope of the paper.

Nonetheless, as a first step, we obtain data on mutual fund flows from Thomson Reuters Lipper,

which collects assets, returns, and distributions from virtually all US-registered open-end mutual

funds and ETFs going back to 1992. About 75% of those funds report total assets under man-

agement (AUM) at both the weekly (Wednesday to Wednesday) and the monthly frequencies; the

rest only report at the monthly frequency. Lipper calculates the flows as changes in AUMs over a

month or week, adjusted for asset price variations. For funds reporting at the monthly frequency

only, Lipper creates a weekly flows series by distributing the monthly flows evenly among the weeks

within the month. We use all three sets of flow estimates in our analysis: (1) weekly flows for the

75% of funds reporting weekly, (2) weekly flows for all funds, and (3) monthly flows for all funds.

  Lipper uses information from fund prospectuses to classify funds into different categories, such

as funds that invest primarily in equities, in US Treasury securities, in US investment grade cor-

porate bonds, and in US high yield corporate bonds, as well as money market funds and various

subcategories. Amongst money market funds, we focus on those that invest predominantly in gov-

                                                 26
ernment securities, as they may provide investors with additional FTS benefits on top of long-term

government bonds.

  For our main results, we exclude ETFs, but the Online Appendix shows results including ETFs.

ETFs present several challenges. First, it is a rapidly growing investment vehicle with inflows

trending up over time. Second, rebalancing ETF portfolios typically incurs brokerage fees, making

ETFs a costly vehicle to achieve the rapid rebalancing required in the face of a FTS. Third, most

ETFs represent index funds and many are held through robo advisors or in institutional investor

portfolios. They may therefore be part of “constant mix” portfolios which would rebalance in a

contrarian fashion rather than be part of a flight-to-safety flow. Consistent with this intuition, our

results including ETFs are robust but slightly weaker than the main results.

  We examine the comovement of FTS spells with the flows of different types of funds, using a

simple linear regression at the fund category (i) level:

                          f lowt,i = α + βF T S,i F T St,U S + β F T S,i F T St−1,U S + εt,i                      (14)

where i is the type of fund (either equity, Treasury, corporate investment grade, corporate high

yield, or government-only money market) and t represents either a week or a month13 . The f lowt,i

variable is flows into funds of type i over the period t, as a percentage of the AU M at those

funds at time t − 1.14 The F T St,U S variable is the percentage of days within a week or month

that are identified as experiencing a FTS in the US. A regression on the contemporaneous FTS

variable may underestimate the effect of FTS on fund flows. For example, if the flow effects occur

with a slight lag and with some persistence, FTS events occurring towards the end of a week may

affect flows in the following week but not in the current week. We therefore consider two different

specifications. In one regression, we only consider the contemporaneous effect, denoted βF T S,i ; in

the other regression, we also include the lagged FTS variable with a coefficient denoted β F T S,i , and

measure the total FTS effect as the sum of βF T S,i and β F T S,i .

  Table 8 reports the results using the three sets of flows data mentioned above. Across all speci-

fications, FTS events appear to be associated with significant outflows from equity and high yield
   13
      Edelen and Warner (2001), among others, document a strong relationship between net flows into equity funds and
market returns in the U.S., but do not examine the effect of flights to safety or market stress on flows into different
types of mutual funds.
   14
      Lipper only provides AU M at the weekly frequency. For monthly regressions, we use AU M from the week that
is the closest to the end of the month.




                                                          27
corporate bond funds and significant inflows into government-only money market funds, with larger

effects at the monthly frequency or when the lagged FTS variable is included. Results using monthly

data on all funds also show significant inflows into Treasury mutual funds and all money markets.

The effects are economically important. For example, if there is a week where all days are FTS

days, the AUM of equity (high yield corporate) funds drops by about 0.30% (0.42%), whereas the

AUM of bond funds increases by 0.50% for the weekly and monthly reporting set.

  We conclude that, at least in the US, mutual fund investors appear to be actively rebalancing

their holdings from riskier into safer asset classes in response to FTS effects. It is well-known that

mutual funds are predominantly held by retail investors.15 Therefore, the evidence presented here

may be indicative of irrational retail investor behavior, considering the substantial returns risky

asset investors can expect to earn following FTS events. More analysis is needed on this topic.


4.4     Flights-to-Liquidity or Flights-to-Quality?

Longstaff (2004) shows that up to 15% of the value of Treasury bonds can be attributed to liquidity

premiums. Beber et al. (2009) use data from the euro-area government bond market to show that,

at times of market stress, investors appear to demand liquidity more than credit quality. Those

findings suggest that FTS may represent more a flight-to-liquidity than a flight-to-quality. In

this section, we test this hypothesis by examining how FTS events affect returns on assets with

different quality and liquidity characteristics in the US corporate bond market (Section 4.4.1) and

international equity markets (Section 4.4.2).


4.4.1    FTS and the Cross Section of Corporate Bonds

It is generally difficult to differentiate “quality” from “liquidity,” as the two characteristics tend to

be highly correlated. However, the corporate bond market provides an ideal laboratory because the

credit rating of a bond is a good indicator of its “quality,” whereas within the same rating category,

large variations in bond liquidity remain. We obtain estimates of returns and transaction costs on

credit quality- and liquidity-sorted US corporate bond portfolios from Bongaerts et al. (2017). They

use transaction-level data from the enhanced TRACE (Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine)
  15
     For example, based on data reported in the 2018 ICI Fact Book (https://www.ici.org/pdf/2018_factbook.pdf,
Table 60), retail investors hold about 92% of all equity mutual funds, 90% of bond mutual funds, and 62% of money
market mutual funds as of 2017.


                                                       28
database from July 2002 up to the end of 2013, a period that witnesses many FTS events. Each

quarter, they form portfolios by sorting bonds first into five credit quality categories and then into

two liquidity categories, where credit quality is measured by either a bond’s S&P credit rating or

its Expected Default Frequency (EDF) as reported by Moody’s KMV, and liquidity is measured by

amount issued, age, or trading activity. They then estimate returns and transaction costs for each

portfolio using the repeat-sales approach of Edwards et al. (2007). Bongaerts et al. (2017) show

that the variation in the transaction costs across bonds is best explained by the “amount issued”

characteristic; we therefore use “amount issued” as our liquidity measure. For credit quality, we

focus on the EDF proxy, but show additional results using the credit ratings proxy in the Online

Appendix.

  The third column of Table 9 reports the average transaction cost, measured by the average effec-

tive percentage bid-ask half-spread, for portfolios from all five credit quality (EDF) quintiles and,

within each EDF quintile, the top and bottom liquidity (“amount issued”) buckets. Transaction

costs monotonically increase from around 30 to 80 bps as default risk increases. Within each de-

fault risk quintile, the differences in transaction costs between low and high liquidity portfolios vary

between 10 and 23 bps, tend to be slightly higher for lower credit quality bonds, and are invariably

statistically significant at the 1% level. There is a clear positive correlation between liquidity and

credit quality, with transaction costs increasing as default risk increases. Nonetheless, the variation

in transaction costs is more notable across liquidity buckets than across credit quality quintiles;

for example, the more liquid bonds in the second best credit quality quintile enjoy lower average

transaction costs (33 bps) than the less liquid bonds in the best credit quality quintile (37 bps), as

is the case for all other adjacent EDF categories.

  To assess the FTS exposure of each portfolio, we run the following regressions:

                         rc,l,t = αc,l + βc,l
                                          TB
                                              rtb,t + βc,l
                                                       EQ
                                                           req,t + γc,l F T St + εc,l,t            (15)

with rc,l,t denoting the weekly return on a portfolio consisting of corporate bonds belonging to

credit quality quintile c and liquidity bucket l, and F T St representing the percentage of FTS days

within the week. We control for returns on two benchmark portfolios, a duration-matched Treasury

portfolio (rtb,t ) and the aggregate US equity market (req,t ).

  Table 9 reports each portfolio’s exposure to FTS and to the two benchmark portfolios. Cor-



                                                      29
porate bonds with higher credit quality have higher Treasury market exposures and lower equity

market exposures. The FTS exposure, γ, is negative for all portfolios and significantly so with

one exception. Even bonds with the highest credit quality (bottom EDF quintile) have FTS betas

close to -50 bps. Nonetheless, these bonds benefit from a large positive exposure to Treasuries and

a low, albeit still positive, exposure to equities, resulting in an overall return on FTS days that

is slightly positive (final column of Table 9).16 The FTS exposure increases monotonically with

default risk, reaching -2.49% for bonds in the highest EDF quintile. The difference in FTS betas

across credit quality quintiles is statistically significant: as shown in the second to last row of Table

9, we can decisively reject the null hypothesis that, within the same liquidity bucket, bonds in the

first and fifth credit quality quintiles have equal FTS exposures. Moreover, bonds with the lowest

credit quality also suffer from the lowest Treasury betas and the highest equity betas, resulting in

significantly negative overall returns on FTS days.

  In contrast, we find little evidence of a flight to liquidity during FTS events. As shown in the

last row of Table 9, we cannot reject the hypothesis that the FTS exposure is the same across

the two liquidity buckets within each credit quality class. Our results are robust to including the

lagged benchmark return and allowing for a lagged response to a FTS (last two columns of Table

9). We therefore conclude that, at least in the US corporate bond market, a FTS event appears to

represent more a flight to quality than a flight to liquidity.


4.4.2    FTS and the Cross Section of Equities

We now turn to the equity market. While quality is not as easily defined for equities as for corporate

bonds, most studies use one or more variables that capture firm profitability, safety, and earnings

quality (see e.g. Graham (1973), Piotroski (2000), Novy-Marx (2013), Asness et al. (2018)).

  We proceed in four steps. First, we collect daily returns on all stocks listed in 22 developed

markets (excluding the US) over the period 1982-2012. We only include common stocks that are

traded on the main stock exchange and covered by WorldScope. To avoid survivorship bias, we

include both active and inactive stocks. Second, for each stock, we calculate five quality indicators:

the total leverage, the Altman z-score17 , two measures of profitability—the ratio of gross profits
  16
     In the Online Appendix, we show that this is not true for top rated corporate bonds, which provide no hedge
against FTS at all. However, that analysis does not include AAA bonds due to their insufficient number.
  17
     We calculate the Altman Z-Score as 1.2x(working capital / total assets) + 1.4x(retained earnings / total assets)


                                                         30
to total assets and the return on equity, and earnings quality, measured as the five-year volatility

in earnings growth. For each indicator for each country, we sort the stocks into five quintiles and

assign a score of 1 (5) to the quintile representing the highest (lowest) credit quality. We then

calculate an aggregate quality indicator for each stock by summing up the five individual quality

scores. Third, for each stock, we measure its liquidity as the percentage of days with non-zero

returns in the previous year (see Lesmond et al. (1999) and Bekaert et al. (2007)). Finally, for

each country, we create nine double sorted portfolios sorted first on aggregate quality and then on

liquidity using 30-40-30 percentile breakpoints. We rebalance yearly at the end of June, using the

liquidity measure calculated over the previous year and the aggregate quality indicator calculated

at the end of the previous year. The Online Appendix provides more detail on the sample (which

contains 7,504 firms), and confirms that “quality” and “liquidity” are priced characteristics.

  The first column of Table 10 reports the average percentage of non-zero daily returns within a

year for the quality and liquidity double sorted portfolios. Over the full sample, irrespective of

quality, stocks in the top liquidity tercile trade around 90% of days, compared to around 55% for

the bottom liquidity tercile. In contrast to the corporate bond market, the correlation between

“quality” and “liquidity” appears low in the equity market, as stocks in the same liquidity group

but different quality bucket trade at similar frequencies.

  To measure the impact of FTS on those portfolios, we run the following panel regression:


rc,l,q,t = αc,l,q,t + βc,l,q,t
                       G,0
                               rglobal,t + βc,l,q,t
                                            G,1
                                                    rglobal,t−1 + βc,l,q,t
                                                                   L,0
                                                                           rlocal,t + βc,l,q,t
                                                                                       L,1
                                                                                               rlocal,t−1 + γl,q F T St + εc,l,q,t

with rc,l,q,t and αc,l,q,t denoting the return and alpha on a portfolio of stocks from country c in quality

tercile q and liquidity tercile l. We control for global and local benchmark returns, including a lag

for both to account for non-synchronous trading hours and allowing the less liquid firms to respond

with a delay to market shocks from the previous day. While intercepts and betas vary both across

characteristics and countries, we impose the FTS exposure γl,q to be constant across countries.

Significance levels are based on standard errors clustered across time.

  The results are reported in Table 10. First, there is a flight-to-quality effect in the equity market

for the more liquid stocks. Outside the least liquid segment, the FTS exposure of equity portfolios
+ 3.3x(earnings before interest and tax / total assets) + 0.6x(market value of equity / total liabilities) + 1.0x(sales
/ total assets).




                                                               31
rises with quality, with the highest quality portfolio posting on average a 19 basis point higher

return on FTS days than the lowest quality portfolios in the top liquidity tercile, after taking into

account their respective benchmark portfolios. A joint test of equal FTS exposures between the top

and bottom quality tercile within the same liquidity segment rejects at the 1% level. Second, unlike

the corporate bond market, there is evidence of a flight-to-liquidity during FTS. Within each quality

tercile, the lowest liquidity portfolios exhibit significantly negative FTS exposures, suggesting that

they decline much more on FTS days than what can be explained by their benchmark exposures;

in contrast, the most liquid stocks exhibit less negative or even positive FTS exposures. A joint

test of equal FTS exposures across liquidity buckets but within the same quality tercile also rejects

at the 1% level. The difference ranges from 12 bps for the low quality tercile to 30 bps for the

top quality tercile18 . Note that this does not imply that highly liquid stocks perform better than

illiquid stocks in a FTS event, because more liquid stocks tend to have higher market exposures. In

fact, the final column of Table 10 shows that without adjusting for the benchmark risks, the 30%

most liquid stocks underperform the 30% least liquid ones by between 79 and 96 bps on FTS days.

Taken together, stocks in the top quality, most liquid bucket have a FTS beta that is 31 bps above

those in the bottom quality, least liquid bucket, a difference that is significant at the 1% level.

    We also perform the sorting in reverse order, first on liquidity and then on quality. The results

are very similar and are shown in the Online Appendix.



5        FTS Events around the World

In this section, we analyze the global ramifications of FTS events. Section 5.1 proposes a few

possible definitions of a global FTS, and discusses the estimated FTS incidence. Sections 5.2 and

5.3 show the sensitivity of emerging market equity and bond returns, respectively, to those global

FTS events. While emerging markets have witnessed numerous severe financial crises, defining FTS

events using data on emerging markets alone is a challenge. During much of our sample period,

local government bond markets in those economies were not well developed and are dominated

by sovereign bonds issued in dollars. These sovereign bonds cannot function as a “safe asset” for
    18
    A similar case of illiquid assets serving as safe assets can be found in Badarinza and Ramadorai (2018), who
show that houses in developed markets (London in particular) act as “safe assets” to insure against political risk in
emerging markets despite their illiquidity.



                                                         32
these emerging markets due to default and exchange rate risks, and we show below that indeed

they behave like risky securities. There is a growing literature on global safe assets (see Caballero

et al. (2017) for a recent overview) which often suggests that US bonds act as the global safe asset,

but the presence of currency risk makes this conjecture problematic. In addition, many emerging

markets imposed capital controls during parts of or throughout our sample period. We therefore

restrict our goal to characterizing the FTS sensitivity of emerging equity and bond markets to

global FTS events, and analyze how such sensitivity depends on the de jure degree of integration

of these markets. We stop short of analyzing the source of this sensitivity, which may or may not

be accompanied by international capital flows.19


5.1    Defining Global FTS Events

We consider three definitions of a global FTS event. First, using our country-by-country aggregate

FTS indicators, we can define global FTS as days on which at least 50% of the countries experience

a FTS. Second, we apply our models to global equity and bond returns, where the global equity

return is proxied by returns on the MSCI World index and the global bond return is proxied by

returns on a portfolio of government bonds from countries that maintained a AAA rating over

the entire sample - the US, Germany, Switzerland, Netherlands, Austria, Finland, and Norway -

weighted according to the size of their equity markets. Finally, we also use the US FTS as a proxy

for the global FTS, on the argument that a FTS in the world’s largest economy will likely have

spillover effects on emerging markets.

  Figure 5 plots the percentage of countries in a FTS according to our benchmark model (top

panel), the aggregate probability of a global FTS from the global model (middle panel), and the

aggregate FTS probability for the US (bottom panel). A horizontal line at 50% probability is

shown in all panels, representing the requirement that a global FTS occurs when at least half of

the countries are in a FTS (top panel), or the 50% threshold probability level we require for a

day to be denoted a FTS (the middle and bottom panels). There is significant overlap across the

definitions, with all well-known global crises identified as global FTS days by all three measures.

The first definition leads to the fewest number of global FTS, with a FTS incidence of only 0.80%,
  19
    One example of the former is Jotikasthira et al. (2012), who show that investor flows in global funds cause
portfolio re-allocations, generating strong price effects in emerging markets.



                                                      33
compared with 2.36% using a global-model-based measure and 2.62% using the US FTS indicator.

The average return impact on FTS days is the smallest under the first definition and largest using

the US FTS indicator.


5.2      Global FTS and Emerging Equity Markets

We use daily data for 25 emerging equity markets from various regions—Bulgaria, Hungary, Ro-

mania, Russia, Slovenia, Turkey from Central East Europe; Israel; South Africa; Argentina, Brazil,

Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru from Latin America; and China, India, Hong Kong, Indonesia,

Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and Thailand from Asia. While

Hong Kong and Singapore are in fact developed markets, we retain them in the sample as they

are not part of our main sample. Returns are computed in dollar terms but are relevant for both

US and local investors because the dollar changes on FTS days are negligible relative to equity

movements. This also makes the results on equities more comparable to those on bonds which also

trade in dollars. For all markets except those in Eastern Europe, the sample starts in the early

1990s. Bulgaria has the latest starting date in March 2000.

  An important consideration in this analysis is the degree of de jure integration of these markets,

which affects the risk models investors use and may also affect the incidence of FTS events. To

measure de jure integration, we use the [0,1] indices compiled by Fernandez et al. (2015) using

IMF data and extended by Bekaert et al. (2016) to an earlier sample period. These indices,

denoted by F Ii,t and available annually, use restrictions specifically focused on equity markets.20

The financial integration indices typically increase over time, signaling higher integration (see the

Online Appendix for details), but are constant at zero (one) for China (Bulgaria, Peru and Hong

Kong).

  When considering the effect of FTS events, it is important to control for the typical response

of emerging market equities to global equity markets, which may differ across jurisdictions due to

different degrees of integration. We therefore consider the following panel model:

                ri,t = (ci,0 + c1 F Ii,t ) + (βi,0 + β1 F Ii,t ) rbe,t + (γi,0 + γ1 F Ii,t ) F T Sbe,t + εi,t       (16)

where ri,t denotes the equity market return (in dollar) in country i on day t and ci,0 the country-
 20
      This index is calculated as one minus the fraction of restrictions in place on international security transactions.




                                                             34
specific intercept. rbe,t and F T Sbe,t represent the time-t benchmark return and FTS indicator,

respectively, that depend on the global FTS definition in consideration. The benchmark return

is the global equity market return under the first two global FTS definitions and the US equity

market under the third definition. We estimate the model as a panel because the limited time

variation in financial integration for some countries requires us to assume β1 and γ1 to be pooled

across countries. In estimating the model, we also take into account asynchronous trading hours. In

particular, for European, African, and Middle Eastern markets, we include both contemporaneous

and one-day-lagged benchmark returns and FTS indicators in the regression. The tables report

the sums of contemporaneous and lagged coefficients and the associated standard errors. We only

include the contemporaneous returns and FTS indicators for Latin American markets, and only

one-day-lagged benchmark returns and FTS indicators for Asian markets.

  Panel A of Table 11 summarizes the results, with country-by-country results reported in the

Online Appendix. The average exposure of emerging equity markets to benchmark returns is

estimated to be 0.26-0.28 using the two global market benchmarks and 0.13 using the US market

benchmark, with higher exposures for more integrated equity markets. The effect is not only

statistically but also economically significant, as a move from zero to full integration increases

an emerging market’s global market beta by about 0.40. On FTS days, emerging equity market

returns decline more than justified by their benchmark exposures. The average FTS impact is the

most negative (-2.46%, with an IQR of -1.79% to -2.96%) when the global FTS is identified as one

with at least half the countries in a FTS, and the least negative (-0.97%, with an IQR of -0.74% to

-1.24%) when the global FTS is identified by applying our methodology to global equity and bond

returns. The FTS effect is less negative for more integrated economies, with γ1 ranging from 0.0057

to 0.0147 and statistically significant at the 1% level for all three definitions. On FTS days, more

integrated emerging equity markets benefit from less negative FTS exposures but at the same time

suffer from more positive benchmark exposures; this suggests that, during FTS episodes, investors

treat integrated and segmented emerging equity markets similarly as one asset class, leading to

indiscriminate declines across those markets.

  While all these results are computed in US dollars, we have verified that the bulk of the effect

comes from declining local equity markets with less than 20% of the total effect coming from

depreciating emerging market currencies.

                                                35
5.3    Global FTS and Emerging Bond Markets

Our analysis of emerging market bonds covers the same set of countries as for emerging equity

markets, except for Slovenia for which no bond market data is found. For Israel, Hong Kong,

Korea, and Singapore, we use JP Morgan’s Emerging Local Markets Index, which contains secu-

rities denominated in each country’s local currency with a relatively short duration; for all other

countries, we use JP Morgan’s Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI) data, consisting of US

dollar-denominated Brady bonds. We use the de jure bond market integration indices compiled by

Fernandez et al. (2015) (and extended by Bekaert et al. (2016)) using restrictions for bond markets

only. We adjust the FTS regression (16) to include both bond and equity benchmarks. Several

papers (e.g. Longstaff et al. (2011), Bekaert et al. (2014b)) suggest that global factors affect the

pricing of emerging market sovereign bonds.

    Panel B of Table 11 shows the average benchmark bond market beta to be 0.17-0.25 and the

average equity market beta to be 0.20-0.27, depending on the definition of global FTS used. The

benchmark bond market betas tend to increase with bond market integration (β1 (bo) = 0.08, which

is significant at the 5% level), while equity market betas show no such correlations. We also find

on average negative FTS betas that range from -0.12% (IQR of -0.39% to 0.17%) using the “50%

countries in FTS rule” to -0.24% (IQR of -0.32% to -0.14%) using the US FTS indicator, although

the estimates are significant (at the 5% level) in no more than 7 of the 24 countries. Contrary

to the equity markets, we find the FTS exposure to decrease with bond market integration, but

the effect is never statistically significant. We conclude that emerging market bonds behave about

in line with typical risky asset classes during a global FTS, while emerging market equities are

exposed to global FTS risks beyond their exposures to standard benchmark risks.



6     Hedging against FTS

A FTS moves equities and bonds in opposite directions; diversification using these two major asset

classes may therefore provide a good way of limiting the losses during stress times. This thinking

is reflected in the fact that a 60% equity - 40% bond portfolio is often used as the benchmark in

institutional asset management. It is also a common belief that additional benefits can be obtained

from diversifying away from the standard equity and bond asset classes into alternative investment


                                                36
vehicles and asset classes such as private equity, hedge funds and natural resources. Some high-

profile university endowments in the US reportedly follow this strategy, which is dubbed by some

as the “endowment model” (see Swensen (2009)). In Section 6.1, we examine whether proxies to

the endowment portfolios provide hedges against FTS. In addition, one specific investment vehicle,

hedge funds, should in theory provide at least a partial protection against market downturns. Those

funds can go long or short and can invest in a wide array of securities and derivative products,

which could potentially provide positive returns in all market environments. In fact, the name

“hedge funds” suggests that, in the mind of many investors, they may “hedge” against bad times.

But do they? Section 6.2 tries to answer this question.


6.1   The Endowment Model

The endowment model seeks to enhance diversification by investing in different geographic regions

(mostly international and emerging market equities), alternative asset classes (e.g., commodities,

real estate), and alternative investment vehicles (e.g., private equity and hedge funds). Ang et al.

(2018) report that US university and college endowments now hold close to one-third of their

portfolios in private equity and hedge funds. Testing whether the endowment model works in

practice during FTS events requires data on those funds’ actual returns, which is beyond the scope

of this article. However, we collected proxies for the various asset classes used by endowment funds,

as well as data on their target or actual asset allocations. With the rapid growth of alternative and

“smart beta” ETFs, retail investors can now mimic the endowment model. We measure the FTS

sensitivity of the various asset classes in the endowment model using a daily regression:

                                 rt,i = α + βi F T St + γi Ctrlt + εt,i                         (17)

where rt,i is the return on asset class i on day t, F T S is our FTS dummy, and the variable Ctrl is

a vector of control variables that may differ across regressions.

  The alternative asset classes we consider include natural resources (S&P GSCI energy index),

commodities (S&P GSCI benchmark total commodity index), hedge funds (HFRX global hedge

fund index), absolute return hedge funds (HFRX absolute return index), real estate (a REITS index

from Datastream), and global private equity in local currency (S&P listed private equity). Those

asset classes show relatively low correlation (see Online Appendix), confirming their potential value



                                                  37
for portfolio diversification. For all asset classes, we control for their exposures to the domestic

equity market. For private equity and non-benchmark fixed income asset classes, we also control

for their exposures to the domestic government bond market.

  Table 12 reports the results using daily dollar returns over the period 2004-2015.21 All asset

classes show significantly positive equity exposures; the bond market exposure is significantly neg-

ative for private equity, reflecting its leverage component, and significantly positive for foreign and

inflation-linked bonds. After controlling for the benchmark risks, real estate, natural resources and

commodities show significantly positive FTS betas, suggesting that those asset classes do indeed

provide some FTS insurance. The hedge fund indices and high-yield bonds have significantly neg-

ative FTS betas, while global equities (either world excl. US or emerging markets) have negative

yet insignificant FTS betas, suggesting those asset classes lose value more than justified by their

benchmark exposures during FTS episodes22 .

  We track the annual portfolio allocations of all endowments in Nacubo combined and the Harvard

and Yale endowments, the two largest and best known endowment funds over 2004-2015. We obtain

actual allocations for Nacubo and Yale but only target allocations for Harvard. Table 13 (Panel

A) shows some snapshots of their asset allocations. Both Harvard and Yale have more real assets

than the average endowment, and Yale’s well-known strategy of overweighting private equity and

underweighting listed domestic equity is also visible from the table. Nevertheless, the returns on

the three endowment portfolios, calculated using the allocations and the proxies shown in Table

12, are highly correlated with correlations exceeding 90% (see the Online Appendix).

  Panel B repeats regression (17) for the three endowment funds returns using different control

variables. On average, the values of those portfolios go down between 91 bps (Harvard) and 1.42%

(Yale) more on FTS days than on other days. Once we control for domestic equity exposures, all

portfolios have positive FTS exposures, which are only significant (at the 10% level) for the Harvard

portfolio. This may simply reflect the performance of the fixed income portion of their portfolio.

In fact, an often-used benchmark for endowment portfolios contains 60% equities and 40% bonds.

Indeed, all three endowment portfolios have betas not too far from one with respect to such a
   21
      While our asset allocation weights go back to 2002 for Nacubo and even further for the Harvard and Yale
endowments, the HFRX Absolute Return Index starts only on July 1, 2004.
   22
      In the Online Appendix, we report the same table showing Dimson (1979) betas with one lag. The results
are largely similar, with FTS betas of the absolute return hedge fund index and high-yield bonds also becoming
significantly negative though remaining economically small.


                                                     38
benchmark, with Yale showing the highest beta. The FTS betas now become significantly negative

for all three portfolios, with Harvard’s FTS beta the least negative or significant23 . We conclude

that most endowment funds remained exposed to FTS risks. Of course, it is conceivable that the

actual portfolios of endowments perform better than the tracking portfolios we constructed using

various indices that are not actively managed.


6.2         Hedge Funds

In this section, we examine how well hedge funds do during times of market stress, as measured

by our FTS indicator. We obtain daily returns (in US Dollars) on various Hedge Fund Research

(HFR) indices over the period of March 2003 to July 2015. The indices include the overall index

(“Global Hedge fund”) and 11 different categories such as “Convertible Arbitrage,” “Global Macro”

and “Absolute Return.” We describe the various categories in more detail in the data appendix, and

report summary statistics on the returns in the Online Appendix. While these hedge fund indices

show overall positive returns, with the exception of Convertible Arbitrage and Equity Market

Neutral, and subdued volatilities of only 2.5 to 6.5% annualized, their returns on FTS days are

invariably negative, ranging from -0.025% for equity market neutral funds to -0.624% for equity

hedge funds.

  It is well known that most hedge fund styles have positive market exposures (for example, see

Asness et al. (2001) and Patton (2009) for market neutral funds). Therefore, we run our usual

regression, regressing daily hedge fund returns on the US FTS indicator and control for market risk

using the US equity market return. To prevent FTS events from contaminating the factor beta

estimates, we also consider two abnormal return models. The first model is

                                             ri,t = αi + βi Ft + εi,t
                                                             0




where ri,t is the return on hedge fund index i, Ft represent the risk factors under consideration,

and βi is a vector of exposures of hedge fund index i with respect to the risk factors Ft . The model
        0



is estimated using only data on non-FTS days. Abnormal returns on FTS days are computed as

                                            ARi,t = ri,t − α̂i − β̂i Ft
                                                                   0




with t now indicating FTS days. We then conduct a simple t-test on the average abnormal returns,
 23
      The results are unchanged when a lagged Dimson beta is included (see the Online Appendix).



                                                        39
which constitute an alternative estimate of the FTS beta. In the second model, α and β are

estimated over a window of 250 days before the FTS event; hence, this model allows the α and

β estimates to be different for each FTS event. FTS days within the window are excluded when

estimating the model.

  Column (3) of Table 14 reports estimates of the market exposures for the standard specifi-

cation. Most hedge fund categories have significantly positive systematic exposures, suggesting

poor performance during market downturns. The exceptions include Convertible Arbitrage, which

shows significantly negative exposure, and Distressed Securities, Equity Market Neutral, and Global

Macro, which have effectively zero exposures. After controlling for market risks, the estimated FTS

betas reported in Column (4) are negative for all categories and, with the sole exception of Equity

Market Neutral, significant at the 10% level or below. The estimated FTS betas do not differ much

between the standard regression (shown in Column (4)), and the abnormal return models (shown in

Columns (6)-(7)), although the FTS betas for Equity Market Neutral, Global Macro, and Absolute

Return become insignificant in the abnormal return model with rolling betas.

  We consider four additional robustness checks of the benchmark regressions. First, Asness et al.

(2001) claim that the systematic exposure of hedge funds increases substantially when lagged

exposures are accounted for. In column (8) of Table 14, we report the FTS exposures using the

contemporaneous and two lags of US equity market returns as systematic risk controls.24 The

results are remarkably robust with the FTS betas and their significance barely affected. Second,

when using a richer risk model with the seven factors as in Fung and Hsieh (2004) and additionally

including an Emerging Markets factor, our results, again, remain robust (see Online Appendix).

Third, we redo all our specifications using the global equity return instead of the US equity return to

control for systematic risks. The R2 s rise in a few cases, but most other results remain unchanged.

The FTS betas are estimated to be negative and statistically significant for most categories, with

a few cases of insignificant betas found for Convertible Arbitrage, Distressed Securities and Equity

Market Neutral.

  Last but not the least, Patton and Ramadorai (2013) study the changing market exposure of

individual hedge funds within the month by interacting them with instruments available at the
  24
    We also examined models with one and four lags, and applied this methodology to the abnormal return framework
as well. The results are invariably robust (see Online Appendix).



                                                       40
daily frequency. They find strong evidence of time-varying market exposures, some deterministic

and some in response to market conditions. For example, they find that the market exposures of

hedge funds may abruptly change in response to lower stock returns, higher stock volatility, or

elevated TED spreads. This suggests that hedge funds may provide hedges against market stress

by lowering their exposure to the risk factors ahead of a FTS. We can only test this at the fund

category level as we do not have data on individual hedge fund returns, but our data on daily

returns allows us to directly test whether hedge funds change their exposure ahead of a FTS.

  We consider a model where the exposure of the hedge fund index with respect to the risk factors

depend on the time (in days) relative to the FTS event, denoted by ζ:

                                       ri,t = αi + βi (ζ) Ft + εi,t .
                                                     0




Our most general specification for βi (ζ) is a third-order polynomial function:
                                       0




                  βi (ζ) = βi0 + βi1 ln(ζ̄) + βi2 ln(ζ̄)2 + βi3 ln(ζ̄)3 + βi4 D1 + βi5 D2        (18)
                   0         0     0            0            0            0         0




where D1 is a dummy variable that equals one on the last day before a FTS event and D2 a

dummy variable that equals one on each of the last 5 business days before a FTS event. In the

third-order polynomial specification, we set ζ̄ = ζ for ζ < 250 and ζ̄ = 250 for ζ ≥ 250. The

baseline model does not include lags of Ft . We also consider models including 1, 2 and 4 lags of

Ft , where the lagged exposures are assumed to be proportional to βi (ζ). The Online Appendix
                                                                              0



provides details on the estimation results of the most general model as well as a more restricted

version. As a summary, we find that the two dummy variables are never statistically significant,

suggesting the polynomial function is flexible enough to capture changes in risk exposure, even near

a FTS event. The dummy variables are therefore excluded from the preferred model. For 3 hedge

fund categories (Convertible Arbitrage, Merger Arbitrage and Relative Value), the polynomial

coefficients are jointly and/or individually all statistically insignificant and we put them equal to

zero in the preferred model.

  We find that the time variations in the risk exposures are remarkably similar across fund categories

with non-constant exposures. We therefore show the pattern only for the overall hedge fund index

in Figure 6, relegating detailed results for individual categories and different specifications to the

Online Appendix. Systematic exposures are relatively small at around 0.10 one year before a FTS,



                                                    41
but increase steadily to about 0.25 around 50 days before a FTS event. The market exposure then

decreases rather quickly to levels below that witnessed a year earlier just before the FTS event,

before rising slightly into the event. This pattern is seen for all fund categories with significant

polynomial coefficients with varying magnitudes. Because of the parametric nature of the beta

function, we can analyze the observed pattern mathematically. Focusing on the model without

lags, we define ζ1 and ζ2 as the distance to FTS that reaches the largest and the smallest beta,

respectively. The last two columns of Table 14 report the estimates. The maximum beta occurs

in general between 78 and 52 days before a FTS event, and 63 days before for the overall index.

The minimum occurs a few days before a FTS event, varying between 3 (for most categories) and

7 (Equity Market Neutral) days. This table shows numerically that the pattern of Figure 6 is

valid for all hedge fund categories. We can also test whether these changes in systematic exposure

are statistically significant. Columns (10) and (11) of Table 14 show that both the increase in

market exposures from 250 days before a FTS event to day ζ1 and the the decreases in market

exposures between day ζ1 and the day before a FTS are statistically significant and economically

large (varying between 0.08 and 0.18).

  In summary, similar to Patton and Ramadorai (2013), we find significant changes in hedge fund

exposures, but the pattern is intricate. Hedge funds appear to slowly increase their systematic

exposures before a FTS event occurs, likely during periods when markets are relatively calm, but

rapidly reduce their market exposure a few months before a FTS event. Interestingly, once we

allow for time variations in market exposure using the polynomial specification, the estimated FTS

betas (Column (9) of Table 14) become significantly negative for all hedge fund categories.

  We conclude that hedge funds do not hedge against FTS events. That said, we do find that about

half of the fund categories and the overall index generate positive and statistically significant alphas,

which remains true under the Fung-Hsieh model to control for risk. There is, in fact, extensive

research on the relationship between the average performance of a fund on the one hand, and the

R2 with respect to various systematic exposures (Titman and Tiu, 2011), the probability of fund

failure (Bollen, 2013), the dynamic risk management ability of hedge fund managers (Namvar et al.

(2016)), and insurance value against high tail risk episodes (Jiang and Kelly, 2012) or “bad times”

(Cao et al., 2014), on the other hand. Those papers all use individual hedge fund returns and it is

therefore difficult to compare our results with theirs. At the fund category level, there does not seem

                                                   42
to be a strong link between low R2 s and alphas; for example, Event Driven and Merger Arbitrage

have both the highest R2 s and the highest alphas. Moreover, all hedge fund categories fare poorly

during FTS episodes, regardless of their alpha. Of course, it is also conceivable that the broad

categories might mask individual hedge fund effects, with some high quality funds indeed providing

hedges against FTS events. One economic factor that could lead to differential performance of hedge

funds in crisis times is liquidity. For example, Boyson et al. (2010) suggest that hedge funds may

experience contagion effects in response to large adverse shocks to asset and hedge fund liquidity;

Sadka (2012) shows that liquidity risk is an important factor in explaining the cross-section of

hedge fund returns; and Cao et al. (2013) document that hedge funds tune their market exposures

with respect to liquidity conditions. We defer further analysis of these issues to future work.



7     Conclusion

We define a FTS event as a day on which bond returns are positive, equity returns are negative, the

stock-bond return correlation is negative, and there is market stress as reflected in elevated equity

return volatility. Using daily data on only equity and bond returns, we identify FTS episodes in 23

countries. To do so, we develop a new RS model for bond and stock returns that embeds the FTS

characteristics described above. The model delivers relatively persistent FTS spells, accompanied

by steep increases in equity risk premiums and more modest decreases in bond risk premiums, high

conditional equity return volatility, and very negative conditional bond-stock return correlations.

We combine the FTS measure delivered by this model with the FTS measures implied by two

alternative models to generate conservative FTS estimates.

    On average, FTS episodes comprise less than 2% of the sample, and when they occur, bond returns

exceed equity returns by about 2.72% on average. FTS spells are short-lived, rarely exceeding 4

days and never longer than 10 days. Alternative market stress indicators such consumer sentiment

indices, implied stock market volatility, and safe haven currencies (the Yen and the Swiss Franc)

move as expected on FTS days. For the US, we document that FTS are accompanied by outflows

from equity mutual funds and inflows into Treasury bond and money market funds. This may

suggest that retail investors, which are the dominant investors in such funds, forego the high

relative risk premiums to be earned on such days. Also, using corporate bonds stratified over


                                                 43
“quality” and “liquidity,” we show that the FTS effect represents more a flight to quality than a

flight to liquidity. However, international equity data stratified across quality and liquidity lines

show FTS events to adversely affect both low-liquidity and low-quality stocks, with high-quality or

high-liquid stock portfolios featuring positive FTS betas. Alternative asset classes do not fully help

hedge against FTS, and we find the FTS exposure of portfolios following the “endowment model”

(the average endowment as well as those of Yale and Harvard) to be negative once we control for

exposure to the standard 60% equities; 40% bonds benchmark portfolio. Hedge funds overall and

almost all hedge fund styles we examine do not hedge against FTS events either, but we document

an intricate pattern of changes in the systematic risk exposure of hedge funds preceding a FTS. It

would be interesting to further examine the FTS exposures of individual hedge funds.

  We hope that our results will provide useful inputs to theorists positing theories regarding the

origin and dynamics of FTS, and to asset pricers attempting to uncover major tail events that may

drive differences in expected returns across different assets or asset classes. Those results may also

inspire portfolio and risk managers to look for portfolio strategies that may help insure against

FTS events, especially since we show that standard hedge fund strategies do not provide such an

insurance. Preliminary computations suggest that such strategies would involve quite large bond

allocations.




                                                 44
References
Acharya, Viral V., Lasse H. Pedersen, Thomas Philippon, and Mattthew Richards, 2017, Measuring
  systemic risk, Review of Financial Studies 30, 2–47.

Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K. Brunnermeier, 2016, CoVar, American Economic Review 106,
  1705–1741.

Aikman, David, Michael Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael G. Palumbo, and Missaka Warusawitha-
  rana, 2017, Mapping heat in the U.S. financial system, Journal of Banking & Finance 81, 36 –
  64.

Ait-Sahalia, Yacine, Mustafa Karaman, and Loriano Mancini, 2018, The term structure of variance
  swaps and risk premia, Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 18-37.

Allen, Linda, Turan G. Bali, and Yi Tang, 2012, Does systemic risk in the financial sector predict
  future economic downturns?, Review of Financial Studies 25, 3000–3036.

Ang, Andrew, Andrés Ayala, and William N Goetzmann, 2018, Investment beliefs of endowments,
  European Financial Management 24, 3–33.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2002, International asset allocation with regime shifts, Review
  of Financial Studies 15, 1137–1187.

Asness, Clifford, Robert Krail, and John Liew, 2001, Do hedge funds hedge?, Journal of Portfolio
  Management 28, 6–19.

Asness, Clifford S, Andrea Frazzini, and Lasse Heje Pedersen, 2018, Quality minus junk, Review of
  Accounting Studies https://doi.org/10.1007/s11142-018-9470-2.

Badarinza, Cristian, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2018, Home away from home? Foreign demand and
  London house prices, Journal of Financial Economics 130, 532–555.

Bae, K. H., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz, 2003, A new approach to measuring financial contagion,
  Review of Financial Studies 16, 717–763.

Baele, Lieven, Geert Bekaert, and Koen Inghelbrecht, 2010, The determinants of stock and bond
  return comovements, Review of Financial Studies 23, 2374–2428.

Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler, 2006, Investor sentiment and the cross-section of stock re-
  turns, Journal of Finance 61, 1645–1680.

Bansal, Naresh, Robert A. Connolly, and Christopher T. Stivers, 2010, Regime-switching in stock
  index and Treasury futures returns and measures of stock market stress, Journal of Futures
  Markets 30, 753–779.



                                               45
Barsky, Robert B., 1989, Why don’t the prices of stocks and bonds move together, American
  Economic Review 79, 1132–1145.

Baur, Dirk G., and Brian M. Lucey, 2009, Flights and contagion - An empirical analysis of stock-
  bond correlations, Journal of Financial Stability 5, 339–352.

Baur, Dirk G., and Thomas K. McDermott, 2010, Is gold a safe haven? International evidence,
  Journal of Banking & Finance 34, 1886–1898.

Beber, A., M. W. Brandt, and J. Cen, 2014, Switching risk-off: Fx correlations and risk premia,
  Working Paper Cass Business School.

Beber, Alessandro, Michael W. Brandt, and Kenneth A. Kavajecz, 2009, Flight-to-quality or flight-
  to-liquidity? evidence from the euro-area bond market, Review of Financial Studies 22, 925–957.

Bekaert, Geert, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, and Arnaud Mehl, 2014a, The global crisis
  and equity market contagion, Journal of Finance 69, 2597–2649.

Bekaert, Geert, Eric Engstrom, and Yuhang Xing, 2009, Risk, uncertainty, and asset prices, Journal
  of Financial Economics 91, 59–82.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, Christian Lundblad, and Stephan Siegel, 2014b, Political risk
  spreads, Journal of International Business Studies 45, 471–493.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, Andrea Kiguel, and Xiaozheng Wang, 2016, Globalization
  and asset returns, Annual Review of Financial Economics 8, 221–288.

Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2007, Liquidity and expected re-
  turns: Lessons form emerging markets, Review of Financial Studies 20, 1783–1831.

Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick, and David Marshall, 2001, Peso problem explanations for term
  structure anomalies, Journal of Monetary Economics 48, 241–270.

Bekaert, Geert, and Marie Hoerova, 2014, The VIX, the variance premium and stock market
  volatility, Journal of Econometrics 183, 181–192.

Bekaert, Geert, and Marie Hoerova, 2016, What do asset prices have to say about risk and uncer-
  tainty?, Journal of Banking and Finance 67, 103–118.

Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623–685.

Bollen, N. P., 2013, Zero-R2 hedge funds and market neutrality, Journal of Financial and Quanti-
  tative Analysis 48, 519–547.

Bongaerts, Dion, Frank de Jong, and Joost Driessen, 2017, An asset pricing approach to liquidity
  effects in corporate bond markets, Review of Financial Studies 30, 1229–1269.


                                                46
Boyson, Nicole M., Christof W. Stahel, and Rene M. Stulz, 2010, Hedge fund contagion and liquidity
  shocks, Journal of Finance 65, 1789–1816.

Brownlees, Christian T., and Robert F. Engle, 2011, Volatility, correlation and tails for systemic
  risk measurement, Working Paper.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., 2009, Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007-2008, Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 23, 77–100.

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H. Pedersen, 2009, Market liquidity and funding liquidity,
  Review of Financial Studies 22, 2201–2238.

Caballero, Ricardo, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Emmanuel Farhi, 2017, The safe assets shortage
  conundrum, Journal of Economic Perspectives 31.

Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy, 2008, Collective risk management in a flight to
  quality episode, Journal of Finance 63, 2195–2230.

Cao, Charles, Yong Chen, Bing Liang, and Andrew W. Lo, 2013, Can hedge funds time market
  liquidity?, Journal of Financial Economics 109, 493–516.

Cao, Charles, David Rapach, and Guofu Zhou, 2014, Which hedge fund styles hedge against bad
  times?, Working Paper.

Connolly, Robert, Chris Stivers, and Licheng Sun, 2005, Stock market uncertainty and the stock-
  bond return relation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 161–194.

Dimson, Elroy, 1979, Risk measurement when shares are subject to infrequent trading, Journal of
  Financial Economics 7, 197–226.

Edelen, Roger M., and Jerold B. Warner, 2001, Aggregate price effects of institutional trading: a
  study of mutual fund flow and market returns, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 195–220.

Edwards, A., L. Harris, and M. Piwowar, 2007, Corporate bond market transaction costs and
  transparancy, Journal of Finance 62.

Ermolov, A., 2017, Time-varying risk of nominal bonds: How important are macroeconomic
  shocks?, Working Paper.

Fernandez, A, MW Klein, A Rebucci, M Schindler, and M Uribe, 2015, Capital control measures:
  a new dataset, IMF Working Paper .

Fung, William, and David A. Hsieh, 2004, Hedge fund benchmarks: A risk-based approach, Finan-
  cial Analyst Journal 60, 65–80.

Gilbert, Ethel S., 1968, On discrimination using qualitative variables, Journal of the American
  Statistical Association 63, 1399–1412.

                                               47
Goyenko, Ruslan, and Sergei Sarkissian, 2012, Treasury bond illiquidity and global equity returns,
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49, 1217–1253.

Graham, B., 1973, The Intelligent Investor (4th rev. ed.) (Harpers & Row, New York).

Hamilton, James D., 1989, A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series
  and the business cycle, Econometrica 57, 357–384.

Hamilton, James D, 1994, Time Series Analysis (Princeton University Press, New York).

Hollo, Daniel, Manfred Kremer, and Marco Lo Duca, 2012, Ciss - a composite indicator of systemic
  stress in the financial system, ECB Working Paper No. 1426.

Jiang, Hao, and Bryan Kelly, 2012, Tail risk and hedge fund returns, Chicago Booth Research Paper
  No. 12-44.

Jotikasthira, Chotibhak, Christian Lundblad, and Tarun Ramadorai, 2012, Asset fire sales and
  purchases and the international transmission of funding shocks, Journal of Finance 67, 2015–
  2050.

Kelley, Eric K., and Paul C. Tetlock, 2013, Why do investors trade? Working Paper.

Kim, Chang-Jin, 1994, Dynamic linear models with Markov-switching, Journal of Econometrics
  60, 1–22.

Lesmond, David A., Joseph Ogden, and Charles Trzcinka, 1999, A new estimate of transaction
  costs, Review of Financial Studies 12, 1113–1141.

Longstaff, Francis, 2004, The flight to liquidity premium in US Treasury bond prices, Journal of
  Business 77, 511–526.

Longstaff, Francis A., Jun Pan, Lasse H. Pedersen, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 2011, How sovereign
  is sovereign credit risk?, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 3, 75–103.

Martin, Ian, 2017, What is the expected return on the market?, The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  132, 367–433.

Mayfield, E. Scott, 2004, Estimating the market risk premium, Journal of Financial Economics 73,
  465–496.

Merton, Robert C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
  investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 323–361.

Namvar, Ethan, Blake Phillips, Kuntara Pukthuanthong, and P Raghavendra Rau, 2016, Do hedge
  funds dynamically manage systematic risk?, Journal of Banking and Finance 64, 1–15.




                                               48
Novy-Marx, R., 2013, The other side of value: Good growth and the gross profitability premium,
  Journal of Financial Economics 108, 1–28.

Patton, Andrew J., 2009, Are "market neutral" hedge funds really market neutral?, Review of
  Financial Studies 22, 2495–2530.

Patton, Andrew J., and Tarun Ramadorai, 2013, On the high-frequency dynamics of hedge fund
  risk exposures, Journal of Finance 68, 597–635.

Piotroski, J., 2000, Value investing: The use of historical financial statement information to separate
  winners from losers, Journal of Accounting Research 38, 1–41.

Sadka, Ronnie, 2012, Hedge-fund performance and liquidity risk, Journal of Investment Manage-
  ment 10, 60–72.

Swensen, David F, 2009, Pioneering portfolio management: An unconventional approach to insti-
  tutional investment (Free Press).

Teugels, Jozef L., 1990, Some representations of the multivariate bernoulli and binomial distribu-
  tions, Journal of Multivariate Analysis 32, 256–268.

Titman, Sheridan, and Cristian Tiu, 2011, Do the best hedge funds hedge?, Review of Financial
  Studies 24, 123–168.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 2004, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, NBER Working
  Paper No. 10327.

White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance-matrix estimator and a direct test
  for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817–838.




                                                  49
                   Table 1: Bivariate Regime Switching Model - Estimation Results


Panel A reports estimation results for the bivariate regime switching model developed in Section 2.1. Panel
B reports ergodic probabilities for each of the 6 possible regime combinations (S e , S b , S F T S ).

            Panel A: Estimation Results                    Panel B: Ergodic Probs.

                      Estim.       s.e.       pval.           Ergodic Probabilities across
                                                                 states (S e , S b , S F T S )
              Pe      0.989       0.001       0.00
                                                                    0,0,0                      52.00%
              Qe      0.969       0.003       0.00
                                                                    0,1,0                      21.24%
              Pb      0.987       0.002       0.00
                                                                    1,0,0                      15.70%
              Qb      0.968       0.005       0.00
                                                                    1,0,1                       3.31%
              A       0.009       0.002       0.00
                                                                    1,1,0                       6.41%
              B       0.988       0.004       0.00
                                                                    1,1,1                       1.35%
              α1      -0.910      0.149       0.00                Total FTS                    4.66%
              α2      1.221       0.670       0.08
            αF T S    -5.453      1.232       0.00
            αF T R    3.463       1.246       0.01
              γ1      -0.821      0.141       0.00
              γ2      0.085       0.047       0.08
            γF T S    0.362       0.083       0.00
            γF T R    -1.404      0.313       0.00
              ve      0.024       0.011       0.03
              vb      0.156       0.042       0.01
              ae      0.691       0.008       0.00
              be      1.554       0.041       0.00
              ab      0.719       0.011       0.00
              bb      1.436       0.033       0.00
            θF T S    -1.338      0.083       0.00
             θLL      0.006       0.020       0.38
             θLH      0.072       0.037       0.06
             θHL      0.013       0.059       0.39
             θHH      0.349       0.075       0.00




                                                      50
                                                     Table 2: Model-Implied Within-Regime Expected Equity and Bond Returns

     Panel A reports expected equity returns (relative to a country specific intercept α0i ) conditional on the equity volatility (Ste ) and FTS (StF T S ) regimes
     as implied by our Bivariate RS model. For each regime combination, we also calculate the total expected return for the US (including α0us , final
     column) and its different components using the equations in (6). Panel B reports corresponding expected bond return differences, the total US bond
     returns, and their components conditional on being in any of the six possible equity volatility (Ste ), bond volatility (Stb ), and FTS (StF T S ) regimes
     (calculated using the equations in Section 1.2 of the Online Appendix). All numbers are annualized. The final rows test for significant differences
     between the state-dependent expected returns.

                                                                                              Panel A: Equities




51
                                                            Switch to          Stay in         Switch out
                                                                                                                    Switch to FTS            Stay in FTS            Switch out FTS             Total ER (US)
                                                         high equity vol   high equity vol   high equity vol
      E[re,t+1 |Ste = 0, StF T S   = 0; It ]   Formula     α1 (1 − P e )                                       αF T S (1 + ve ) (1 −P e) A                                                         10.14%
                   (ERe0,0 )                    Total        -2.592%                                                    -0.1397%                                                                   (0.95%)
      E[re,t+1 |Ste = 1, StF T S   = 0; It ]   Formula                                        α2 (1 − Qe )        αF T S (1 + ve ) Qe A                                                            10.17%
                   (ERe1,0 )                    Total                                           9.567%                  -12.274%                                                                   (1.04%)
      E[re,t+1 |Ste = 1, StF T S   = 1; It ]   Formula                                        α2 (1 − Qe )                                   Qe BαF T S ve   [(1 − Qe ) + Qe (1 − B)] αF T R       28.12%
                   (ERe1,1 )                    Total                                           9.567%                                        -31.951%                  37.623%                    (3.19%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                (α0us = 12.88)
                                               estim.         s.e.
            (ERe1,0 ) - (ERe0,0 )              0.03%         0.07%
            (ERe1,1 ) - (ERe1,0 )              17.97%        2.13%
            (ERe1,1 ) - (ERe0,0 )              17.95%        2.19%
                                                                                                   Table 2 continued...

                                                                                                       Panel B: Bonds
                                                                       Switch to          Stay in       Switch out
                                                                                                                            Switch to FTS               Stay in FTS           Switch out FTS             Total ER (US)
                                                                     high bond vol
                                                                                      high bond vol   high bond vol
     E[rb,t+1 |Ste   =   0, Stb = 0, StF T S   = 0; It ]   Formula    γ1 1 − P b                                       γF T S (1 + vb ) (1 −   P e) A                                                       4.40%
                               00,0
                         (ERb )                             Total      -2.338%                                                 0.011%                                                                     (0.57%)
     E[rb,t+1 |Ste =     0, Stb = 1, StF T S   = 0; It ]   Formula                                     γ2 1 − Qb       γF T S (1 + vb ) (1 − P e ) A                                                        7.42%
                         (ERb01,0 )                         Total                                       0.680%                 0.011%                                                                     (0.53%)
     E[rb,t+1 |Ste =     1, Stb = 0, StF T S   = 0; It ]   Formula    γ1 1 − P b                                          γF T S (1 + vb ) Qe A                                                             5.31%
                         (ERb10,0 )                         Total       -2.338%                                                  0.918%                                                                     (0.63%)




52
                                                                                
     E[rb,t+1 |Ste =     1, Stb = 0, StF T S   = 1; It ]   Formula    γ1 1 − P b                                                                        γF T S vb QB   [(1 − Qe )) + Qe (1 − B)]γF T R      2.71%
                         (ERb10,1 )                         Total      -2.338%                                                                         13.576%                 -15.257%                   (1.43%)
     E[rb,t+1 |Ste =     1, Stb = 1, StF T S   = 0; It ]   Formula                                     γ2 1 − Qb          γF T S (1 + vb ) Qe A                                                             8.33%
                         (ERb11,0 )                         Total                                        0.680%
                                                                                                                               0.918%                                                                     (1.58%)
     E[rb,t+1 |Ste =     1, Stb = 1, StF T S   = 1; It ]   Formula                                     γ2 1 − Qb                                        γF T S vb QB   [(1 − Qe )) + Qe (1 − B)]γF T R      5.73%
                         (ERb11,1 )                         Total                                         0.680%                                         13.576%                  -15.26%                    (1.53%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (γ0us = 6.73%)
                                                           estim.        s.e.
                 ERb11,1 vs ERb11,0                        -2.60%       0.41%
                 ERe1,1 vs ERb11,1                         16.24%       2.24%
                 ERe0,0 vs ERb00,0                         -0.40%       0.14%
             Table 3: Model-Implied Within-Regime Equity and Bond Return Volatilities


This table reports the model-implied within-regime equity and bond return volatilities, calculated using the
expressions in Appendix C. As input for the shock volatilities, we take the average shock volatilities across
countries. The equity volatility only depends on the equity regime and the FTS regime; the bond volatility
depends on equity, bond and FTS regimes. The model-implied total volatility is calculated using the ergodic
probabilities. All numbers are annualized.

                       Equity Volatility                                          Bond Volatility
     V   ar (re,t+1 | Ste
                        = 0, StF T S = 0; It )   16.18%   V   ar (rb,t+1 | Ste   = 0, Stb = 0, StF T S   = 0; It )   6.28%
                                                          V   ar (rb,t+1 | Ste   = 0, Stb = 1, StF T S   = 0; It )   8.50%
     V ar (re,t+1 | Ste = 1, StF T S = 0; It )   25.36%   V   ar (rb,t+1 | Ste   = 1, Stb = 0, StF T S   = 0; It )   6.31%
                                                          V   ar (rb,t+1 | Ste   = 1, Stb = 0, StF T S   = 1; It )   7.74%
     V ar (re,t+1 | Ste = 1, StF T S = 1; It )   27.66%   V   ar (rb,t+1 | Ste   = 1, Stb = 1, StF T S   = 0; It )   8.52%
                                                          V   ar (rb,t+1 | Ste   = 1, Stb = 1, StF T S   = 1; It )   9.63%
     Unconditional                               19.22%                                                              7.07%




                                                          53
                                                          Table 4: FTS Summary - All Models


     This table reports FTS incidence (column 2), equity, bond and return impact (defined as the difference between the bond and equity returns) on all
     FTS days (columns 3 to 5) and on the first day of a FTS spell (columns 6 to 8), the ratio of volatility on FTS relative to non-FTS days (columns 9
     and 10), and stock-bond return correlations during FTS episodes (column 11), over the full sample (column 12), and on non-FTS days (column 13).
     For each indicator, we report the equally-weighted average, the median, and interquartile range (IQR).

                                                              Panel A: Bivariate RS Model

                                                 All   FTS Days             First FTS Days           Vol Ratio         Stock-Bond Correlation
                           FTS Incidence    equity     bond Impact     equity    bond Impact       equity bond       FTS       All     Non-FTS
          Average (EW)        4.73%         -0.33%     0.11% 0.44%     -0.91% 0.19% 1.10%           1.95   1.23    -58.48% -10.30%      -4.18%
             Median           5.01%         -0.33%     0.10% 0.43%     -1.08% 0.18% 1.16%           1.94   1.26    -60.01% -12.93%      -7.03%
                              4.03%         -0.41%     0.09% 0.29%     -1.34% 0.08% 0.57%           1.72   1.17    -62.49% -14.87%      -8.67%
               IQR
                              5.48%         -0.21%     0.11% 0.51%     -0.34% 0.28% 1.48%           2.00   1.29    -57.00% -4.79%        2.08%

                                                               Panel B: Threshold Model




54
                                                 All   FTS Days             First FTS Days           Vol Ratio         Stock-Bond Correlation
                           FTS Incidence    equity     bond Impact     equity    bond Impact       equity bond       FTS        All    Non-FTS
          Average (EW)        4.64%         -2.18%     0.57% 2.75%     -2.18% 0.57% 2.75%           1.41   1.14    -17.38% -10.30%       2.95%
             Median           4.64%         -2.17%     0.55% 2.71%     -2.17% 0.55% 2.71%           1.37   1.14    -23.99% -12.93%       0.34%
                              4.60%         -2.43%     0.54% 2.44%     -2.43% 0.54% 2.44%           1.30   1.06    -35.65% -14.89%      -2.39%
               IQR
                              4.68%         -1.89%     0.58% 2.99%     -1.89% 0.58% 2.99%           1.47   1.21     -9.13%    -3.71%     9.52%

                                                                 Panel C: Ordinal Model

                                                 All   FTS Days             First FTS Days           Vol Ratio         Stock-Bond Correlation
                           FTS Incidence    equity     bond Impact     equity    bond Impact       equity bond       FTS       All     Non-FTS
          Average (EW)        4.65%         -2.00%     0.32% 2.32%     -2.00% 0.32% 2.32%           1.37   1.09    -24.42% -10.30%      -2.66%
             Median           4.66%         -1.97%     0.30% 2.26%     -1.97% 0.30% 2.26%           1.35   1.08    -25.52% -12.93%      -4.55%
                              4.62%         -2.27%     0.29% 1.97%     -2.27% 0.29% 1.97%           1.23   0.99    -30.32% -14.89%      -7.46%
               IQR
                              4.67%         -1.68%     0.33% 2.55%     -1.68% 0.33% 2.55%           1.48   1.19    -18.39% -3.71%        3.69%
                                                             Table 5: Ordinal FTS Measure


     This table reports cross-country summary statistics for the Ordinal FTS measure discussed in Section 3.2. Column (2) reports summary statistics for
     the threshold level, calculated as the minimum of the ordinal numbers on days that satisfy a set of “mild” FTS conditions. Column (3) reports the
     percentage of observations that have an ordinal number above this threshold. Column (4) reports how much of those observations have an ordinal
     measure larger than 50% (calculated as 1 minus the percentage of false positives, i.e. the percentage of observations with an ordinal number above
     the threshold that do not meet our FTS criteria). Column (5) shows the percentage of observations in the full sample that have an ordinal FTS
     probability larger than 50%.




55
                                                              % obs         % (obs > threshold) with       % obs with
                                            Threshold    above Threshold        FTS prob > 50%           FTS Prob > 50%
                                  Mean       67.95%          15.61%                 31.14%                   4.65%
                                  Median     68.97%          13.85%                 33.72%                   4.66%
                                   Min       63.04%           9.34%                 20.84%                   4.57%
                                   Max       74.00%          22.13%                 49.83%                   4.75%
                                   Q1        66.45%          13.54%                 26.69%                   4.63%
                                   Q3        69.65%          17.50%                 34.46%                   4.67%
             Table 6: Joint FTS Incidence - Overlap with high equity volatility states


The first three data columns report joint FTS incidence as well as equity and bond return impact on FTS
days across countries. The last two columns show the percentage overlap in days between our FTS events and
stress times in equity markets. For each country, we select the same number of days with the highest equity
market volatilities as the number of FTS days we identify for that country, and calculate the percentage
overlap with our FTS indicator. We use the backward-looking Gaussian kernel method with bandwidths (bw)
of either 5 or 25 days to estimate equity market volatility. We show country-specific results and summary
statistics (average, min, max, interquartile range) for our full sample of 23 countries.


                          FTS        Equity      Bond       % of FTS that are also high vol days
                       Incidence     Impact     Impact     Vol (bw = 5 days) Vol (bw = 25 days)
  United States          2.27%       -2.02%      0.54%           21.4%                7.1%
    Germany              2.21%       -2.23%      0.40%           27.3%               20.5%
 United Kingdom          2.15%       -1.86%      0.43%           18.6%               15.6%
   Switzerland           1.59%       -2.35%      0.25%           29.4%               21.7%
      Japan              1.29%       -2.38%      0.37%           11.3%                7.5%
     Canada              1.60%       -2.27%      0.50%           20.5%               19.7%
     Sweden              2.14%       -2.57%      0.38%           10.1%                7.4%
    Australia            1.58%       -1.85%      0.55%           14.5%                4.3%
    Denmark              1.73%       -2.02%      0.32%           16.8%                2.5%
      France             2.06%       -2.26%      0.43%           18.9%               19.5%
     Belgium             1.99%       -1.81%      0.37%           15.1%               17.9%
       Italy             2.12%       -2.42%      0.47%           21.3%               21.8%
  New Zealand            0.38%       -2.01%      0.59%           16.7%               16.7%
  Netherlands            2.36%       -2.27%      0.39%           27.9%               26.9%
     Ireland             1.36%       -2.59%      0.45%           11.1%                5.6%
      Spain              2.06%       -2.37%      0.42%           23.5%               14.1%
     Austria             1.67%       -2.01%      0.40%            8.4%                0.6%
 Czech Republic          1.56%       -2.68%      0.40%           20.3%               15.3%
     Finland             1.64%       -2.75%      0.40%            3.7%                0.0%
     Greece              1.14%       -2.69%      0.43%            2.0%                0.0%
     Norway              1.51%       -2.20%      0.37%            4.5%                3.4%
     Poland              1.54%       -2.97%      0.48%            8.6%                8.6%
    Portugal             2.06%       -2.16%      0.44%           35.0%               31.4%
      Mean               1.74%       -2.29%      0.43%           21.6%               17.5%
     Median              1.67%       -2.27%      0.42%           22.4%               19.7%
        Q1               1.55%       -2.50%      0.39%           14.9%                9.5%
        Q3               2.09%       -2.02%      0.46%           28.0%               23.1%




                                                    56
                                                       Table 7: Alternative Market Stress Indicators

     This table reports regressions of changes in consumer confidence, safe have currency values, the TED spread, gold prices, and equity implied volatility
     measures on the aggregate FTS dummy (instances). The consumer confidence indicator is the monthly (country-specific) OECD consumer confidence
     indicator (seasonally-adjusted), available for all countries except for Norway. The safe-haven currencies include the Swiss Franc, the Japanese Yen,
     and the US dollar and are expressed in terms of local currency per unit of safe currency. The daily TED spread is available for all countries except
     Ireland, Austria, Czech Republic and Poland. The price of gold is measured by the S&P GSCI gold index in US dollars. Country-specific equity
     implied volatility measures are VIX for US and Canada, VFTS for the UK, VDAX for the other European countries, and VJX for Japan, Australia
     and New Zealand. Changes are measured in percentage terms for the currencies and gold, and in simple terms for all other indicators. Regressions
     are run monthly for the consumer confidence (with monthly FTS incidence measured as the fraction of FTS days within that month) and daily
     for all others. For gold, we consider specifications with and without the global equity market return (in US dollars) as a control variable. For all
     regressions, we show the slope parameter estimates for the US, Germany, and the UK, as well as the average, standard deviation, and top/bottom
     quartile of parameter estimates across all countries for which data is available. The second to last column shows the number of countries for which




57
     the parameters estimates are significant at the 10% level. The last column shows the number of countries for which data is available. ***, **, and *
     represent statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

                                                              US       Germany         UK      Mean      Std      6th     17th    Sign.   Obs
                         OECD Consumer Confidence         -0.563***     -0.231*    -0.429***   -0.389   0.212   -0.511   -0.281    19     22
                                           Swiss Franc      0.169*     0.196***     0.222***    0.327   0.276    0.152    0.346    21     22
                                         Japanese Yen     0.193***      0.156**     0.312***    0.439   0.337    0.199    0.617    20     22
                                            US Dollar          -       -0.177***      -0.058    0.073   0.291   -0.121    0.160    13     22
                                          TED Spread      0.051***       -0.002       -0.004    0.012   0.026    0.000    0.007     5     19
                                                 Gold       0.122        0.171*       -0.004    0.026   0.137   -0.070    0.115     3     23
                  Gold, Controlling for Market Return     0.370***     0.396***      0.200**    0.202   0.160    0.082    0.312    12     23
                             Equity Implied Volatility    3.176***     2.139***     2.432***    2.252   0.448    2.009    2.273    23     23
                                                           Table 8: FTS and Mutual Fund Flows

     This table reports estimated coefficients from regressions of mutual fund flows (as a percentage of the lagged AUM) on our FTS variable. In the first
     regression, we only include the contemporaneous effect (βF T S ); in the second regression, we also include the lagged FTS variable and report the total
     FTS effect as the sum of contemporaneous effect (βF T S ) and the lagged effect (β̄F T S ). The FTS variable is the percentage of days within the week
     or month that signals a FTS for the US. We show results for both weekly-reporting-only funds and all funds. For the latter, we differentiate between
     the monthly flows based on reported monthly AUMs, and weekly flows Lipper constructed by distributing monthly flows evenly among the weeks
     within a month for funds reporting at the monthly frequency only. We exclude ETFs, but the Online Appendix shows results including ETFs. ***,
     **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively, using Newey-West standard errors (using either 6 monthly or
     12 weekly lags).




58
                                                      Weekly-reporting funds only                              All funds
                                                                 Weekly                          Weekly                          Monthly
                                                          βF T S   βF T S + β̄F T S       βF T S   βF T S + β̄F T S       βF T S    βF T S + β̄F T S
                 Equity                               -0.0034***     -0.0052***       -0.0029***     -0.0043***       -0.0173***     -0.0270***
                 Treasury                                 0.0000        0.0008           0.0050       0.0067**         0.0377***      0.0541***
                 Corporate IG                            -0.0013        -0.0017          0.0005         0.0005           0.0033         0.0006
                 Corporate HY                          -0.0048**      -0.0059**       -0.0042***     -0.0052***       -0.0296***     -0.0342***
                 Money Market - All                       0.0023        0.0048           0.0028         0.0056          0.0368**       0.0453**
                 Money Market - government only        0.0208***      0.0291***        0.0210***     0.0298***         0.0819***      0.1619***
                             Table 9: FTS Return Impact on Quality and Liquidity Double Sorted Corporate Bond Portfolios


     This table reports the average effective percentage bid-ask half spreads and FTS impact estimates for corporate bond portfolios double sorted on
     quality (measured by the KMV’s EDF) and liquidity (measured by amount issued). The table on the left reports contemporaneous exposures to a
     duration-matched Treasury-bond benchmark and the aggregate US equity market as well as the FTS impact (see Equation (15) in Section 4.4.1).
     The table in the middle reports the sum of contemporaneous and lagged FTS impact, after correcting for contemporaneous and lagged exposures to
     the Treasury and equity market benchmark portfolios. The table on the right reports the sum of the contemporaneous and lagged FTS exposures,
     not corrected for benchmark risks. The bottom rows report the p-value from a test of the hypothesis that (1) low and high liquidity bonds within
     the same quality quintile have the same FTS exposures; or (2) the bottom and high quality quintiles within the same liquidity bucket have the same
     FTS exposures.

                                                 Av. effective %                                                                        FTS impact      Total FTS impact
                                   Liquidity                           βT B                    β EQ                    FTS Impact (γ)
                                               bid-ask half spread                                                                      (incl. lags)   (not risk corrected)
                                     low             0.37%           0.744***                0.057***                       -0.46%       -0.78%***             0.08%
          Bottom Quintile
                                     high            0.27%           0.684***                0.041***                     -0.47%**        -0.43%**             0.04%




59
       (lowest default risk)
                                     diff          0.10%***            -0.06                  -0.02                        -0.01%         0.35%*              -0.05%
                                     low             0.46%           0.691***                0.058***                    -0.87%***       -0.88%***             -0.35%
              Quintile 2             high            0.33%           0.707***                0.071***                    -0.69%***       -0.68%***             -0.16%
                                     diff          0.13%***            -0.02                  -0.01                        -0.18%          -0.19%             -0.19%
                                     low             0.53%           0.661***                0.107***                    -0.88%***       -0.95%***            -0.51%*
              Quintile 3             high            0.40%           0.721***                0.104***                    -0.98%***        -0.9%***            -0.6%**
                                     diff          0.14%***           -0.06*                   0.00                          0.1%          -0.06%              0.09%
                                     low             0.73%           0.514***                0.155***                    -1.16%***       -1.29%***          -1.12%***
              Quintile 4             high            0.51%           0.523***                0.104***                    -1.26%***        -1.11%**           -1.11%**
                                     diff          0.23%***            -0.01                   0.05                         0.11%          -0.18%             -0.01%
                                     low             0.87%           0.288***                0.254***                    -2.17%***        -1.99%**          -2.71%***
            Top Quintile
                                     high            0.71%           0.361***                0.245***                    -2.49%***       -2.00%***          -2.93%***
       (highest default risk)
                                     diff          0.16%***            -0.07                   0.01                         0.32%          0.01%               0.22%

       H0 : equal FTS exposure impact for between credit quality quintiles 1 and 5 (within same liquidity quintiles)       [0.00]          [0.02]             [0.00]
      H0 : equal FTS exposure impact between low and high liquidity quintiles (within same credit quality quintiles)       [0.67]          [0.48]             [0.72]
                      Table 10: FTS Return Impact on Quality and Liquidity Double Sorted International Equity Portfolios


     This table reports percentages of non-zero daily returns and FTS impact estimates for international stocks double sorted first on quality and
     subsequently on liquidity (see Section 4.4.2 for details). The table on the left reports the cross-country averages and IQRs of exposures—sum of
     contemporaneous and lagged—to both global and local benchmark portfolios, as well as the FTS exposure (see Equation (16) in Section 4.4.2). The
     table on the right reports the sum of the contemporaneous and lagged FTS exposures, not correcting for exposures to benchmark portfolios. The
     bottom rows report the p-value from a test of the hypothesis that (1) FTS exposures are the same for low and high liquidity equities within the same
     credit quality tercile; or (2) FTS exposures are the same for the bottom and top credit quality terciles within the same liquidity tercile.

                                              % day with        Global β (incl lag)   Local β (incl lag)   FTS Impact (γ)        FTS impact (incl lag)
                          Liquidity
                                            non-zero returns    Mean       IQR        Mean       IQR          (incl lag)          (not risk corrected)
        Bottom             Low                   53.9%           0.41      0.10        0.10      0.13         -0.18%**                 -0.97%***
        Quality        Intermediate              77.6%           0.47      0.18        0.10      0.15        -0.22%***                 -1.46%***




60
         Tercile           High                  89.3%           0.50      0.20        0.07      0.10          -0.06%                  -1.92%***
                     High minus Low             35.4%           0.09                  -0.03                   0.12%*                 -0.96%***
      Intermediate         Low                   55.9%           0.43      0.09        0.09      0.10         -0.16%**                 -0.93%***
         Quality       Intermediate              78.6%           0.46      0.15        0.11      0.13         -0.16%**                 -1.35%***
         Tercile           High                  90.0%           0.49      0.24        0.08      0.07           0.08%                  -1.76%***
                     High minus Low             34.1%           0.06                  -0.01                  0.24%***                -0.83%***
         Top               Low                   56.7%           0.42      0.16        0.11      0.11        -0.17%***                 -0.90%***
        Quality        Intermediate              78.3%           0.47      0.15        0.10      0.14          -0.11%                  -1.34%***
        Tercile            High                  89.4%           0.37      0.23        0.07      0.10         0.13%**                  -1.70%***
                     High minus Low             32.7%           -0.05                 -0.04                  0.30%***                -0.79%***

      H0 : equal FTS exposures between high and low liquidity buckets (within same quality buckets)            [0.00]                     [0.00]
       H0 : equal FTS exposures for bottom and top quality buckets (within same liquidity buckets)             [0.00]                     [0.00]
                                       Table 11: FTS and Emerging Markets

This table reports the FTS exposures for emerging equity markets (Panel A) and emerging bond markets
(Panel B) estimated using specification (16) in Section 5.2. The three global FTS indicators considered are:
an indicator that equals 1 when at least half of countries are in a FTS (columns 2-3), a global-model-based
indicator (columns 4-5), and the US FTS indicator (columns 6-7). We use the global (US) equity market
return as the benchmark equity market return under the first two (third) definition(s). To account for non-
synchronous trading hours, we include both contemporaneous and one-day-lagged benchmark returns and
FTS indicators for European, African, and Middle Eastern Markets. For Latin-American (Asian) markets,
we only use contemporaneous (one-day-lagged) benchmark returns and FTS indicators. When reporting the
benchmark beta and FTS exposure, we sum across contemporaneous and lagged coefficients, if applicable.
The parameters c1 , β 1 , and γ 1 capture the potential effect of market integration on the country-specific
intercepts and benchmark and FTS exposures, respectively. ***, **, and * indicate statistical significance
at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level (calculated using standard errors clustered on time).
                                         Panel A: Emerging Equity Markets
                                    50% countries in FTS        Global FTS (model)                     US FTS
                                    benchmark         FTS       benchmark              FTS        benchmark      FTS
                    Average            0.26        -2.46%             0.28            -0.97%        0.13        -1.94%
                    Median             0.19        -2.65%             0.20            -1.01%        0.05        -2.08%
                       Q1              0.02        -2.96%             0.04            -1.24%        -0.05       -2.38%
                       Q3              0.40        -1.79%             0.40            -0.74%        0.27        -1.47%
                  # significant        17             25               17              20            15          25
                                      Estim           pval            Estim            pval         Estim        pval
                       c1            -0.0002          0.55          -0.0002            0.59        0.0000        0.94
                       β1            0.416***         0.00       0.405***              0.00       0.309***       0.00
                       γ1           0.0147***         0.00       0.0057***             0.01       0.0102***      0.00

                                            Panel B: Emerging Bond Markets
                             50% countries in FTS               Global FTS (model)                             US FTS
                         β (bo)      β (eq)     FTS           β (bo)         β (eq)      FTS         β (bo)     β (eq)    FTS
       Average              0.25      0.27      -0.12%         0.17           0.27      -0.18%        0.20       0.20    -0.24%
       Median               0.25      0.26      -0.13%         0.13           0.26      -0.19%        0.19       0.18    -0.27%
          Q1                0.12      0.18      -0.39%         0.02           0.17      -0.45%        0.07       0.11    -0.32%
          Q3                0.34      0.35      0.17%          0.27           0.34      0.11%         0.28       0.26    -0.14%
     # significant           18        22         2            18             23              7        15         23       4
                            estim     pval                    estim           pval                   estim       pval
          c1            -0.0002       0.12                   -0.0002          0.22                  -0.0002      0.25
        β1 (bo)         0.0855**      0.03                   0.0912**         0.02                  0.0766**     0.02
        β1 (eq)          0.0203       0.27                    0.0152          0.42                   0.0072      0.46
          γ1            -0.0022       0.63                   -0.0013          0.26                  -0.0006      0.27




                                                                 61
                                                      Table 12: FTS and Endowment Asset Classes

     This table reports results from regression in Equation (17) for various asset classes frequently included in endowment portfolios. The third column
     shows the indices used as proxies for the asset classes. The subsequent columns report coefficient estimates. We control for the domestic equity market
     for all asset classes (expect for the benchmark domestic bonds), and also control for the domestic bond market for private equity and non-benchmark
     fixed income asset classes. We use daily returns, expressed in percentages, over the period 2004-2015. ***, **, and * represent statistical significance
     at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.

      Asset classes                                Index used as proxy                                           α          βF T S    βEquity      βBond
      Equity           Domestic equity             US Datastream Total Market Index                         0.105***     -1.858***       -            -
                       Foreign equity              World excl. US Datastream Total Market Index               0.016         -0.040   0.479***         -
                       Emerging market equity      Emerging Markets Datastream Total Market Index             0.032*        -0.040                    -




62
                       Private equity              S&P Listed Private Equity                                  -0.002        0.023    1.019***    -0.168***
      Hedge funds      All strategies              HFRX Global Hedge Fund Index                               0.006*     -0.173***   0.111***         -
                       Absolute return             HFRX Absolute Return Index                                 0.002       -0.052**   0.018***         -
      Real assets      Real estate                 US Datastream REITs                                        -0.008      0.322**    1.418***         -
                       Natural resources           S&P GSCI Energy Total Return                               -0.049       0.488**   0.516***         -
                       Commodities                 S&P GSCI Commodity Total Return                            -0.035       0.308*    0.431***         -
      Fixed income     Domestic bonds              10-year Benchmark US Government Bond Index                 0.002      0.637***        -            -
                       Foreign bonds               ICE BofAML Global Government Index                         0.003         0.067    0.021***     0.376***
                       Inflation-linked bonds      Barclays US Treasury TIPS Index                          -0.018***       0.050    0.033***     0.646***
                       High-yield bonds            ICE BofAML US High Yield Total Return Index              0.030***       -0.081*   0.067***       0.010
      Cash                                         JPM US CASH 1M                                           0.006***     0.005***      0.000          -
                                                           Table 13: FTS and Endowment Portfolios

     This table reports asset allocations and estimation results for three endowment portfolios: the dollar-weighted portfolio across the sample of university
     endowments in the NACUBO–Commonfund Study of Endowments, and the Harvard and Yale endowment portfolio. Panel A shows the endowments’
     allocation to asset classes for receptively 2005, 2010 and 2015. For the Nacubo and Yale portfolio it is the actual allocation; for the Harvard portfolio
     the target allocation. Allocations are in percent. For the Nacubo and Yale portfolios, the foreign equity allocation includes emerging market equity.
     Panel B reports estimated coefficients from regressions of our endowment portfolio returns on the US FTS dummy. The first two columns report the
     results for the model without adding control variables; the next three columns for the model with the domestic equity market as control variable; the
     latter three columns for the model with a standard “60-40” domestic equity–bond benchmark portfolio as control variable. ***, **, and * represent
     statistical significance at the 1, 5 and 10 percent level, respectively, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.
                                                                  Panel A: Weights of asset classes
                                                                         Nacubo portfolio         Harvard portfolio      Yale Portfolio
                          Asset classes                                 2005 2010 2015           2005 2010 2015       2005 2010 2015
                          Equity             Domestic equity            34.3 15.0 16.0           15.0 11.0 11.0       14.1    7.0     3.9
                                             Foreign equity             14.0 16.0 19.0           10.0 11.0 11.0       13.7    9.9    14.7
                                             Emerging market equity      0.0  0.0     0.0         5.0   11.0 11.0      0.0    0.0     0.0
                                             Private equity              7.1  15.6 15.0          13.0 13.0 18.0       14.8 30.3 32.5




63
                          Hedge funds        All strategies             16.6 21.3 22.0            0.0   0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0
                                             Absolute return             0.0  0.0     0.0        12.0 16.0 16.0       25.7 21.0 20.5
                          Real assets        Real estate                 4.5  5.2     6.0        10.0   9.0    12.0   25.0 27.5 14.0
                                             Natural resources           3.6  7.3     6.0         0.0   9.0    11.0    0.0    0.0     6.7
                                             Commodities                 0.0  0.0     1.0        13.0   5.0     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0
                          Fixed income       Domestic bonds             17.2 12.0     9.0        11.0   4.0     7.0    4.9    4.0     4.9
                                             Foreign bonds               0.0  0.0     0.0         5.0   2.0     1.0    0.0    0.0     0.0
                                             Inflation-linked bonds      0.0  0.0     0.0         6.0   5.0     2.0    0.0    0.0     0.0
                                             High-yield bonds            0.0  2.6     2.0         5.0   2.0     0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0
                          Cash                                           2.7  5.0     4.0        -5.0    2.0    0.0    1.8    0.3     2.8

                                                                   Panel B: Parameter Estimates
                                                without   controls        with   domestic   equity       with 60 equity / 40 bond
                                 Portfolio        α          βF T S       α       βF T S     βGlobal      α      βF T S      β60/40
                                 Nacubo       0.060***     -1.030***   0.001       0.019    0.565***   0.000 -0.195*** 0.971***
                                 Harvard      0.055***     -0.911***   -0.003     0.113*    0.551***   -0.003   -0.107*    0.935***
                                   Yale       0.081***     -1.421***   -0.004      0.096    0.816***   -0.006 -0.220*** 1.396***
                                                                 Table 14: FTS and Hedge Fund Returns

     This table reports estimation results for our FTS dummy model (columns (2) to (5)), our two abnormal return models without lags (column (6) and
     (7)), our FTS dummy model including 2 lags (column (8)), and our model with FTS time-dependent exposures (columns (9) to (11)). For the FTS
     dummy model without lags we report the alpha, the risk exposure, the adjusted R2 measure and the FTS beta. For the other models we only report
     the FTS beta. Column (10) and (11) report the difference in beta over two combinations of days, based on the beta polynomial specification for the
     restricted model without lags. ζ1 and ζ2 are the optimums of the beta specification (i.e. the distance to FTS for which the beta is respectively a
     maximum and a minimum). The optima are calculated by taking the first derivative of Equation (18) with respect to ζ, set it equal to zero and then
     solving for ζ. The optimums are
                                                                     0
                                                                      q
                                                                               0           0
                                                                                 2           0 
                                                                − 2βi2 ±    2βi2 − 4 3βi3 βi1 
                                                                                  0
                                                    ζ1,2 = exp                                    − 1.
                                                                             2 3βi3

     ***, **, and * represent statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10 percent level, respectively, and are based on heteroskedasticity-consistent standard
     errors.




64
              (1)                    (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)          (11)       (12)   (13)
         Fund Categories                      Standard Regression                 Abnormal 1   Abnormal 2   Lag model                      Polynomial model
                                       αi          βi      R2           βiF T S      βiF T S      βiF T S       βiF T S      βiF T S   (250) − (ζ1 ) (ζ1 ) − (1)   ζ1      ζ2
      Convertible arbitrage         -0.0026   -0.0344** 0.0117      -0.1716***    -0.1843***   -0.2046***   -0.1741***    -0.1832***         -             -        -       -
      Distressed securities         0.0026      -0.0062  0.0017       -0.0489*     -0.0487**   -0.0538***    -0.0495**    -0.0907***    -0.0954*** 0.1133***       69      3
      Event driven                0.0132***   0.1500*** 0.4137      -0.1904***    -0.1976***   -0.0559***   -0.1919***    -0.1586***    -0.1608*** 0.1201***       58      3
      Equity hedge                  0.0026    0.2374*** 0.5554      -0.2101***    -0.2168***    -0.0483**   -0.2141***    -0.1446***    -0.1822*** 0.1205***       64      3
      Equity market neutral         0.0006       0.0023  0.0005        -0.0221      -0.0245      -0.0061       -0.0212     -0.0576**    -0.1154*** 0.1227***       78      7
      Merger arbitrage            0.0139***   0.1235*** 0.3128       -0.0942**    -0.1026***   -0.0636***    -0.0942**    -0.0999***         -             -        -       -
      Global macro                 0.0113*       0.0038  0.0061       -0.1667*    -0.1653***     -0.0573      -0.1649*    -0.1681***    -0.1706*** 0.1583***       75      4
      Relative value               0.0096**   0.0414*** 0.0618      -0.1801***    -0.1923***   -0.0920***   -0.1835***    -0.1932***         -             -        -       -
      Market directional           0.0095*    0.2039*** 0.4262      -0.2428***    -0.2520***    -0.0559**   -0.2476***    -0.2049***    -0.1483***    0.1041*      64      3
      Absolute return               0.0019    0.0185*** 0.0292       -0.0524**    -0.0575***     -0.0117     -0.0531**     -0.0343**    -0.0957*** 0.0706***       56      3
      Equal weighted strategies   0.0075***   0.0675*** 0.2582      -0.1382***    -0.1440***   -0.0748***   -0.1393***    -0.1233***    -0.1018*** 0.0793***       63      3
      Overall hedge fund           0.0073**   0.1118*** 0.3769      -0.1729***    -0.1789***   -0.0577***   -0.1749***    -0.1516***    -0.1509*** 0.1193***       63      3
                                        Figure 1: Co-Exceedance Model - FTS Incidence and Return Impact


     This graph plots the FTS incidence (left axis) and the return impact (right axis) from the co-exceedance model for various levels of κ. The blue
     horizontal line indicates the target FTS incidence of 4.66%. Dashed and dotted lines plot the associated IQRs.




65
                               Figure 2: Ordinal Model - FTS Incidence and Return Impact - Various Volatility Scales


     This graph plots the FTS incidence (left axis) and the return impact (right axis) from the ordinal model for various levels of κ. The blue horizontal
     line indicates the target FTS incidence of 4.66%. Dashed lines plot the associated IQRs.




66
                                                Figure 3: FTS Probability - US - Individual and Joint

     This figure plots the probability of being in a FTS according to the Bivariate Regime Switching model (top panel; see Section 2), the Co-Exceedance
     model (second panel; see Section 3.1), the Ordinal Approach (third panel, see Section 3.2), and according to the Joint FTS measure (bottom panel,
     see Section 3.3).




67
                    Figure 4: Return Impact before, during, and after FTS Spell

This figure plots the average return across all countries and the associated IQR before, during, and after
a FTS spell for equities (Panel A), bonds (Panel B), and the difference between the two (“return impact”)
(Panel C) at different stages of a FTS, including (1) over the 5 days before the start of the spell, (2) on the
day right before the start of the spell, (3) on the first day of the spell, (4) over all subsequent days, except
the last one, of the spell , (5) on the last day of the spell, (6) on the first day following the spell, and (7)
over the 5 days following a spell.




                                                      68
                                                             Figure 5: Global FTS Measures

     This figure plots the percentage of countries in a FTS according to our benchmark model (top panel), the aggregate FTS probability from a global
     version of the benchmark model (middle panel), and the aggregate FTS probability for the US. A horizontal line at 50% probability is shown in all
     panels, representing the requirement that a global FTS occurs when at least half of the countries are in a FTS (the top panel), or the 50% threshold
     probability level we require for a day to be denoted a FTS (the middle and bottom panels).




69
                                     Figure 6: Time-Varying Market Exposure of the Overall Hedge Fund Index

     This figure shows the market beta of the overall hedge fund index as a function of the distance to FTS. The market beta is based on the model in
     Equation (18), in which the market exposure depends upon the time (in days) relative to the FTS event according to a polynomial function. The
     coefficients of the dummy variables D1 and D2 are imposed to be zero if they are estimated to be insignificant. The US market return is used as the
     risk factor.




70
                                                                                                                                                                                                              A


                                                                Table A.1: Data Sources and Availability for Variables

     This table gives an overview of the variables used in this paper, the data sources or proxies, the data availability in term of countries and time period, and the data
     frequency. Our sample of 23 developed countries includes two countries from North-America (US, Canada (CN)), 18 European countries (Austria (OE), Belgium
     (BG), Czech Republic (CZ), Denmark (DK), France (FR), Finland (FN), Germany (BD), Greece (GR), Ireland (IR), Italy (IT), Netherlands (NL), Norway (NW),
     Poland (PO), Portugal (PT), Spain (ES), Sweden (SD), Switzerland (SW), UK), as well as Australia (AU), Japan (JP), and New-Zealand (NZ). Our sample of
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Data Appendix




     25 emerging equity markets includes Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Turkey from Central East Europe; Israel; South Africa; Argentina, Brazil,
     Chile, Colombia, Mexico, and Peru from Latin America; and China, India, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
     and Thailand from Asia. If we refer to “All countries” in the column ’Availability Countries’, it only concerns the developed countries. In the column ’Availability
     Time Period’, we only mention the starting year, unless the data is not available until the end of the sample period, in which case the end date is also mentioned.
     The individual equity quality indicators include leverage, Altman z-score, gross profits to total assets, ROE and asset growth volatility.

      Variables                                        Data Source / Proxy                          Availability Countries                     Avaibility Time Period (Start Date)             Frequency
      Equity data
      Developed market equity indices             Datastream Total Market Indices                        All countries                           See Table 1 of the Online Appendix              Daily
      Emerging market equity indices              Datastream Total Market Indices                   All emerging countries                       See Table 13 of the Online Appendix             Daily




71
      Individual equity returns                             Datastream                            All countries, except for US                   See Table 11 of the Online Appendix             Daily
      Individual equity quality indicators                  Worldscope                            All countries, except for US                   See Table 11 of the Online Appendix             Yearly
      Bond data
      10-year government bond indices        Datastream 10-year Government Bond Indices                   All countries                    1980 (CN/JP 1984; AU 1987; NZ 1991; NW 1992)         Daily
      Emerging market bond indices            JP Morgan’s Emerging Local Markets Index      Israel, Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore              See Table 13 of the Online Appendix            Daily
      Emerging market bond indices            JP Morgan’s Emerging Markets Bond Index     Other emerging countries, except for Slovenia          See Table 13 of the Online Appendix            Daily
      Individual bond transaction data                    TRACE database                                       US                                             2002-2013                         Weekly
      Credit ratings                                            S&P                                            US                                             2002-2013                         Weekly
      Expected default frequency                          Moody’s - KMV                                        US                                             2002-2013                         Weekly
      Alternative market stress indicators
      OECD Consumer Confidence                               OECD                               All countries, except for Norway                              1980 *                            Monthly
      Currencies                                             MSCI                                          All countries                                     1980 **                             Daily
      TED Spread                                         Federal Reserve                  All countries, except for IR, OE, CZ and PO                        1980 ***                            Daily
      Gold                                     S&P GSCI benchmark commodity index                             Global                                           1980                              Daily
      Equity implied volatility                            Datastream                               US, Germany, UK, Japan                      US 1986; BD 1992; UK 2000; JP 1995               Daily
      Fund flows
      Fund flows and AUM non-ETF funds                Thomson Reuters Lipper                                   US                                               1992                         Weekly/Monthly
      Fund flows and AUM ETF funds                    Thomson Reuters Lipper                                   US                         Equity 1996; Treasury/Corp IG 2002; Corp HY 2007   Weekly/Monthly

     * JP 1982; GR 1985; ES/PT 1986; FN 1987; NZ 1988; CZ/SD 1995; PO 2001
     ** NZ/FN 1982; IR/GR/PT: 1987; PO 1992; CZ 1994
     *** US/BD/JP/AU/NW 1986; FN 1987; DK 1988; SD/FR 1989; CN/IT/ES 1990; BG 1991; GR 1994; PT 1999; NZ 2003)
B     Kernel Method for High and Low Frequency Variances and
      Correlations
Let re,t and rb,t be the returns on a benchmark equity and Treasury bond index, respectively. Given
any date t0 in a sample t = 1, .., T , the kernel method calculates stock and bond return variances
at the normalized date τ = t0 /T ∈ (0, 1) as:
                              2 =
                                      t=1 Kh (t/T      − τ ) ri,t    i = e, b
                                    PT                        2 ,
                             σi,τ

where Kh (z) = K (z/h) /h is the kernel with bandwidth h > 0. The weights given to individual
observations depend on (1) how close in time these observations are to the time point of interest,
τ , (2) the specific form of the kernel, and (3) the chosen bandwidth. In our applications, we use a
backward looking Gaussian kernel:

                                                       z2
                             K (z) =
                                                           
                                         √ψ exp                 if   z≤   t−k
                                          2π           2                   T


                             K (z) =           0                if   τ>   t−k
                                                                           T

with ψ a scaling factor that makes the weights sum up to a 100%, and k the number of past days
(including the current) that are excluded from the variance calculation. The bandwidth can be
viewed as the standard deviation of the distribution, and determines how much weight is given to
returns either in the distant past or future. The higher the bandwidth, the more past observations
are taken into account. When measuring the long-run component of volatility, we set the bandwidth
to 360 days (h = 360) and exclude to last 5 days (k = 5) to avoid contamination by recent FTS
events. The bandwidth of 360 days was chosen for the variances to reflect macro-economic cyclical
variation; it implies that the kernel’s half-life corresponds roughly to the average length of US
postwar recessions, which is around 11 months. We calculate time-varying covariances in a similar
way, i.e. by applying the same weighting scheme to the cross-product of the stock and bond returns.
The long-run correlation is then simply the long-run covariance divided by the cross-product of the
long-run stock and bond volatilities.


C     Conditional Volatilities
Appendix C shows the expressions for the conditional volatilities for respectively stock returns (see
Section C.1) and bond returns (see Section C.2).

C.1    Equity Volatilities
There are only three possible regimes for the conditional equity volatilities, because a FTS regime
cannot occur when the equity regime variable is in the low variance state. The conditional or
state-dependent equity volatilities are given by:
   V ar (re,t+1 | Ste = 0, StF T S = 0; It ) = α12 P e (1 − P e ) + 2α1 αF T S (1 + ve )P e (1 − P e )A
                                                   +αF2 T S (1 + ve )2 (1 − P e ) A (1 − (1 − P e ) A)
                                                   +me,t (ae P e + be (1 − P e ))
   V ar (re,t+1 | Ste = 1, StF T S = 0; It ) = α22 Qe (1 − Qe ) − 2α2 αF T S (1 + ve )Qe (1 − Qe ) A
                                                   +αF2 T S (1 + ve )2 Qe A (1 − Qe A)
                                                   +me,t (ae (1 − Qe ) + be Qe )
   V ar (re,t+1 | Ste = 1, StF T S = 1; It ) = α22 Qe (1 − Qe ) + 2α2 (αF T R − αF T S ve ) (1 − Qe ) Qe B
                                                   +(αF2 T S ve2 + αF2 T R )Qe B (1 − Qe B)
                                                   +me,t (ae (1 − Qe ) + be Qe ) .

C.2     Bond Volatilities
For bond returns, there are six regime-dependent conditional volatilities, because a FTS regime
can occur in either high or low bond volatility regimes. The various conditional or state-dependent
bond volatilities are given by:


      V ar (rb,t+1 | Ste = 0, Stb = 0, StF T S = 0; It ) = γ12 P b (1 − P b )
                                                             +γF2 T S (1 + vb )2 (1 − P e )A (1 − (1 − P e )A)
                                                             +mb,t ab P b + bb (1 − P b )
                                                                    h                     i


      V ar (rb,t+1 | Ste = 0, Stb = 1, StF T S = 0; It ) = γ22 Qb (1 − Qb )
                                                             +γF2 T S (1 + vb )2 (1 − P e )A (1 − (1 − P e )A)
                                                             +mb,t ab (1 − Qb ) + bb Qb
                                                                    h                       i


      V ar (rb,t+1 | Ste = 1, Stb = 0, StF T S = 0; It ) = γ12 P b (1 − P b )
                                                             +γF2 T S (1 + vb )2 Qe A (1 − Qe A)
                                                             +mb,t ab P b + bb (1 − P b )
                                                                    h                     i


      V ar (rb,t+1 | Ste = 1, Stb = 0, StF T S = 1; It ) = γ12 P b (1 − P b )
                                                             + γF2 T S vb2 + γF2 T R Qe B (1 − Qe B)
                                                                                    


                                                             +mb,t ab P b + bb (1 − P b )
                                                                    h                     i


      V ar (rb,t+1 | Ste = 1, Stb = 1, StF T S = 0; It ) = γ22 Qb (1 − Qb )
                                                             +γF2 T S (1 + vb )2 Qe A (1 − Qe A)
                                                             +mb,t ab (1 − Qb ) + bb Qb
                                                                    h                       i


      V ar (rb,t+1 | Ste = 1, Stb = 1, StF T S = 1; It ) = γ22 Qb (1 − Qb )
                                                             + γF2 T S vb2 + γF2 T R Qe B (1 − Qe B)
                                                                                    


                                                             +mb,t ab (1 − Qb ) + bb Qb .
                                                                    h                       i
D     Calculation of Joint FTS Dummy
Assume {Xi , i = 1, 2, ..., n} is a sequence of Bernoulli random variables, where

                                             P {Xi = 0} = qi ,             P {Xi = 1} = pi

where 0 < pi = 1 − qi < 1. The multivariate Bernoulli distribution is then represented by

                                      pk1 ,k2 ,...,kn := P {X1 = k1 , X2 = k2 , ..., Xn = kn }

where ki ∈ {0, 1} and i = 1, 2, ..., n. Let p(n) be a vector containing the probabilities of the 2n
possible combinations of the n individual binary indicators. To define p(n) , we write k (with
1 ≤ k ≤ 2n ) as a binary expansion:
                                                                       n
                                                            k =1+            ki 2i−1
                                                                       X

                                                                       i=1

where ki ∈ {0, 1}. This expansion induces a 1-1 correspondence
                                                          k ↔ (k1 , k2 , ..., kn )

so that
                                              pk = pk1 ,k2 ,...,kn ,            1 ≤ k ≤ 2n
                                               (n)


Teugels (1990) shows that p(n) can be calculated as:

                                       1   1                    1     1                               1  1
                                  "               #       "                      #               "            #
                  p   (n)
                            =                         ⊗                              ⊗ ... ⊗                      σ (n)
                                      −pn qn                  −pn−1 qn−1                             −p1 q1

                                          (n) T
where σ (n) = σ1 , σ2 , ..., σ2n                  is the vector of central moments than can be calculated as
                                            
                  (n)       (n)


                                                                       n
                                                                   "                         #
                                                              =E           (Xi − pi )
                                                      (n)              Y                ki
                                                     σk
                                                                   i=1

In our application, n = 3, with pi corresponding to the FTS probability on a particular day based
on the RS model (i = 1), the threshold model (i = 2), and the ordinal model (i = 3). The
Bernoulli variables Xi , i = 1, .., 3 are set to 1 when pi > 0.5, and zero otherwise. The vector of
central moments σk is estimated over the full sample. Our joint FTS dummy is set to one when
                   (n)

on that particular day, the probability that the RS model and at least one of the other two models
signal FTS is larger than 50%, i.e. when p1,1,1 + p1,1,0 > 0.5 or p1,1,1 + p1,0,1 > 0.5.
