NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEBT REDEMPTION AND RESERVE ACCUMULATION
Laura Alfaro
Fabio Kanczuk
Working Paper 19098
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19098

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013, Revised June 2018

The paper does not reflect the views of the Brazilian Ministry of Finance or the National Bureau
of Economic Research. We thank for their valuable comments and suggestions Emine Boz, Nan
Li, two anonymous referees, Enrique Alberola-Ila, Javier Bianchi, Roberto Chang, Menzie Chinn,
Charles Engel, Jeffrey Frankel, Marcio Garcia, Galina Hale, Ricardo Hausmann, Lakshmi Iyer,
Carmen Reinhart, Jesse Schreger, Eric Werker, and participants in seminars at the Kennedy
School of Government, Harvard Business School, Fundacão Getulio Vargas, University of São
Paulo, University of Wisconsin-Madison, and participants at the LACEA, and the Brazilian
Central Bank Inflation Targeting Conference. Hayley Pallan and Haviland Sheldahl-Thomason
provided great research assistance. Support from Harvard Business School research budget
acknowledged.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2013 by Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Debt Redemption and Reserve Accumulation
Laura Alfaro and Fabio Kanczuk
NBER Working Paper No. 19098
June 2013, Revised June 2018
JEL No. F31,F34
ABSTRACT
In the past decade, foreign participation in local-currency bond markets in emerging countries has
increased dramatically. We revisit sovereign debt sustainability under the assumptions that
countries can borrow internationally using their own currencies and accumulate reserves. As
opposed to traditional sovereign-debt models, asset-valuation effects occasioned by currency
fluctuations act to absorb global shocks and smooth consumption. Countries do not accumulate
reserves to be depleted in “bad” times. Instead, issuing domestic debt while accumulating
reserves acts as a hedge against external shocks. A quantitative exercise of the Brazilian economy
suggests this strategy to be effective for smoothing consumption and reducing the occurrence of
default.

Laura Alfaro
Harvard Business School
Morgan Hall 263
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu
Fabio Kanczuk
University of São Paulo
R. Dr Alberto Cardoso de Melo Neto 110/131A
Sao Paulo-S.P.-CEP 01455-100
BRAZIL
kanczuk@usp.br

1 Introduction
The past decade witnessed the impressive development of domestic government bond
markets in emerging market economies (EMEs). Market depth increased, maturities
lengthened, and the investor base broadened as a consequence of active foreign participation
in local currency bond markets. At the same time, EMEs accumulated international reserves.
However, since the interest earned from international reserves is much lower than that paid
on EMEs’ debts, this policy seems puzzling. What is the role of international reserves if these
countries have the option of inflating away domestic debt facing no significant external
liquidity risks? Why are these reserves not used to repay debt? Are international reserves
ultimately increasing or decreasing the sustainability of EMEs’ debts?
This paper revisits the question of the optimal level of debt and foreign reserves under
novel assumptions that reflect the recent developments of capital flows to emerging markets.
In particular, increased foreign participation in local-currency bond markets implies that
emerging countries borrow internationally in domestic-currency-denominated bonds. This
makes them subject to new sets of constraints regarding repayment of their liabilities, and
exposes them to new incentives to actively accumulate international reserves.
We modify a standard model of sovereign debt to quantitatively study how countries
should react to this new reality. We obtain that optimal reserve holdings turn out to be as
large as those observed in the data, and that default almost never occurs. This approach
differs from the traditional model, in that asset valuation effects contribute most significantly
to consumption smoothing. Our results suggest that joint issuance of domestic-denominated
debt and international reserves act as a powerful hedge against external shocks.
These results are congruous with two trends that have characterized capital flows and
portfolio holdings of emerging countries over the past decade. The first is a strong increase in

1

foreign participation in local-currency bond markets in emerging economies. Using a newly
constructed dataset of the currency composition of sovereign and corporate external debt, Du
and Schreger (2015a, b) show that over the past decade, major emerging market sovereigns
that borrowed as much as 85% of their external debt in foreign currency now borrow more
than half in their own currencies (see also Burger et al. (2012)). Figure 1 displays the increase
in domestic-currency-denominated debt in a sample of emerging markets.
Figure 1: Domestically-Denominated Debt as a Fraction of Total Government Debt (%)
100

90
80

90

70
60

70

50

60

40

Percentage

Percentage

80

30

50

20
40

10

30

0
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Brazil

Mexico

Colombia

Phillipines

Thailand

China

Turkey

South  Africa

Peru  (right  axis)

2014

Chile  (right  axis)

Source: Moody’s Statistical Handbook, 2014.

The second trend is the accumulation of international reserves, depicted in Figure 2.
The average level of reserves in 2014 was more than 25% of GDP in emerging countries, and
only approximately 5% of GDP in high-income countries. As documented by the European
Central Bank (2006), the size and pace of accumulation of foreign reserves has been
unprecedented. Countries have accumulated reserves greater than their IMF quotas,
exhibiting ratios of reserves to imports above four months of coverage, reserves to short-term
external debt maturities above one year (Greenspan-Guidotti rule) and broad money. The
increase in reserve assets is not limited to China or the East Asian countries; its ubiquity

2

among developing countries has raised interesting questions in academic and policy circles
about the costs and benefits of reserve accumulation.
The cost of holding reserves has been estimated at approximately 1% of GDP for all
developing countries (Rodrik, 2006). Against this cost, the commonly advanced explanation
is that reserves are accumulated as insurance against the risk of an external crisis, by
providing increased liquidity. However, borrowing constraints for emerging countries are
quite different from what they used to be. More than fifteen years ago, Eichengreen and
Hausmann (1999) advanced the original-sin hypothesis on the limits of emerging markets’
ability to borrow in their own currency. But the gradual redemption of these economies’ debt
sins over the past decade might naturally be expected to significantly affect incentives related
to debt default and repayment.
Figure 2: International Reserves (% GDP)
35

55
50

30

45
40

20

35

15

30

Percentage

Percentage

25

25

10

20
5

15

0

10
2000

2002

2004

2006

Mexico
Peru
South  Africa
China  (right  axis)

2008
Brazil
Chile
Turkey

2010

2012

2014

Colombia
Phillipines
Thailand   (right  axis)

Source: Moody’s Statistical Handbook, 2014.

In this paper, we study the joint determination of domestic-currency debt and foreign
reserve accumulation by constructing a dynamic equilibrium model of a small open economy
subject to international shocks. To smooth consumption, a benevolent government may issue

3

foreign debt in domestic and international currencies denominated in the price of nontradable and tradable goods, respectively. Domestic and international interest rates may
differ, and we explicitly model the risks associated with such differences. We calibrate our
model to Brazil, a typical example of an emerging country that accumulated international
reserves during debt redemption.
The basic intuition for our model goes back at least to Bohn (1990), but its empirical
implementation has only recently begun to be studied (see Benetrix, Lane, and Shambaugh,
2015). Having positive net foreign currency positions (assets in foreign currency and debt in
domestic currency) is optimal when a country faces international shocks (such as the
endowment of tradable goods). This is because the asset valuation effects occasioned by
currency depreciation (or appreciation) act to absorb global shocks and smooth consumption.
Debt and reserve accumulation also affect, and are affected by, a country’s incentives
to default. A large stock of domestically denominated debt could help counterbalance an
external shock but may not be sustainable. A country might not resist the temptation to
default on such a large debt, and could default through such methods as surprise inflation and
an outright restructuring of its services. Very large holdings of international reserves may
also not be optimal. International reserves that are unable to be pledged may not increase the
sustainability of debt. In fact, these reserves may reduce sustainability when debt is
denominated in foreign currency (Alfaro and Kanczuk, 2009). Additionally, because holdings
of international reserves shift consumption to later dates, they may be excessively costly.
Our quantitative results suggest that the optimal level of international reserves is
fairly large, as the cost of holding these reserves is mitigated by valuation-smoothing gains.
Our model also matches some features of Brazil’s economic fluctuations, being consistent, in
particular, with the reduction in exchange rate volatility.

4

In our analysis, issuing domestic debt while accumulating high levels of reserves acts
as a hedge against negative external shocks. That is, differently from previous work,
countries do not accumulate high levels of reserves to be depleted in “bad” times, as is
usually suggested in policy circles. This result relates to the vast literature on valuation
effects and optimal international portfolio diversification (Cole and Obstfeld (1991), Engel
and Matsumoto (2009), Alfaro and Kanczuk (2010), Healthcote and Perri (2013), and
Gourinchas and Rey (2014)). We contribute to this literature by explicitly considering a
sovereign’s incentive to default, thus incorporating sustainability of portfolio choices in our
analysis. In further contrast to previous literature, asset yields and exchange rates are
endogenously determined in the model, and are dependent on the government’s portfolio
choice.
Our paper also relates to the growing literature that examines debt sustainability (see
Aguiar and Amador (2014) and Aguiar et al. (2016) for recent surveys of the literature),
particularly to analyses of the recently increasing role of local-currency debt in emerging
markets (Burger et al. (2012), Du and Schreger (2015 a, b), Hale et al. (2014), Ottonello and
Perez (2017)). Our paper adds to this literature by examining the determinants of reserve
accumulation in emerging markets. The rationale for reserve accumulation based on
interaction with local currency external debt (i.e., “redemption” of the “original sin”), which
was also put forth by Jeanne and Rancière (2011), complements explanations that emphasize
precautionary motives and roll-over risk (Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009), Durdu, Mendoza, and
Terrones (2009) and Bianchi et al. (2012)), financial stability (Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and
Taylor (2010)), externalities associated with the tradable sector or mercantilist view (Dooley,
Folkerts-Landau, and Garber (2003), and Benigno and Fornaro (2011)) and political economy
considerations (Aizenman and Marion (2003)).

5

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we derive intuition from a
two-period, stripped down version of the model. In Section 3, we present the infinite-period
general model. In Section 4, we calibrate the model to Brazil’s economy and discuss the
results of the quantitative simulation. In Section 5, we present further analyses of the main
results, discuss the robustness of the exercises. Section 6 concludes this study.

2 Two-Period Version of the Model
We first develop a two-period, stripped-down version of the model to provide
intuition for the joint determination of international reserves and domestically-denominated
debt. Although the model cannot shed light on the sovereign’s “willingness to pay”
incentives, which hinge on the costs from defaulting, this simpler version underscores how
the combination of reserves and debt provides insurance against international shocks and
allows for intratemporal consumption smoothing.
In this simple economy, the sovereign consumes only in the second period. In the first
period, she decides her holdings of debt and reserves for the second period, which are
denoted respectively by D and R. The sovereign’s preferences are given by:
u(cN, cT ) = E [log(cN) + log(cT) ],
where households’ second period consumption of non-tradable and tradable goods are
respectively denoted by cN and cT, and E represents expectation. In the first period,
households do not have any endowment, which implies that D = R (the first period exchange
rate was normalized to one). In the second period, households receive an endowment of a unit
of consumption of non-tradable good, yN =1, and their endowment of the tradable good
follows a stochastic process:
yTG = (1 + σ), with probability equal to ½ (good state of nature), and
yTB = (1 – σ), with probability equal to ½ (bad state of nature).

6

Reserves correspond to riskless bonds that bear interest rates given by ρ. Debt can be
issued either in foreign currency or domestic currency. We assume the sovereign repays debt
in both the good and bad states of nature. In other words, default cannot be used to smooth
consumption.
2.1 Domestic Denominated Debt
When debt is issued in domestic currency, households’ budget constraints can be
written as:

cGN
1
D(1 + r )
c +
= (1 + σ ) + + R(1 + ρ ) −
in the good state of nature, and
eG
eG
eG
T
G

c BN
1
D(1 + r )
c +
= (1 − σ ) + + R(1 + ρ ) −
in the bad state of nature,
eB
eB
eB
T
B

where r denotes the interest rate on domestically-denominated debt. International investors
are risk neutral, and must be indifferent between international assets and domestic bonds.
This implies:

(1 + ρ ) =

(1 + r ) ⎡ 1 1 ⎤
⎢ + ⎥.
2 ⎣ eG eB ⎦

In each state of nature, households’ optimizations determine the real exchange rate
according to the relative marginal utility of tradable and non-tradable goods. Logarithmic
utilities imply the exchange rates are given by eG = 1/cTG and eB = 1/cTB. Market clearing
forces the consumption of non-tradables to equal the endowment of non-tradables. By
plugging the exchange rate into the budget constraints, the government problem can be
written as maximizing:

u (cGT , cBN ) = log(cGT ) + log(cBT ) ,

7

subject to:
𝑅 = 𝐷,	  
𝑐&' = 1 + 𝜎 + 𝑅 1 + 𝜌 − 𝐷𝑐&' 1 + 𝑟 ,	  
𝑐.' = 1 − 𝜎 + 𝑅 1 + 𝜌 − 𝐷𝑐.' 1 + 𝑟 ,
1 + 𝑟 𝑐&' + 𝑐.' = 2 1 + 𝜌 .	  
Before considering that D = R, suppose that cTG + cTB equals approximately two, such
that the last constraint can be approximately written as r = ρ. In this case, it becomes
straightforward to plug the constraints into the maximization as follows:

⎛ 1 + σ + R(1 + ρ ) ⎞
⎛ 1 − σ + R(1 + ρ ) ⎞
⎟⎟ + log⎜⎜
⎟⎟ .
u = log⎜⎜
D
ρ
D
ρ
+
+
+
+
1
(
1
)
1
(
1
)
⎝
⎠
⎝
⎠
To make consumption the same in the good and bad states, the government could set either a
very high D or very high R, or both. Since D = R, the solution is to make them both very
high. (Note that, as a consequence, cTG + cTB equals two, and r = ρ).
The result here is that domestic-denominated debt is a very effective insurance device.
Large holdings of domestic debt (in conjunction with large amounts of reserves) make
consumption approximately equal across different states of nature.
To better grasp the mechanics of how this is accomplished, consider again the
household budget constraint after plugging in the market clearing condition for non-tradable
goods. They imply that the consumption of tradable goods are:

cGT = (1 + σ ) + R(1 + ρ ) −

D(1 + r )
eG

in the good state of nature, and

c BT = (1 − σ ) + R(1 + ρ ) −

D(1 + r )
eB

in the bad state of nature.

There are two terms that make consumption different depending on the state of nature.
One term is the endowment shock, i.e., the sign of sigma. The other term is the domestic
denominated debt, which is valued by different exchange rates.

8

If the exchange rate appreciates in good states of nature, then the second term offsets
the effect of the first term. It turns out that this is exactly the case. Market clearing conditions
imply that the exchange rate appreciates in a good state of nature and depreciates in a bad
state of nature, thus generating valuation effects over domestic-denominated debt. These
valuation effects work as an insurance device by paying out more in worse states of nature.
2.2 Foreign-Denominated Debt
If debt is issued in foreign currency, the household’s budget constraint would be
written as:

cGT +

cGN
1
= (1 + σ ) + + R(1 + ρ ) − D(1 + r ) in the good state of nature, and
eG
eG

cBN
1
c +
= (1 + σ ) + + R(1 + ρ ) − D(1 + r ) in the bad state of nature, and
eB
eB
T
B

since there is no default, ρ = r.
As before, to derive some intuition and before considering that D = R, we plug in the
exchange rates obtained by the market clearing condition to obtain the government problem

u = log(1 + σ + ( R − D)(1 + ρ )) + log(1 − σ + ( R − D)(1 + ρ ))
To make consumption the same in both states, the government would have to make (R
– D) very large. Of course this is not possible, as D = R. This happens because the
government lacks an instrument to redistribute resources across states of nature, and can only
redistribute resources across different time periods.
The conclusion of this section is that domestic-denominated debt provides the
government with a natural way of insuring against income shocks to the tradable good. Large
amounts of domestic debt (in conjunction with large holdings of international reserves) imply
that the valuation effects become very effective as a smoothing device. In other words, small

9

endowment shocks are translated into large offsetting payoffs. In turn, this allows for
consumption smoothing across different states of nature.
In contrast, the role of foreign-denominated debt is to transfer resources across time.
As such, it does not provide any intratemporal insurance. In this simple model, where
consumption happens in only one period, foreign-denominated debt plays no role in
consumption smoothing.
Note that because this two-period model abstracts from default incentives, it cannot
shed light on the amount of debt and reserves a sovereign chooses to accumulate. Indeed, the
optimal solution in this simple case is for the government to hold infinite amounts of debt and
reserves. However, if we consider the possibility of default, there could be limits to the
amounts of debt the government would hold before resorting to default. In other words,
default considerations imply the need to analyze debt sustainability. And debt sustainability
considerations could, in turn, affect how much consumption smoothing could be provided by
the issuance of domestic debt. The next section tackles these issues.

3 General Model
We model an economy populated by a continuum of private households, a benevolent
government, and a continuum of international, risk-neutral investors. Preferences are
concave, implying that households prefer a smooth consumption profile for both tradable and
non-tradable goods. To smooth consumption, a benevolent government may optimally issue
foreign debt in domestically-denominated currency and accumulate foreign reserves. The
benevolent government may further optimally choose to default on its international
commitments, in which case we assume it to be temporarily excluded from borrowing in

10

international markets. Default can be thought of as surprise inflation or as an outright
default.1
We assume the households’ preferences to be given by:
∞

U = E ∑ β t u (ctT , ctN )

(1)

t =0

with:
(

[ω (cT ) −η + (1 − ω )(c N ) −η ]
u(cT , c N ) =
(1 − σ )

1−σ
)
−η

−1

,

(2)

where E is the expectation operator, cTt and cNt denote, respectively, household consumption
of tradable and non-tradable goods, σ > 0 measures the curvature of the utility, η measures
the degree of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods, ω indicates the relative
importance of these goods to household preferences, and β ∈ (0, 1) represents the discount
factor.
If the government chooses to repay its debt, the country’s budget constraint is given
by:

ctT +

ctN
D
yN
D
+ qtR Rt +1 − qtD t +1 = ytT + t + Rt − t ,
et
et
et
et

(3)

where Rt denotes the foreign reserves level, Dt denotes the domestic denominated debt level,
and yTt and yNt are, the tradable and non-tradable goods endowments of output, respectively.
The debt and reserve price schedules, qR(st, Rt+1, Dt+1) and qD(st, Rt+1, Dt+1), and real exchange
rate function, e(st, Rt+1, Dt+1), are endogenously determined in the model, and are dependent
on the state of the economy, st, as well as on the government’s decisions. In the benchmark
1

Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) document the main stylized facts regarding sovereign debt and default. As the
authors document, the cases of full outright default, as are those of outright repudiation of domestic debt, are
rare. Historical average haircut of outright default was around 30%. In other words, the assumption of full
default is a useful simplification both in the case of inflation and outright default.

11

version of the model, the state of the economy is completely defined by the ordered set st =
(Rt , Dt, yTt, yNt).
When the government defaults, the economy’s constraint is:

ctN
ytN
R
D
c + + qt Rt +1 = yt +
+ Rt ,
et
et
T
t

(4)

where yD = h(yT) corresponds to the endowments of tradable goods in default periods. After
defaulting, the sovereign is temporarily excluded from issuing debt. We assume θ to be the
probability that the sovereign regains full access to international credit markets.
International investors are risk-neutral and have an opportunity cost of funds given by

ρ, which denotes the risk-free rate denominated in the price of tradable goods. Investors will
choose the debt and reserve prices, qD and qR, which depend on the perceived likelihood of
default and currency depreciation. For these investors to be indifferent between the riskless
asset and lending in a country’s non-tradable goods denomination, it must be the case that,
qtD =

⎡
e ⎤
1
Et ⎢(1 − d t +1 ) t ⎥
et +1 ⎦
(1 + ρ ) ⎣

,

(5)

qR =

and

1
.
1+ ρ

(6)

where dt+1 ϵ {0, 1}t is the occurrence (or not) of default, which is endogenously determined
and depends on the sovereign’s incentives to repay the debt. Note (5) is a version of the
uncovered interest parity condition that considers the possibility of default.
Because the government chooses debt and reserve levels, the problem of the
households is intratemporal, and has the sole role of determining the real exchange rate.
Individual household maximization equates the relative marginal utility of tradables to nontradables to their relative prices,

12

ω ⎛ ctN
⎜
et =
(1 − ω ) ⎜⎝ ctT

1+η

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

.

(7)

The market-clearing condition for non-tradable goods is:
N
ctN = yt .

(8)

The timing of the decisions is as follows. In the beginning of each period, the
government starts with debt level Dt and reserve level Rt and receives endowments yTt and
yNt. It faces the reserve price schedule qR(st, Rt+1, Dt+1), bond price schedule qD(st, Rt+1, Dt+1),
and real exchange rate price schedule e(st, Rt+1, Dt+1). Taking these schedules as given, the
government simultaneously makes three decisions. It chooses (i) the next level of reserves,
Rt+1, (ii) whether to default on the debt, and (iii) if it decides not to default, the next level of
debt, Dt+1.
The model described is a stochastic dynamic game. We focus exclusively on the
Markov perfect equilibria, whereby the government does not have commitment and players
act sequentially and rationally.
Note that international investors and households are passive, and their actions can be
completely described by equations (5), (6), and (7). To write the government problem
recursively, let νG denote the value function if the sovereign decides to maintain a good credit
history this period (G stands for good credit history), and νB the value function if the
sovereign decides to default (B stands for bad credit history). The value of being in good
credit standing at the start of a period can then be defined as

ν = Max{v G , v B } .

(9)

This indicates that the sovereign defaults if νG < νB. The value function νG can be
written as:

ν G ( st ) = Max{u (ctT , ctT ) + βEv ( st +1 )},

(10)

13

subject to (3), and the value function νB as:

ν B ( st ) = Max{u (ctT , ctT ) + β [θEv G ( st +1 ) + (1 − θ ) Ev B ( st +1 )]},

(11)

subject to (4).
The recursive equilibrium is defined by the set of policy functions for government
asset holdings and default choice and the price functions for domestic bonds, reserves, and
the real exchange rate such that, (i) taking the price functions as given, the government policy
functions satisfy the government optimization problem, and (ii) prices of domestic bonds,
reserves, and the exchange rate are consistent with the government’s decisions.
This definition of equilibrium, identical to that of Arellano (2008) and Alfaro and
Kanczuk (2005, 2009), among many others, reflects a game played by a large agent (the
government) against many small agents (the continua of investors and households). It implies
that the government internalizes the effects of its actions over the prices. In our model, the
government internalizes the effect of its asset holdings over the real exchange rate.

4 Quantitative Analysis
We solve the model numerically to evaluate its quantitative predictions in relation to
the accumulation of debt and reserves, the occurrence of default events and the business cycle
properties of the exchange rate.
4.1 Calibration
One challenge in conducting quantitative analysis is that emerging countries only
began to issue relevant amounts of domestically-denominated bonds in the middle of the past
decade. The data time span of the current regime, especially concerning episodes of default,
is relatively small. In Brazil, for example, the last default episode was between 1983 and
1990 (Reinhart, 2010).

14

We address this problem by calibrating some of the parameters using a much longer
time horizon, during which international debt was denominated mainly in foreign currency.
In transforming our economy to consider the case in which bonds were denominated in
foreign currency, we assume the country budget constraint to be given by:

ctN
ytN
R
B
T
c + + qt Rt +1 − qt Bt +1 = yt +
+ Rt − Bt ,
et
et
T
t

(3’)

rather than equation (3).
This is effectively the case considered by Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009), in which B
denotes holdings of foreign bonds denominated in foreign currency. As above, in the case of
a debt default, reserves R continue to be held and can be used to smooth consumption. We
proceed with calibration by considering annual data since 1965.
We set the international interest rate ρ = 0.04 and the inter-temporal substitution
parameter σ = 2, as is usual in real business cycle research in which each period corresponds
to one year (see Kanczuk, 2004). Due to considerable disagreement over the intratemporal
elasticity of substitution between tradable and non-tradable goods (Akinci, 2011), we make
the elasticity equal to one (the middle of the many possible estimations), and, for that, set η =
0. Our results are robust to many other parameter values. For the weight of tradables, we use
the share of output that corresponds to industry and agriculture, and set ω = 0.35, which is
also consistent with literature estimations.
Because non-tradable consumption goods cannot be smoothed, we focus on the case
in which shocks are exclusively external, that is, on the tradable endowment.2 We thus make
yN = 1 for all periods. We then set yTt = exp (zTt), and assume that zTt can take a finite number

2

Since the consumption of non-tradeable goods must be always equal to the non-tradeable endowment,
domestic shocks cannot be smoothed out (unless one considers additional policy tools such as fiscal policy, for
example). Different debt and reserve levels could still affect allocations due to the valuation effects, albeit
quantitatively small, that result from the exchange rate movements.

15

of values and that it evolves over time according to a Markov transition matrix with elements

πT(zTi , zTj ); that is, the probability that zTt +1 = zTj, given that zTt = zTi, is given by the matrix π
element of row i and column j.
We calibrate the technology state zT by considering the (logarithm) of GDP to follow
T
T
an AR(1) process; that is, zt+1 = α zt + ε t+1 where ε t ≈ N(0,σ ε ) . We obtain α = 0.85 and σ =

2

0.12. The apparently high value of the standard deviation reflects the fact that the tradable
sector corresponds to roughly one-third of total output. To make the model consistent with
the data, the volatility of the tradable sector must thus be approximately three times that of
total output. As an indirect indication of consistency, we note that the volatility of the
industry and agriculture output is three times as high as the Brazilian GDP.
We discretize this technology state into nine possible values, spaced such that the
extreme values are three standard deviations away from the mean. We also discretize the
space state of debt and reserves enough to avoid spurious results.
Setting the probability of redemption at θ = 0.5 implies an average stay in autarky of
two years, in line with estimates by Gelos et al. (2011). Direct output costs are modeled from
default and assumed to be asymmetric. The endowments of tradable goods in default periods
are given by h(yT) = yDEF in case yT > yDEF, and h(yT) = yT in case yT ≤ yDEF. Setting yDEF =
0.85yT implies that tradable output costs of defaulting equal 15%, with the relatively large
number again reflecting the fact that the tradable sector corresponds to one-third of the
economy. The choice of output costs affects the probability of default. Thus, we calibrate
output costs in order to make the interest spread in the simulations equal to the average level
observed in the data, 6.8%.
To obtain reasonable levels of debt in equilibrium, we set the intertemporal factor at
the relatively low value of β = 0.80, which is common practice in debt models (Alfaro and

16

Kanczuk, 2009). This calibration of β also makes the average debt service – defined as

Bt − qtB Bt +1 – equal to its observed levels, which is 3.3% of GDP. (This happens because the
interest spread level was also matched).
Table 1 summarizes the parameter values.
Table 1: Calibration
Parameter

Calibration

Data matched

Technology autocorrelation

α = 0.85

GDP AR(1) process

Technology standard deviation

σ ε = 0.12

GDP AR(1) process

Fraction of tradeableas

ω=0,35

Share of industry & agriculture

Probability of redemption

θ = 0.50

Duration of each default

Output costs

yDEF = 0.85yT

Interest Spread

Risk aversion

σ=2

Brazilian Business Cycle

Risk free interest rate

ρ = 0.04

Brazilian Business Cycle

Discount factor

β = 0.80

Debt

4.2 Simulation results
We first simulate our economy under the assumption that debt is denominated in
foreign currency. For the chosen parameters, the invariant distribution displays 48% of GDP
of debt and a 6.1% frequency of default (case (i) in Table 2). These numbers align closely
with the historical data for Brazil and other emerging countries presented in many other
papers. The equilibrium level of reserves is zero, a reincarnation of Alfaro and Kanczuk’s
(2009) result in a model with two sectors (but shocks in only one).
As discussed extensively in that paper, there is a potential role in this setup for
reserves to smooth consumption when a country is excluded from international markets. But,
because reserve holdings reduce the sustainability of debt, quantitatively their optimal

17

holding is zero. The optimal government policy is to hold (foreign-denominated) debt and
default in extremely bad times.
Table 2: Invariant Distribution Properties
Case (i)

Case (ii)

Case (iii)

Foreign Denominated Debt (% GDP)

48.0

-	  

-	  

Locally Denominated Debt (% GDP)

-

9.8	  

28.6	  

International Reserves (% GDP)

0.0

-	  

24.0	  

Probability of Default (%)

6.1

0.4	  

0.4	  

Std.Dev. (y) (%)

2.8

2.8	  

2.8	  

Std.Dev. (e) (%)

26.2

7.5	  

4.2	  

Std.Dev.(e) / Std.Dev.(y)

9.4

2.7	  

1.5	  

Std.Dev. (c) (%)

2.0

0.5	  

0.3	  

Std.Dev. (r) (%)

2.3

0.2	  

0.2	  

Sdt. Dev.(nx/y) (%)

2.4

3.8

3.4

Corr (e, y)

-.99

-.90	  

-.17	  

Corr (c, y)

.99

.90	  

.17	  

Corr (r, y)

-.79

-.79	  

-.79	  

Corr (nx/y, y)

.99

.99

.99

Notes: y, c, e and r denote, respectively, output, consumption, exchange rate and interest rate spread.

As an intermediate step, assuming the government cannot hold reserves (case (ii)), we
simulate the economy with locally-denominated bonds. We obtain, in this case, that the
government holds a fairly small amount of debt (9.8% of GDP) and virtually does not default.
Note that the volatility (standard deviation) of the exchange rate drops from 26.2% in the
case of foreign-denominated debt, and to 7.5% in the case of domestically-denominated debt
with no reserves. Thus, even without resorting to default, domestic denomination results in
more consumption smoothing.
The level of domestic-denominated debt is small because consumption smoothing can
be attained even without default. Defaulting allows to smooth consumption but is costly: the

18

exclusion of markets and output drop itself. Since the benefit of smoothing is not needed, the
sovereign opts to choose a level of debt in which she can resist defaulting.
When we simulate the economy with locally-denominated bonds, but allow the
government to hold positive amounts of reserves (case (iii)), we obtain that, in the invariant
distribution, the economy displays 28.6% of GDP in (locally denominated) debt, with 24% of
GDP in reserves. As in case (ii), the government virtually does not resort to default as a
means to smooth consumption. Note, also, that the volatility of consumption drops even
more, with the standard deviation of the exchange rate falling to 4.2 percent.
The intuition for holding both (domestically-denominated) debt and reserves,
developed in Section 2, is to allow for consumption smoothing across both states and time.
But the experiment with the full-fledged model yields novel results.
In the two-period model, the optimal policy was to accumulate infinite amounts of
debt and reserves. In the general model, default incentives and the related issue of debt
sustainability reduce the amount of optimal debt and reserves. That they may, in fact, be
smaller than anticipated suggests that this scheme for smoothing consumption is fairly
powerful.
A second insight is that the accumulation of reserves is not a problem in terms of
reducing the sustainability of debt when debt is in local currency. The experiment shows the
proposed scheme to be, in fact, sustainable in the sense that the government (almost) never
defaults.
Put differently, in both the foreign-denominated and locally-denominated debt
experiments, international reserves play a role when a country is excluded from capital
markets. However, this role reduces the amount of debt that is sustainable, triggering
defaults, which are costly. When debt is foreign-denominated, Alfaro and Kanczuk (2009)
obtain that the optimal level of reserves is zero. This paper indicates that, when debt is

19

domestically-denominated, reserves are very useful, owing to their valuation effect, which
helps smooth consumption.
Given that the interest earned from their reserves is much lower than that paid on their
debt, the reserve accumulation policy of emerging economies seems sub-optimal. For
example, Brazil’s total government debt (domestic and international) in 2011 was
approximately 60% of GDP and paid annual interest of about 12%. Its holdings of
international reserves, at 15% of GDP, earned interest of approximately 2% per year. Over
the last years, many pundits argue that international reserves are too costly, and that Brazil
should use them to reduce outstanding debt.
According to our model, the logic of accumulating both reserves and domesticallydenominated debt is precisely that it is costly during good periods. When an international
shock is favorable, debt service is higher and consumption is reduced, when unfavorable,
debt service is reduced and consumption increases. When the whole invariant distribution of
shocks is taken into account, a country will enjoy a more stable level of consumption.
Note that in the proposed construction, the level of reserves remains high during
unfavorable periods. The idea is not to buy consumption goods that deplete the stock of
reserves, but rather to maintain a constant reserve stock that serves as insurance by increasing
the stabilizing effect of domestic-denominated debt. Contrary to the usual argument in policy
circles, reserves are thus not insurance that can be “used” in bad times.
In fact, the optimal policy function is to hold the amount of debt and reserves constant
in the relevant region, regardless of the period state. For this reason, we opted not to depict
the debt and reserve policy functions since they are just simple horizontal lines.
To better grasp the mechanism of consumption smoothing without changing debt and
reserve holdings, we proceed as in the two-period model. Consider the household budget

20

constraint (3) after plugging in the non-tradable goods market clearing condition, and
assuming debt and reserves holdings are constant:

ctT = y tT + (1 − qtR ) R − (1 − qtD )

D
.
et

In good states of nature, endowment yT is higher, which makes consumption also
higher. However, even if reserves and debt holdings (and interest rates) are constant, the
valuation effects of the exchange rate et can also affect consumption levels. If it is the case
the exchange rate appreciates in good periods (depreciates in bad periods), this valuation
effect tends to offset the endowment effect. Equation (7), which equates the relative marginal
utility of tradables to non-tradables to their relative prices, predicates exactly that. That is, in
good periods the exchange rate is smaller (more appreciated) and therefore consumption does
not increase as much.
Notice that reserve holdings are kept constant, and that debt holdings are kept
constant in domestic units. However, debt holdings in foreign currency change affect the
consumption of tradable goods. In other words, it is the change in debt holdings in foreign
currency that offsets the endowment shock and makes consumption smoother.
The finding that debt and reserve holdings do not vary with the state of nature is a
striking result. We investigated further the generality of this result by considering alternative
parameterizations and allowing for finer grid around the optimal values. We found that this
invariance result is very robust and, in this sense, seems more qualitative than quantitative.
The essential intuition for the result is that the stabilization effect of issuing local-currency
debt provides sufficient consumption smoothing so that there is no need to change the levels
of debt and reserves.
Early literature on sovereign debt has proposed two alternative devices to smooth
consumption. One is contingent debt, which is to vary debt holdings depending on the state

21

(e.g., Eaton and Gersovitz (1981)). The other is contingent service, where debt holdings are
kept constant, but debt services vary with the state of nature (e.g. Grossman and Van Huyck
(1988)).3 Adding to that literature, Grossman and Han (1999) show that contingent service
models allow for more consumption smoothing than contingent debt models.
More recent literature (e.g. Arellano (2008)) considered models in which contingent
debt and contingent services were simultaneously possible. An interesting result of this
literature is that, in equilibrium, only contingent services are used to smooth consumption. In
contrast, debt tends to be used primarily to front load consumption. A common result in this
literature is that debt holdings are lower in bad times (see Kanczuk and Alfaro (2009)). That
is, changes in the debt level make consumption less smooth.
As in recent literature, the model in this paper assumes both contingent debt and
contingent services are possible. A novelty is that there are two instruments to perform
contingent service. One is the traditional option to default; the other is valuation effects via
exchange rate changes.
The finding that debt and reserve holdings do not vary with the state of nature is
striking at first sight. But it can be seen as a reincarnation of the result that only contingent
service is used for consumption smoothing. The stabilization effect of issuing local-currency
debt provides sufficient consumption smoothing.
4.3 Comparison with Brazilian Data
We now compare the model’s outcomes with recent data from Brazil. Figure 3 plots
the evolution of government holdings of international reserves and foreign- and domestically-

3

That is, consumption smoothing is achieved by making service contingent on the realization of income: the
sovereign services its debt in full only when it realizes high income and faults either partially or fully when it
realizes low income.

22

denominated debt. These assets (or liabilities) could potentially be held against both the
Brazilian private sector and the rest of the world.
In our model, only the government is assumed to be able to hold international assets.
However, the position of the full country (government and private sector) against the rest of
the world is, in fact, the closest concept to be contrasted with the model. The challenge in
doing so is the absence of comprehensive data about the denomination of private sector
holdings.
Figure 3: Government Holdings (% GDP)
30

Foreign  Denon.  Debt  (left  axis)

25

60

Domestically  Denon  Debt  (right  axis)

20

55

15

50

10

45

5

40

0

Percentage

Percentage

65

Internat.  Reserves  (left  axis)

35
2000

2002

2004

2006

2008

2010

2012

Source: Brazilian Central Bank.

Although some information about private sector debt holdings is available, it is
common practice for firms to change the denomination of debt using market derivatives. It is
similarly common for foreigners to use derivatives to gain exposure to the Brazilian currency
and invest in carry trade strategies. Because these derivatives to swap currencies are often
traded over the counter, it is impossible to assess their dimension (see Benetrix, Lane and

23

Shambaugh (2015)).4 Given the lack of comprehensive data, we assume international
reserves and foreign-denominated government debt to roughly correspond to the country’s
position in relation to the rest of the world.
The case of domestic-denominated bonds is more complicated. We know that before
2003, foreign exposure to Brazilian currency debt was quite small.5 Post-2002, because the
increase in debt was concomitant with the accumulation of reserves, as depicted in Figure 3,
it is natural to assume foreigners to be responsible for a large fraction of it.
Table 3: Brazilian Data
1996 to 2005

2006 to 2014

Foreign Denominated

Debt

Assets (Reserves)

Locally Denominated

0

Debt

Std. Dev. (y) (%)

3.0

2.2

Std. Dev. (e) (%)

35.9

12.3

Std. Dev. (e)/Std. Dev. (y)

11.8

5.6

Std. Dev. (c) (%)

6.0

3.3

Sdt. Dev.( r) (%)

3.8

1.4

Sdt. Dev.(nx/y) (%)

2.9

2.5

Corr (e, y)

-0.90

-0.87

Corr (c, y)

0.92

0.69

Corr (r, y)

-0.69

0.14

Corr (nx/y, y)

-0.82

-0.58

Mean (r) (%)

7.7

1.4

Note: y, c, e, r and nx denote output, consumption, exchange rate, interest spread and net exports.

Table 3 summarizes the data. Rather than guessing the holdings of assets and
liabilities, we indicate the net position in each denomination. Before 2006, there was virtually
4

Anecdotal information indicates that even large firms that issue bonds denominated in dollars hedged most of
their currency exposure after the substantial depreciation in 1999 (Central Bank of Brazil (2015)).
5
In 2002, the Brazilian five-year CDS, which measures the risk of dollar denominated debt, was as high as
4,000 basis points. In periods with such risk of default, it is highly unlikely that foreigners would hold local
currency.

24

no local-denominated external debt. After 2006, holdings of reserves were higher than
holdings of foreign-denominated debt. Thus, the net position of foreign-denominated
securities switched from debt (liabilities) to assets (reserves).
The comparison between Table 2 and Table 3 requires some discussion. As there was
no available data on the consumption of tradables and non-tradables, we chose the exchange
rate as the primary variable to contrast with the model. Due to a small sample, a single crisis
could imply differing output volatilities. We therefore calculated the ratio between the
exchange rate standard deviation and output deviation to make the comparison of the model
and data more robust.
Our argument is that with debt redemption, the Brazilian economy should move from
case (i) in Table 2 (foreign-denominated debt) to case (iii) in the same table (domesticallydenominated debt and international reserves). The country seems to be in the process of
changing from one steady state to the other, whereas Table 2 shows the economy to already
be in the steady state invariant distribution.
We propose considering the 2006-2014 time-horizon of Table 3 data as an
intermediate step in the transition from case (i) to case (iii) in Table 2. Interpreted this way,
the model accounts for the exchange rate’s cyclical behavior reasonably well. The ratio of
volatility of the real exchange rate to that of output dropped by half, from 11.8 to 5.6 (Table
3). According to our model, this ratio should drop from 9.4 to 1.5 if the country moves from
one steady state to the other (Table 2). Brazil, however, is still far from converging on the
steady state. During the 2006-2014 period, Brazil’s holdings of international reserves were
13.4% of GDP. In the proposed steady state, these holdings would reach 24% of GDP.
Table 3 additionally depicts the correlation of the exchange rate and output. For the
two periods considered, the correlation was -0.90 and -0.87. In our model, there being shocks
only to tradable goods, this correlation is equal to -0.99 in case (i). A simple way to reduce

25

this correlation would be to add (uncorrelated) shocks to the non-tradable sector. We
nevertheless adopt this comparison to support our hypothesis that non-tradable sector shocks
are not a quantitatively important factor in our analysis. Consumption smoothing by itself
makes this correlation very low, once domestic debt is considered.
For completeness, Table 3 also reports consumption standard deviations, as a
secondary indication of the volatility reduction, and the correlation between net exports (trade
balance) with output. We observe that the volatility of consumption also drops in Brazil, both
in absolute value and as a fraction of GDP volatility.6 However, the mere fact that the
volatility of consumption is a lot higher than GDP volatility raises questions of the use of
consumption in the place of exchange rates.7
The moments related to net exports suffer from a related problem. As there are no
investments in our endowment economy, the correlation of net exports with output is
intimately related to the volatility of consumption. Thus, in the model, consumption
smoothing implies that net exports are very procyclical. In contrast, as Table 3 shows, the
trade balance is countercyclical in the data.8

6

Measurement problems with Brazilian data render consumption volatility a particularly noisy information. In
Brazil, as in other emerging countries, there is no direct measure of inventories. Total GDP is then calculated
from the supply side. In order to make GDP from the demand side equal to the supply side calculation,
inventory changes (and any other mismeasurements) are implicitly added to the consumption component. In
other words, consumption is obtained by the residual. As a consequence, the reported consumption component
becomes less reliable and more volatile than expected. In the US national accounts statistics, in contrast,
inventory changes are measured and reported. Consumption is more informative and is less volatile than GDP,
as usual theory suggests. To illustrate the problem, we can make the US data comparable with Brazil, by adding
the change in inventories and measurement residual to the original U.S. consumption series. The resulting
consumption series becomes more volatile than GDP, as in Brazil. According to this perspective, consumption
volatility in the Brazilian data is not a reliable indicator. As a consequence, the consumption volatility generated
by the model, which is smaller than GDP volatility, should not be considered a limitation of the model.
7
Alternatively, García-Cicco, Pancrazi and Uribe (2010) modify the basic real business cycle model in order to
match Mexican and Argentinean data moments. One of their findings is that preference shocks are responsible
for most of the excess volatility of consumption over output in these countries. Applying the same logic to the
model here, one could add preference shocks in order to increase consumption volatility. However, this, not
being the focus of the paper, would not add to our understanding of the mechanisms proposed, but would add
computational complexity.
8
This is a direct consequence of having an endowment economy. There is a long literature (e.g. Backus, Kehoe
and Kydland (1992)) showing how the steep reaction of investments to positive shocks can make net exports
countercyclical in simple models. In other words, there is a standard way to match this feature of the data.
However, for computational simplicity, this paper is abstracting from this issue.

26

Finally, Table 3 reports the correlation between the spread and output. In the first
period the correlation is negative, as expected. In the second period it becomes positive but is
very small. This happens because, with the recent reduction of risk, spreads converge to fairly
small values and become largely irrelevant for the understanding of other variables.
4.4 Evidence from other Emerging Countries
We now look at empirical evidence for other emerging countries. As we mentioned in
the introduction, the accumulation of domestic-denominated debt in conjunction with
reserves is becoming a ubiquitous phenomenon. This generates several questions. Are the
countries that accumulate more debt the ones that are more susceptible to international
shocks? Has the volatility of the exchange rate dropped more in countries that accumulated
more debt?
Although a formal analysis is beyond the scope of this paper, in Table 4 we report
selective statistics for countries depicted in Figures 1 and 2, for which Moody’s study offers
complete data. As a word of caution, since the time span covered is very short, it becomes
statistically difficult to capture changes. We opted to define two periods – the first containing
the years from 2000 to 2004, the second defined by the period 2010 to 2014 – to calculate the
averages of the variables. We then obtain the change in the stock of debt, the stock of
reserves and the standard deviation of the exchange rate between these two periods.
Even though the data sample is very small, this exercise reveals results that are
consistent with our hypothesis. In particular, the correlation between (domestically
denominated) debt accumulation and exchange rate volatility reduction is positive and equal
to 0.3. It is also the case that the correlation of debt accumulation and reserve accumulation is
positive (equal to 0.4). On the other hand, we note that for many countries there was an
increase in exchange rate volatility, in spite of debt and reserves accumulation. We also note

27

that the correlation between reserve accumulation and volatility reduction is slightly negative
(equal to -0.1).
We believe the best way to look at table 4 is to divide the countries into those for
which the exchange rate was very volatile (Brazil, South Africa and Turkey), and those for
which the exchange rate was already fairly stable in the first period considered (Philippines,
Thailand, Peru, China). In the countries for which the exchange rate was very volatile, the
accumulation of (domestically denominated) debt and reserves had an important effect and
caused a reduction in volatility. In countries in which the exchange rate was already stable,
accumulation did not make a significant difference.
Table 4: Emerging Countries Debt, Reserves and Exchange Rate Facts
2000-14

2000-04

2010-14

2000-04

2010-14

2000-04

2010-14

Change

Change

Change

Corr(e,y)

Debt

Debt

Reserves

Reserves

S.D.(e)

S.D.(e)

Debt

Reserves

S.D.(e)

Brazil	  

-0.90

45.2

54.7

7.5

15.6

20.6

13.2

9.5

8.1

-7.4

S. Africa	  

-0.41

32.6

38.1

4.8

10.9

20.2

14.4

5.5

6.1

-5.8

Turkey	  

-0.59

20.9

27.0

11.8

13.4

17.8

10.3

6.0

1.6

-7.5

Chile	  

-0.68

1.2

9.2

19.9

14.8

9.9

9.8

8.0

-5.1

-0.2

Mexico	  

-0.88

12.9

23.3

7.4

12.5

8.5

11.0

10.4

5.1

2.5

Colombia	  

-0.45

26.3

24.0

11.2

9.6

7.6

8.7

-2.2

-1.6

1.1

Philipines	  

-0.54

33.7

25.9

18.6

27.6

4.6

5.8

-7.8

9.0

1.2

Thailand	  

-0.56

20.0

30.2

28.6

46.6

4.5

4.9

10.2

18.0

0.4

Peru	  

-0.72

5.6

9.6

16.3

29.5

2.8

3.7

4.0

13.2

0.9

China	  

-0.24

14.8

29.3

20.7

41.5

0.0

1.8

14.4

20.8

1.7

Mean	  

-0.60

21.3

27.1

14.7

22.2

9.7

8.3

5.8

7.5

-1.3

Median	  

-0.57

20.5

26.4

14.0

15.2

8.1

9.3

7.0

7.1

0.6

Notes: y and e denote, respectively, output and exchange rate.

A similar point can be made about the choice of exchange rate regime. Since most of
the real exchange rate volatility comes from the nominal exchange rate, fixed exchange rate
regimes result in very low (real) exchange rate volatilities. One thus expects that, in these
regimes, the correlation between debt (or reserve) accumulation and the exchange rate

28

volatility is not informative. In the sample considered, even though all countries have de jure
flexible regimes, some have what de facto resembles a fixed regime (Levy-Yeyati and
Sturzenegger (2003)). This is a reason to focus on the countries with higher volatility. In
those countries, the accumulation of debt (and reserves) had an important effect in reducing
exchange rate volatility.

5 Robustness and Discussion
5.1 Volatility of Exchange Rate
In our model, as in other standard exchange rate models, the volatility of the exchange
rate is directly linked to the volatility of the ratio of the consumption of tradable and nontradable goods. If the volatility of consumption is much higher than that observed in the data,
our model generates only reasonable levels of exchange-rate volatility. Adding to this puzzle,
Engel (1999) shows movements in the U.S. exchange rate to be driven almost exclusively by
changes in prices of tradable goods, which are usually assumed to be equal across countries.
Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2003), addressing these issues in the context of
exchange-rate stabilization, introduce in an otherwise standard model a distribution sector
that can dramatically improve the model’s performance. Rather than adding a new sector to
our model, we invoke their claim that modifying preferences in a standard model can mimic
the introduction of distribution costs.
We modify, in particular, the utility function, making the share of tradable goods ω =
0.10. As above, we find the optimal policy to be the accumulation of reserves in conjunction
with locally denominated debt, and this strategy to be effective at smoothing consumption
across both different states of nature and time. The only difference between the results of this
experiment and the one in Section 4 is quantitative. In this alternative economy, the levels of

29

local-currency debt and reserves as a percentage of GDP are, respectively, 10.4% and 3.2%.
Thus, the decrease in the importance of the tradable sector implies, as expected, a reduction
in debt and reserve accumulation.
5.2 Shocks to Non-Tradeable Endowment
As discussed in the calibration of the model, we opted to focus on the case in which
shocks are exclusively external (tradable). Domestic (or non-tradable) shocks are not
essential to the analysis, as they cannot be smoothed out (consumption of non-tradable goods
must be always equal to the non-tradable endowment). However, one can investigate if by
adding shocks to the non-tradable endowment there is substantial improvement of the model
fitness.
Table 5 reports the results of such experiments. Its first two lines show the exchange
rate and output moments for the Brazilian data in the two periods considered. The next four
rows show the moments from model simulations. The third line corresponds to case (i) of
section 4.2, in which there is only foreign denominated debt and there are only shocks to
tradeable endowment. The fifth line corresponds to case (iii) of section 4.2, in which there are
locally-denominated debts and reserves, but again only tradable shocks. Lines third and sixth
are extensions of the third and fifth lines (respectively), when there are shocks both to
tradables and to non-tradable endowment.
Note that the correlation between exchange rate and output was -0.90 and -0.87 in the
two periods considered. In contrast, in our model, there being shocks only to tradable-goods,
this correlation is equal to -0.99 when there is only foreign-denominated debt (third line of
Table 5).
In order to reduce this correlation, we then add (uncorrelated) shocks to the nontradable sector. We find that by having the volatility of non-tradable shocks equal to one third

30

of the volatility of the tradable shocks, we can exactly match this dimension of the data. This
is reported in the fourth line of Table 5. Notice that there is no substantial change in the
volatility of the exchange rate.
Table 5: Exchange Rate Moments
Std. Dev.(e)/

Corr (e, y)

Std. Dev.(y)
Brazil 1996-2005

11.8

-0.90

Brazil 2006-2014

5.6

-0.87

Only Tradables shocks, Foreign Denominated Debt

9.4

-0.99

Non-Tradables shocks, Foreign Denominated Debt

9.6

-0.87

Only Tradables shocks, Locally Denominated Debt

1.5

-0.17

Non-Tradables shocks, Locally Denominated Debt

1.4

0.25

We then consider the case with locally-denominated debt. When there are only shocks
to tradable endowment, the correlation between exchange rate and output is much smaller,
although still negative, as in the data. However, when shocks in non-tradable goods are
added, this correlation becomes positive.
The conclusion of this experiment is that although the inclusion of non-tradable
shocks can improve one dimension of the model, it worsens the other dimension considered
in this section.
5.3 Reserve Accumulation and Exchange Rate Management
A branch of the literature argues that reserve accumulation is a means of keeping the
exchange rate depreciated, thereby helping to protect a country’s industry and stimulate
exports (Dooley et al., 2003). In this paper we do not consider mercantile considerations for
reservation accumulation. For example, as the commodity boom ended and growth slowed,

31

some countries have used their international reserves to maintain their exchange-rate peg.
However, this has clearly not been the main driver for all countries. Brazil, for example,
maintained roughly the same reserve management policy independent of commodity prices.
Notice that while in the present paper, reserves are used to smooth the volatility of the
exchange rate, in the literature on reserves and export-led growth, reserves are used to
influence the average value of the exchange rate. That is, in our model, the rationale for
reserve accumulation is to smooth consumption of tradable goods. But as a direct
consequence, the exchange rate is also smoothed. In particular, the exchange rate does not
need to appreciate as much in good times due to the valuation effects associated with the
accumulation of reserves.
5.4 Rationale for Debt Redemption
In our model, debt redemption, or the possibility of a country issuing external debt
denominated in local currency, implies fewer occurrences of default. A related issue
considers why emerging countries were unable to issue domestically-denominated external
debt previously, such as during the 1980s and into the 1990s. Although a complete
investigation is beyond the scope of this paper, we conjecture that there were two reasons for
recent debt redemption.
One possibility is that investors could not identify the type of government issuing the
bonds. As Alfaro and Kanczuk (2005) argue, sovereign-default episodes (delays,
rescheduling, etc.) seem consistent with reputation building. This, in turn, is consistent with
the existence of different types of governments, including those that would default
independent of the state of nature (“inexcusable defaults”, in the language of Grossman and
Van Huyck (1988)). Lenders, when extracting information from the default in order to set
the next period’s interest rate, most likely will consider the possibility that in this period the

32

sovereign was of the “bad” type, and charge higher interest rates. It is possible that risk
increased sufficiently to shut down the market. As the type of government in control became
clearer and the risk was reduced, international investors became more disposed to buy debt
issued in local markets.
A second, related issue is inflation. Inflation and inflation volatility were extremely
high in Latin America during the 1980s, making returns on domestic-denominated bonds
very risky for international investors, possibly so high that investor appetite for this type of
asset was insufficient for the existence of the market.
5.5 Private-Sector Debt
In our model, debt is issued exclusively by the benevolent government; households
(i.e., the private sector) cannot issue debt and choose their intertemporal consumption. This
assumption raises two issues. First, the analysis would be unchanged were private sector debt
to be included, assuming no distortions or other imperfections (taxes, externalities, time
inconsistency issues) that could drive a wedge between the objectives of the benevolent
government and those of the households. Second, in the event that the objectives of the
government and the households do conflict, the government could attempt to offset, perhaps
even prohibit, household debt and reserve accumulation by creating rules and changing the
law. Thus, unless political economy issues are considered, the assumption that households
cannot issue debt is not crucial to the analysis.
As mentioned before, since firms often use over-the-counter derivatives to change
their debt denomination, data on private debt is unreliable for assessing net positions. These
considerations notwithstanding, due to the recent Real depreciation, and the consequent
balance sheets risk, the Central Bank of Brazil conducted an inquiry on corporate businesses
to have a sense of the dimension of potential currency risks. As Table 6 indicates, dollar-

33

denominated corporate risk debt seemed fairly small. In particular, the unhedged debt of
firms that have no foreign counterpart amounted to only 3.3% of GDP. This suggests that our
assumption that only the government holds international debt is adequate from a purely
quantitative viewpoint as well.
Table 6: Dollar Denominated Corporate Debt in June 2015
Type of Firm

Debt (% GDP)

Non exporter, with local hedge	  

4.0	  

Non exporter, multinational	  

2.1	  

Non exporter, with international assets	  

3.6	  

Non exporter, without hedge	  

3.3	  

Source: Central Bank of Brazil.

6 Conclusion
The past decade was characterized by two new trends in international capital flows to
emerging markets: (1) carry trade activity and associated foreign participation in localcurrency bond markets, and (2) large accumulations of international reserves. We believe that
both can be rationalized as an optimal debt management strategy. Borrowing in domestic
currency can insure emerging countries against international shocks because the valuation
effect that results from currency appreciation negatively correlates with the shock, an
intuition that dates to Bohn (1990).
We revisit sovereign debt sustainability under the assumptions that countries can
accumulate reserves and borrow internationally using their own currency. Countries do not
accumulate reserves to be depleted in “bad” times. Instead, issuing domestic debt while
accumulating reserves acts as a hedge against external shocks. Asset-valuation effects due to
currency fluctuations act to absorb global shocks and smooth consumption. Our quantitative
study of how reserve accumulation affects governments’ decisions to default finds that

34

optimal holdings turn out to be as large as those presently observed. Our results match
several characteristics of the Brazilian business cycle, suggesting this strategy to be effective
for smoothing consumption and reducing the occurrence of default.

References
Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador (2014). “Sovereign Debt.” In Handbook of International
Economics, vol. 4, eds. G. Gopinath, E. Helpman and K. Rogoff, Elsevier.
Aguiar, Mark, Satyajit Chatterjee, Harald Cole, and Zachary Stangebye. 2016. “Quantitative
Models of Sovereign Debt Crises,” Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 4, eds. Harald
Uhlig and John Taylor.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion (2003). “International Reserve Holdings with
Sovereign Risk and Costly Tax Collection,” The Economic Journal 114, 569-591.
Akinci, Orze (2011). “A Note on the Estimation of the Atemporal Elasticity of Substitution
between Tradable and Nontradable Goods,” Working Paper, Columbia University.
Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk (2005). “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim: A
Quantitative Approach,” Journal of International Economics 65, 297-314.
Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk (2009). “Optimal Reserve Management and Sovereign
Debt,” Journal of International Economics 77, 23-36.
Alfaro, Laura, and Fabio Kanczuk (2010). “Nominal versus Indexed Debt: A Quantitative
Horse Race.” Journal of International Money and Finance 29, 1706–1726.
Arellano, Cristina (2008). “Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies,”
American Economic Review 98(3): 690-712.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland (1992). “International Real
Business Cycles” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 100 (4), 745-775.

35

Bank for International Settlements (2012). “Developments in Domestic Government Bond
Markets in EMEs and their Implications,” BIS Papers, no. 67.
Benetrix, Agustin S., Philip R. Lane, and Jay C. Shambaugh (2015). “International Currency
Exposures, Valuation Effects and the Global Financial Crisis,” Journal of
International Economics forthcoming.
Benigno, Gianluca, and Luca Fornaro (2011). “Reserve Accumulation, Growth, and Financial
Crises,” CEP Discussion Paper No 1161.
Bianchi, Javier, Juan Carlos Hatchondo, and Leonardo Martinez (2012). “International
Reserves and Rollover Risk,” Working Paper.
Bohn, Henning (1990). “Tax Smoothing with Financial Instruments,” American Economic
Review 80, 1217-1230.
Burger, John D., Francis E. Warnock, and Veronica Cacdac Warnock (2012). “Investing in
Local-Currency Bond Markets,” Financial Analysts Journal 68, 73-93.
Burstein, Ariel T., Joao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo (2003). “Distribution Costs and Real
Exchange-Rate Dynamics during Exchange-rate-based Stabilizations,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 50, 1189-1214.
Central Bank of Brazil (2015) “Relatorio de Estabilidade Financeira”, Setembro 2015: 27-30
Cole, Harald L., and Maurice Obstfeld (1991). “Commodity Trade and International Risk
Sharing,” Journal of Monetary Economics 28(1): 3-24.
Dooley, Michael, David. Folkerts-Landau, and Peter. Garber (2003). “An Essay on the
Revived Bretton Woods System,” NBER Working Paper 9971.
Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, Enrique Mendoza, and Marco E. Terrones (2009). “Precautionary
Demand for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New
Mercantilism," Journal of Development Economics 89, 194-209.

36

Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger (2016a). “Local Currency Sovereign Risk,” Journal of
Finance 71(3), 1027-1070.
Du, Wenxin, and Jesse Schreger (2016b). “Sovereign Risk, Currency Risk, and Corporate
Balance Sheets,” Working Paper.
Eaton, J., Gersovitz, M., (1981). “Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
analysis.” Review of Economic Studies 48, 289-309.
Engel, Charles, 1999, “Accounting for U.S. Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of
Political Economy 107, pages 507-538.
Engel, Charles, and Akito Matsumoto (2009). “The International Diversification Puzzle when
Goods Prices are Sticky: It’s Really about Exchange-Rate Hedging, not Equity
Portfolios,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1, 155-188.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann (1999). “Exchange Rates and Financial
Fragility,” In New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Proceedings of a symposium
sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
European Central Bank (2006). “The Accumulation of Foreign Reserves,” Occasional Paper
Series No. 43, February.
Garcia-Cicco, Javier & Roberto Pancrazi & Martin Uribe (2010). "Real Business Cycles in
Emerging Countries?," American Economic Review 100(5), 2510-2531.
Gelos, R.G., Ratna Sahay, and Guido Sandleris (2011). “Sovereign Borrowing by Developing
Countries. What Determines Market Access?” Journal of International Economics
83, 243–254.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Helene Rey (2014), “External Adjustment, Global Imbalances
and Valuation Effects,” In Handbook of International Economics, vol. 4, eds. G.
Gopinath, E. Helpman and K. Rogoff, Elsevier.

37

Grossman, Hershel I. and Han, Taejoon (1999), “Sovereign Debt and Consumption
Smoothing,” Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 149-158.
Grossman, Hershel I. and Van Huyck, J. (1988), “Sovereign Debt as a Contingent Claim?
Excusable Default, Repudiation, and Reputation” American Economic Review 78,
1088-97
Hale, Galina, Peter Jones, and Mark Spiegel (2014). “The Rise in Home Currency Issuance,”
San Francisco Fed Working Paper 2014-19.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Rancière (2011). “The Optimal Level of Reserves for Emerging
Market Countries: A New Formula and Some Applications,” Economic Journal 121,
905-930.
Kanczuk, Fabio (2004). “Real Interest Rates and Brazilian Business Cycles,” Review of
Economic Dynamics 7, 436-455.
Levy Yeyati, E., Sturzenegger, F., (2003). “To float or to fix: Evidence on the impact of
exchange rate regimes on growth,” American Economic Review 93 (4), 1173-1193.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor (2010). “Financial Stability, the
Trilemma,

and

International

Reserves,”

American

Economic

Journal:

Macroeconomics 2, 57-94.
Ottonello, Pablo and Diego Perez (2017) “The Currency Composition of Sovereign Debt,”
Working Paper.
Reinhart, Carmen (2010). “This Time Is Different Chartbook: Country Histories on Debt,
Default, and Financial Crises,” NBER Working Paper 15815.
Rodrik, Dani (2006). “The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves,” NBER Working
Paper 11952.

38

