NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX REFORM AND THE SLOPE
OF THE PLAYING FIELD

Patric H. Hendershott

Working Paper No. 1909

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation and projects in Government Budgets and Taxation and
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1909
April 1986

Tax Reform and the Slope of the Playing Field

ABSTRACT

Possible benefits of tax reform include faster economic growth and

greater equity across households. A part of economic growth is the channeling

of saving into the most productive real investments. The ability of various
tax regimes to channel saving efficiently and independently of the inflation

rate is the focus of the current paper. The tax regimes include current law,
preERTA law, the Treasury and Administration reform proposals, HR 3838, and
what seems likely to come out of the Senate Finance Committee.

Patric H. Hendersholt
Hagerty Hall
The Ohio State University
1775 College Road

Columbus, Ohio 43210

Tax Reform and the Slope of the Playing Field
Patric H. Hendershott

One goal of tax policy is an efficient allocation of resources. From the
perspective of real capital, efficiency translates into the familiar "level
playing field" upon which different forms of capital investment would compete

on equal terms. A relevant question, then, is: will the changes in tax rates
and tax incentives embodied in the Treasury, Administration and House (HR 3838)

reform plans render the field more level? Because the slope of the playing
field under current law also depends on the level of inflation, a related

question is: will this slope's sensitivity to inflation be dampened or
exaggerated by the reforms? Providing answers to these questions is the
purpose of this paper. Along the way, I also take a brief look backward at the
impact of early 1980 tax changes and forward at the impact of the bill likely
to emerge from the Senate Finance Committee.

My analysis of the various tax reforms plans suggests that only the
Administration plan would create a more level playing field (a full version of
this analysis is contained in Hendershott, 1986) .

Both the Treasury plan and

the House bill would tilt the existing field toward owner—occupied housing, the

investment that is already most tax favored. In effect, we would return to the
pre—1981 world. The Administration plan, and the House bill to a lesser
extent, would also significantly reduce the sensitivity of the playing field to

inflation. The Treasury plan, in contrast, would increase the sensitivity, in
spite of its professed intent to do otherwise.

—2—

THE ANNUAL RENTAL COST AND THE EFFICIENT ALLOCATION OF CAPITAL

A key determinant of investment in any type of capital good is its annual

rental cost. If the gross return from investment promises to exceed this cost,
then investment will occur. Because additional investment drives down the
gross return, eventually an equilibrium will be reached at which the gross

return from new investment equals the rental cost. Moreover, the higher is the
rental cost for any capital good, the higher will be the required gross return
and thus the less will be investment in the good in equilibrium.

In a world devoid of taxes and tax incentives, the annual rental cost or
investment hurdle rate is simply the real interest rate, including the risk

premium relevant to the asset, plus economic depreciation. The higher is the
risk premium an asset must promise and the greater is its anticipated rate of
depreciation, the higher is the hurdle rate and thus the required gross return.

But this is only appropriate: assets that are riskier and wear out faster
should promise greater returns to compensate for their greater risk and more

rapid deterioration. The zero tax and tax—incentive world would yield a level
playing field, i.e., one in which the risk—adjusted net (of depreciation)
rental costs for all investments are equal.

Our actual world contains numerous taxes and tax incentives. The
'effective tax rates" for alternative investments, plus differences in the

financing and riskiness of the investments, tilt the playing field in various

directions. The tilts, in turn, cause overinvestment in some capital goods and
underinvestment in others. The result is a lower average return on capital
than would exist with the optimal allocation of capital and a reduction in the

national standard of living. The reduction is labeled an efficiency loss.

—3—

THE PLAYING FIELD UNDER CURRENT LAW

The risk—adjusted net rental costs for seven capital classes are listed

in Table 1 for five tax regimes: current law, the November 1984 Treasury plan,
the May 1985 Administration plan, HR 3838 passed in December 1985 and the

'Senate Finance Committee Bill'. There are four corporate asset classes
——PLACE TABLE 1 HERE——
(inventories, equipment, public utility structures and industrial structures)

and three noncorporate real estate assets (depreciable rental and commercial
structures, owner—occupied housing of households with adjusted gross incomes
under 50,000 1985 dollars, and owner—occupied housing of households with
incomes over $50,000) .

Two noncorporate equipment categories are also included

for the Senate Bill. The calculations for current law assume a five percent
inflation rate and a ten percent debt rate and have been adjusted to the

presumed risk of owner—occupied housing. Other important assumptions are noted
below.

As can be seen, the adjusted net rental costs or investment hurdle rates
vary widely across corporate assets under current law, with inventories having

the highest and utilities and, especially, equipment the lowest. The
differences are easily explained. Inventories are subject to a special
inflation tax, owing to FIFO accounting, and utilities and equipment benefit

from a special tax break, the investment tax credit. Because a given
percentage credit is more beneficial the shorter the life of the asset, the
credit lowers the cost for equipment more than the cost for utilities.

The hurdle rate for depreciable real estate structures is far less than

that for corporate industrial structures. In addition to the double—taxation
of corporate income, the difference reflects discrimination in the current
system against riskier, more equity financed investments and the lower risk and

greater debt associated with real estate investments) More specifically, the

—4—

calculations are based on a one—third debt—to—value ratio and a 5 percent risk
premium for corporate investments versus a two—thirds debt—to—value ratio and
2½ percent risk premium for depreciable real estate.

The hurdle rates for owner—occupied housing are the lowest, reflecting

the absence of taxation of the returns from this asset. (These calculations
are independent of the assumed risk premium and, under current law, are largely

independent of the assumed loan—to—value ratio.) The advantage of the
nontaxation is, of course, greater the higher the tax bracket of the homeowner.
For simplicity, owners have been divided into only two classes, those with

incomes above and below $50,000. The hurdle rates for these classes are rough
weighted averages of owners within each of these classes, the weights depending
on the relative quantities of housing the owners demand.

A comparison of the risk—adjusted net costs under current law suggests

two ways to produce a more level playing field. First, the general advantage
of real estate, especially owner—occupied housing of higher income households,

can be lessened. (While a plausible case can be made for tax incentives to
encourage homeownership, a persuasive case for subsidizing owners to occupy

larger houses has not been made.) Second, the disparity of costs across
corporate assets can be reduced. In the context of the first way, this largely
means lowering the costs of other corporate assets to that of equipment, not

raising the latter to the former; the often—noted bias in favor of equipment
under current law, while large relative to other corporate investments, is
small relative to capital investments generally.

THE TREASURY, ADMINISTRATION AND HOUSE TAX REFORMS

Proposed tax reforms generally treat capital income less favorably than

does current law: the investment tax credit is dropped in all proposals,
depreciation allowances are less generous in most cases, and the tax rate at

—5.-

which real estate expenses are deductible would decline under every reform. As

a result, aggregate investment demand would fall if the existing level of

interest rates continued. I have constructed a model in which the interest
rate declines just enough to maintain aggregate investment demand. This
interest rate level is shown at the bottom of Table 1, and the adjusted net

rental costs listed in the Table for the various reforms are based upon the new

lower level. This procedure makes the general level of adjusted net costs in
any column comparable to that in any other column. If the costs were computed
with the initial 10 percent level of interest rates, all the numbers in each
column would be increased, the increase being larger the further 10 percent is

above the interest rate in the bottom row. However, the relationship between
the numbers in any column ——

the slope of the playing field —— would change

little for the Administration and House reforms, and the differences across the
numbers for the Treasury plan would be even greater.

The Treasury plan attempts to neutralize the tax system for inflation by

indexing everything. Only real capital gains, including those on inventories,
would be taxed; depreciation would be on a replacement, rather than historic,
cost basis; and only the "real' part of interest expense would be taxed and
could be deducted (except all mortgage interest on one's principal residence
would remain deductible) .

The Treasury plan also attempts to tax all assets

and business forms (except owner—occupied housing) equally. To this end, tax
depreciation for each depreciable asset would equal the Treasury's best

estimate of true economic depreciation; the investment tax credit would be
dropped; real capital gains would be taxed at the regular income tax rate;
and half of corporate dividends would be deductible at the corporate level. As
the data in Table 1 show, the indexation of inventory gains, the removal of the

—6—

tax credit, and the proposed tax depreciation treatment would vastly narrow the

risk—adjusted net costs across corporate assets. Also the partial dividend
exclusion would reduce the double taxation of corporate investments.

While the Treasury plan scores high in reducing the disparities across
corporate investments —— and in reducing the disparities across industries

within the corporate sector, although I do not illustrate this point here ——

the plan fails to reduce the advantages of real estate. In fact, the relative
advantage of owner—occupied housing rises by nearly a quarter. Under current
law the difference between the average net costs for corporate and owner—
housing capital is about 4 percentage points (0.067—0.026) ;
plan the difference rises to 5¼ points (0.069—0.016) .

with

the Treasury

Because owner—occupied

housing is currently the most tax—favored asset, the added efficiency loss from
enlarging this bias swamps the efficiency gain from better allocation across
corporate assets.

2

The Administration plan retreats from the general principles of the

Treasury plan in significant respects: all interest would continue to be
deductible; investors in nondepreciable assets would have the option of paying
taxes on nominal capital gains at one—half of the regular income tax rate; tax
depreciation would exceed economic depreciation; only one—tenth of dividends
would be deductible; and, in order to make the plan revenue neutral, inventory
gains would continue to be nonindexed. Tax depreciation would be especially
generous for equipment that continues to be classified as 3 or 5 years and for

public utility structures; allowable depreciation would exceed that under
current law even at zero inflation. However, most 5—year equipment would be
reclassified as 6,7 and even 10 year equipment. As a result, biases against
inventories and in favor of equipment would remain, although at much reduced

levels. Moreover, the Administration plan would reduce the general bias

—7—

against corporate investments and in favor of owner—occupied housing,

especially that of higher income households. Overall, a more level playing
field and efficient allocation of capital would result.

The House bill removes the investment tax credit and substantially

lengthens depreciation schedules for structures. The resulting impact on
adjusted net rental costs would be remarkably similar to that of the Treasury

plan. Moreover, because far less base broadening would occur than under the
Treasury and Administration plans (most importantly, state and local taxes
would continue to be fully deductible), marginal tax rates for most homeowners
with incomes between $40,000 and $90,000 would not decline relative to current
law (Hendershott and Ling 1986) and thus neither would the absolute advantage

of owner—occupied housing. The disparity among corporate net rental costs
would narrow sharply, but these costs would be at a high level, while costs for

owner—occupied housing would decline from their already low levels. Again a
generally less level field and less efficient allocation of capital would
result.

THE SENATE FINANCE COMMITTEE

At this point (mid April), the final version of the Committee bill is far

from certain. In these calculations I have assumed the original 'Packwood"
investment incentives: ACRS depreciation schedules (with 3 percent indexation
—— 5 percent inflation less the 2 percent threshold) , 30
year straight—line

depreciation for structures, and no investment tax credit. To account for the
higher $50,000 expensing provision for equipment, two additional capital

categories have been included in Table 1; both are noncorporate equipment, one
with five—year ACRS depreciation and the other with complete expensing.

—8—

For owner—occupied housing, two alternatives are analyzed. The first
assumes that tax revenues are increased by raising some excise taxes and

eliminating the deductibility of excise taxes and tariffs. With this revenue,
a significant reduction in marginal household tax rates is possible; the
reduction is assumed to be the same as that generated in the Administration

plan. In the second, no additional tax revenues from excise taxes and tariffs
are assumed and thus no significant rate reduction is possible; the marginal
household tax rates here are taken to be the same as those in the House bill.
The difference between my Administration and House variants of the Senate

Finance Committee bill is clear; the sharply higher marginal tax rates for
owners in the $50,000 to $100,000 income range under the House bill increases
the tax advantage to owner—occupied housing and thus lowers its net rental

cost. In contrast, the costs for capital other than owner—occupied housing
rise slightly. It is also useful to compare the Senate Finance Committee

variants with their pure Administration/House counterparts. Relative to the
Administration plan, the Senate variant is less favorable to structures,
including depreciable real estate, and public utilities and more favorable to

owner—occupied housing. Relative to the House bill, the other Senate variant
is also less favorable to structures, but it is more favorable to equipment and
public utilities (offsetting some of the impact of the removal of the
investment tax credit) and less favorable to owner—occupied housing.

WHAT ERTA/TEFRA WROUGHT
The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 roughly halved depreciation tax

lives. Together with the existing investment tax credit, this created negative
effective tax rates for equipment, although the 1982 Act, which reduced the
depreciable base for equipment by one—half the investment tax credit (and
reneged on promised more accelerated depreciation methods in 1985) ,

got the tax

—9---

rates back into the positive zone. Because ERTA/TEFRA were so maligned for the
biased (toward equipment) playing field they created (see Gravelle 1982, for
example) ,

it is perhaps useful to revisit the impact of the early 1980 tax

changes.

Table 2 contains risk—adjusted net rental costs both before and after

ERTA/TEFRA. The expected long—run inflation rate at the time of enactment is
presumed to have been 8 percent and the level of interest rates associated with
-— PLACE TABLE 2 HERE —-

that

is taken to be 13 percent. Comparing the pre and post ERTA/TEFRA numbers,

we do see a marked reduction in the hurdle rate for equipment relative to other

corporate investments: 3½ points vis—a—vis inventories, 2 points relative to
public utilities and one point more than structures. On the other hand, what
had been a large bias in favor of owner—occupied housing was sharply reduced.

The 'average" gap between hurdle rates on corporate capital and owner—occupied
housing was lowered from roughly 6 points (0.07 less 0.01) to about 3½ points
(0.06 less 0.025)

ERTA/TEFRA, then, reduced the efficiency of the allocation within the
corporate sector but increased the efficiency of allocation between owner—

occupied housing and the corporate sector. Given the large bias toward owner—
occupied housing prior to ERTA/TEFRA, overall capital would likely be allocated

more efficiently post than pre ERTA/TEFRA. The principal deficiency of both
the Treasury Plan and the House Bill, from the capital efficiency perspective,
is their tendency to reestablish the large bias in favor of owner—occupied
housing (compare the net adjusted hurdle rate for owner—occupied housing in
Tables 1 and 2).

—10—

INFLATION NEUTRALITY
The inflation neutrality of the various tax regimes is examined by
computing the changes in the adjusted net rental costs that would occur as

inflation rises from zero to ten percent. The model—computed change in the
level of interest rates accompanying the 0.10 rise in inflation is listed in

the last row of Table 3. Under current law (and the Administration and House
reforms) ,

interest

rates rise by about 1.4 times the increase in inflation
—— PLACE TABLE 3 HERE —-

because nominal, rather than real, interest is taxed and deducted; with the
1.4 increase, the general level of rental costs that evolves maintains

aggregate investment. With perfect interest indexation (the taxation and
deduction of real interest only) ,

interest

rates would rise one—for—one with

the increase in inflation. The rate increase is 1.15—for-one under the
Treasury plan because two flaws in its indexation feature would continue to

allow deduction of part of the inflation premium in interest rates. First, the
indexation presumes a 6 percent real interest rate, a level that is probably
too high even under current tax law and would certainly be far too high after

interest rates declined in response to the adoption of indexation. Second,
mortgage interest expense on one's principal residence would continue to be
fully deductible under the Treasury plan.

Two sources of bias in current tax law, the advantage of debt and the
double—taxation disadvantage of corporate ownership, are aggrevated by

inflation. Thus inflation favors depreciable real estate and high—income
owner—occupied housing, which are heavily debt—financed and not corporate

owned, and disfavors heavily equity—financed corporate investments. Lower—
income owner housing is also disfavored because the owners deduct interest at a

low tax rate and do not have an advantage from debt financing. With a marginal
tax rate of 0.2, the real after—tax debt rate rises from 2½ percent at a zero

—11—

inflation rate to 4 percent at a ten percent rate. In contrast, with a 0.4 tax
rate, the real—after tax rate would decline from 1 and 3/4 percent to
percent.

Full interest indexation and integration of corporate and personal taxes
would eliminate the disadvantages to both equity finance and corporate

ownership. Because aggrevation of these biases is the source of inflation
nonneutrality under current law, one would expect the Treasury plan to be more

inflation neutral than current law. Unfortunately, imperfections in the
Treasury plan, particularly the exclusion of home mortgage interest expense

from the indexation provision, render the plan more inflation sensitive. While
the large advantage to depreciable real estate is removed, the advantage to

owner—occupied housing is increased. With the much smaller increase in nominal
interest rates and the continued full deductibility of interest payments, the
real after—tax mortgage rate declines as inflation accelerates, even for owners

in the 0.2 tax bracket. The other side of the coin is higher costs for

corporate investments. Note, however, that the different types of corporate
investment are affected equally (badly) by inflation.

The Administration plan, in contrast, would be more inflation neutral

than current law. The two inflation—favored investments under current law,
depreciable real estate and owner—occupied housing of high—income households,
would be less favored.

This follows from the reduction in tax rates which

lowers the advantage of debt. With the exception of inventories, which would
still be subject to the inflation tax, corporate costs would be quite

insensitive to inflation. (This would also be true of inventory costs if
revenue—neutrality had not caused the inflation tax to be maintained.)

The House bill, too, would reduce the inflation biases existing in

current law, although by less than the Administration plan. Again, the two
most inflation—favored investments under current law would be less favored, but

—12--

the increase in the

cost

for high—income owner—occupied housing is limited.

The small increase relative to the Administration plan follows from differences
in the marginal tax rate at which owners in the $50,000 to $100,000 income

range would deduct mortgage interest. Under the House bill, this tax rate
would rise by 2 percentage points, tending to lower the after—tax mortgage

rate; in contrast, this tax rate would decline by 6½ points under the
Administration plan.

CONCLUS ION

Possible benefits of tax reform include faster economic growth and

greater equity. A part of economic growth is the channeling of saving into the
most productive real investments. The ability of various tax regimes to
channel saving efficiently and independently of the inflation rate has been the
focus of the current paper.

On the basis of this single criterion, the May 1985 Administration
proposal is superior to current law, the Treasury proposal of November 1984,
HR 3838 passed by the U.S. House of Representatives in December 1985, and what

seems likely to come out of the Senate Finance Committee. Efficient capital
investment requires that the risk—adjusted net (of depreciation) rental costs

of all capital goods be equal. The Administration plan would reduce both the
disparity of these costs across corporate investments and the gap between the

average costs for corporate investments and owner—occupied housing. While the
Treasury plan and House bill would narrow the differences in rental costs
across corporate assets even more than the Administration plan would, these
reforms (and the likely Senate Finance Committee legislation) would greatly

increase the bias in favor of owner—occupied housing. In fact, this bias is
likely to be as great as it was prior to ERTA. As a result, saving would be
allocated even less efficiently under these plans than under current law.

Table
1

Risk—Adjusted Net Rental Costs
(5 Percent Inflation Rate)

.085

.052

.087

House
Bill

.083

.050

.060

Administration
Plan

.086

.063

.058

.074

Treasury
Plan

.074
.051

.072

.072

.044

Current
Law

109
.068

.048

.070

.042

Corporate
Investments

.036
.072

.064

040

Senate Finance
Committee
Adm.
House

Equipment
.060
.073

.036

Owner—Occupied
Housing

•

Public Utilities
.075

.041

.035

Inventories

Structures

.041

.020

Depreciable
Real Estate

.035

.023

.010

026

.020

.041

.016

.029

.091

.022

.042

.012

.029

.087

.089

•

Under $50,000 AGI

.012

094

.016

.029

.074

Over $50,000 AGI
Noncorporate
Equipment
Five—Year Life
Expensed

.100

Except for the calculations for the Senate Finance Committee, these numbers are

Level of
Interest Rates

Source:

based on Hendershott (1986)

—14—

Table 2
Risk—Adjusted Net Rental Costs
(5 Percent Inflation Rate)

Corporate
Investments

PreERTA

Post
ERTA/TEFRA

Inventories

.100

.110

Equipment

.054

.030

Public Utilities

.063

.057

079

.066

.039

.039

.025

036

—.001

.013

.130

.141

Structures
Depreciable
Real Estate

Owner—Occupied
Housing
Under $50,000 AGI
Over $50,000 AGI

Level of
Interest Rates

—15—

Table 3
Change in Risk—Adjusted Net Rental
Costs as Inflation Rises from 0 to 10 Percent

Corporate
Investments
Inventories

Current
Law

Treasury
Plan

Administration
Plan

House
Bill

.017

.018

.030

.023

016

.017

.003

• 014

Public Utilities

.011

.018

.003

.009

Structures

.005

.018

.003

• 007

—.015

.004

011

— .007

Under $50,000 AGI .012

—.005

.013

• 008

Over 50,000 AGI

—.015

—.021

—.005

—.013

.146

.115

.145

.139

Equipment

Depreciable
Real Estate

—.

Owner—Occupied
Housing

Change in Level of
Interest Rates

—16—

FOOTNOTES

1. These calculations are somewhat controversial because the impacts of double
taxation and the riskiness of investments on relative hurdle rates are

uncertain. If the personal tax rate on share returns is taken to be a 40/60
weighted average of the tax rates on dividends and capital gains, the 40
reflecting the percentage of real corporate earnings that historically have

been paid out, then double taxation causes a large wedge in hurdle rates. In
contrast, if a 10/90 weighted average is employed, reflecting the proportion of
equity capital raised by new share issues rather than retained earnings the
wedge is much smaller (Auerbach 1983, 918—926) .
analysis of Bulow and Summers (1984) ,

risk

Similarly,

if one accepts the

creates a large wedge, but this is

not true under the framework of Gordon and Wilson (1986) .

An intermediate

wedge, based upon a 10/90 dividend/capital gains tax assumption and the Bulow—
Summers analysis, is built into the estimates in Table 1.

2. These conclusions regarding the Treasury plan differ from those of Fullerton
and Henderson (1986, Table 5) who find that the relative advantage to owner—

occupied housing would rise only half as much. The differences in the two
studies is largely attributable to different assumptions regarding home

mortgage financing. Because mortgage interest expense would be fully
deductible but mortgage (bond) interest income would be only partially taxed, I
have assumed that households would raise their loan—to—value ratios from 67

percent to 85 percent. The gain from this pure tax arbitrage ——
mortgage debt and investing in GNMA securities ——

is

issuing

an effective reduction in

the rental cost of housing, the collateral of which is needed for the

arbitrage. Fullerton and Henderson assume a base case loan—to—value ratio of
only 33 percent and no increase in response to the Treasury plan.

(When I

—17---

analyze the Treasury plan with full interest indexation —— home mortgage
interest, too, is only partially deductible ——

the

relative advantage to

owner—occupied housing increases by only 1/3 percentage point.)

—18—

REFERENCES

Auerbach, A.J., 1983, 'Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of
Capital," Journal of Economic Literature, 21, September, 905—940.

Bulow, J.I. and LH. Summers, 1984, "The Taxation of Risky Assets," Journal of
Political Economy, 92, 20—39.

Fullerton, Don and Yolanda Henderson, 1987, "The Impact of Fundamental Tax
Reform on the Allocation of Resources," in Martin Feldstein (ed.), The Effects
of Taxation on Capital Formation, University of Chicago Press.

Gordon, R.H. and J.D. Wilson, 1986, "Measuring the Efficiency Cost of Taxing

Risky Capital Income," NBER Working Paper.

Gravelle, Jane, 1982, "Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the

Taxation of Income from Business Capital," National Tax Journal, 35, March,
1—20.

Hendershott, P.H., 1986, "Tax Changes and Capital Allocation in the l980s," in
Martin Feldstein (ed.) , The Effects of Taxation on Capital Formation,

University of Chicago Press.

Hendershott, P.H. and D.C. Ling, 1986, "Likely Impacts of the Administration
Proposal and the House Bill," in James Follain (ed.), Tax Reform and Real
Estate, The Urban Institute.

