NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BIG BANKS AND MACROECONOMIC OUTCOMES:
THEORY AND CROSS-COUNTRY EVIDENCE OF GRANULARITY
Franziska Bremus
Claudia Buch
Katheryn Russ
Monika Schnitzer
Working Paper 19093
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19093
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2013

This paper was written in the context of the Priority Programme SPP1578 "Financial Market Imperfections
and Macroeconomic Performance'' of the German National Science Foundation (DFG) and the Economics
Program of the U.S. National Science Foundation (Project No. 201222555), from whom funding is
gratefully acknowledged. The authors also thank seminar participants at the University of Mannheim,
the Federal Reserve Board of Governors Office of Financial Stability, the 2011 WEAI Summer Meetings,
and the Fall 2012 Midwest Macro Meetings as well as Silvio Contessi, Kris Mitchener, Julian di Giovanni,
and Andrei Levchenko for helpful comments. Lu Liu provided very valuable research assistance.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Franziska Bremus, Claudia Buch, Katheryn Russ, and Monika Schnitzer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Big Banks and Macroeconomic Outcomes: Theory and Cross-Country Evidence of Granularity
Franziska Bremus, Claudia Buch, Katheryn Russ, and Monika Schnitzer
NBER Working Paper No. 19093
May 2013
JEL No. E32,E44,F4,F62,G0,G21
ABSTRACT
Does the mere presence of big banks affect macroeconomic outcomes? In this paper, we develop a
theory of granularity (Gabaix, 2011) for the banking sector, introducing Bertrand competition and
heterogeneous banks charging variable markups. Using this framework, we show conditions under
which idiosyncratic shocks to bank lending can generate aggregate fluctuations in the credit supply
when the banking sector is highly concentrated. We empirically assess the relevance of these granular
effects in banking using a linked micro-macro dataset of more than 80 countries for the years 1995-2009.
The banking sector for many countries is indeed granular, as the right tail of the bank size distribution
follows a power law. We then demonstrate granular effects in the banking sector on macroeconomic
outcomes. The presence of big banks measured by high market concentration is associated with a positive
and significant relationship between bank-level credit growth and aggregate growth of credit or gross
domestic product.
Franziska Bremus
DIW Berlin
German Institute for Economic Research
Mohrenstr. 58
10117 Berlin
Germany
fbremus@diw.de

Katheryn Russ
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
knruss@ucdavis.edu

Claudia Buch
Department of Economics
University of Tuebingen
Mohlstrasse 36
72074 Tuebingen, Germany
claudia.buch@uni-tuebingen.de

Monika Schnitzer
Department of Economics, University of Munich,
Akademiestr. 1/III,
80799 Munich, Germany
schnitzer@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

1

Introduction

The purpose of this paper is to determine whether and under what conditions the presence of big
banks, in itself, can affect macroeconomic outcomes such as aggregate credit and output. Given
the recent interest in regulatory reform, this question has become a focal point both in political
debates and in the broader public discourse. A number of prominent policy makers and academics
recently have proposed limiting the size of banks or breaking large banks into smaller ones. Yet,
the academic literature investigating this potential link is surprisingly small, so our understanding
of the implications of bank size for macroeconomic outcomes remains limited. In this paper, we
provide a theoretical framework to study this issue in the data. Empirical evidence from more than
80 countries suggests that indeed idiosyncratic shocks to large banks can cause macroeconomic
fluctuations.
The idea that bank size can destabilize aggregate credit is not new.1 Bail out expectations
may invite imprudent risk-taking of large banks (“too big to fail”), and close linkages between large
banks and highly leveraged shadow financial institutions (“too connected to fail”) may destabilize
the entire financial system. The focus on size in policy debate and the media is inspired by some
sensational bank failures, but also by the general observation that the banking sector in many
countries is indeed very concentrated.2 What is more, the largest 15 banks hold about one quarter
of commercial bank assets worldwide, so the biggest banks are quite large not only in the relative
sense, but also in the absolute.
So far, the literature measuring the influence of bank size has focused on issues of connectedness,
spillovers, and exposure to common macroeconomic shocks. Tarashev et al. (2009, 2010) use a
Shapley value to map risk associated with individual banks into aggregate risk, while Adrian and
Brunnermeier (2009) pioneer the use of a CoVaR model to measure systemic risk in banking. Both
papers show that large banks are more systemically important. Work by Hale (2012) identifies
connectedness, through interbank lending, as a channel spreading shocks in the lending behavior
of large banks from one bank to another with implications for business cycle behavior. Corbae
and D’Erasmo (2013) examine the role of large banks in exacerbating or mitigating macroeconomic
effects that emerge when banks are exposed to national or regional macroeconomic shocks.
Our approach differs from this research because we study the effects of bank size for macroeco1

Boyd and Gertler (1993), for example, point to bad real estate loans by large banks as the primary source of the
U.S. banking crisis in the 1980s and subsequent economy-wide credit crunch.
2
In a study of trends in financial consolidation, the G10 has found an increase in banking sector concentration
in the advanced economies (Group of Ten 2001). Empirical evidence provided by Corvoisier and Gropp (2002) for
a group of advanced countries and by Walkner and Raes (2005) for the European countries points into the same
direction. Moreover, De Nicolo et al. (2004) find that banking sector concentration tends to increase when looking at
the world average. For the US, Berger et al. (1999) find an increase in banking concentration at the national level,
while Schargrodsky and Sturzenegger (2000) document increasing local concentration in Argentina. Calderon and
Schaeck (2012) and the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD 2010) show that merger
activity during the global financial crisis has led to higher concentration in many countries. Other studies point to
a rather heterogeneous evolution of banking concentration across the world. These studies find that some countries
have experienced increasing concentration, while other countries have seen a decrease in concentration over the last
decades (e.g. Hawkins and Mihaljek (2001), De Nicolo et al. (2004), Beck and Demirgüç-Kunt (2009), Davis (2007),
and De Bandt and Davis (1999)).

1

nomic outcomes even in the absence of contagion, spillover effects, or shared responses to macroeconomic shocks. Instead, we focus on granular effects as a channel through which large banks can
affect macroeconomic outcomes even in otherwise normal times, in addition to times of crisis or
common adversity. Generally, the theory of granularity predicts that adverse idiosyncratic shocks
to very large (manufacturing) firms do not average out across the population of firms, but rather
affect aggregate fluctuations (Gabaix 2011). We apply this concept to the banking sector in two
steps. First, we determine whether the banking sector in theory and in practice fits the necessary
conditions for granular effects to arise. Second, we test whether there is a statistically significant
relationship between the presence of big banks as measured by a high level of market concentration,
and macroeconomic outcomes. Our answer to both questions is “Yes.”
Our research builds on Gabaix (2011) who pioneers the concept of granularity in economics,
showing that idiosyncratic shocks (the “granular residual”) hitting the largest 100 US firms can
explain a significant portion of growth in per capita GDP. The mechanism driving granular effects
lies in the unequal distribution of firm sizes. Firm size distributions are usually fat-tailed - there
are many small firms but also a few extremely large ones. The fat tail implies that the distribution
of firm size resembles a power law. In this case, idiosyncratic shocks to large firms do not cancel
out in the aggregate.3 Gabaix provides a theoretical underpinning to calculate macroeconomic
outcomes based on a Herfindahl index computed across heterogeneous firms, neatly summarizing
the distribution of firm size within an index of market concentration. In his model, markups are
constant, so that shocks are passed on fully into prices and thus the equilibrium quantity of output.
Di Giovanni and Levchenko (2009) and Di Giovanni et al. (2011) further develop this concept to
analyze the link between trade liberalization and macroeconomic fluctuations, also with a theory
using constant markups.
We expand the theory of granularity to encompass financial intermediaries of heterogeneous
size who charge variable markups. For this purpose, we develop a discrete choice model with a
large number of rival banks competing in a Bertrand-like fashion to provide homogeneous loans.
We extend the framework developed in De Blas and Russ (2010, 2013) by integrating the concepts
of concentration and granularity. Borrowers do not know exactly what interest rate a bank will
charge until they apply. In the spirit of Anderson et al. (1987), ex ante uncertainty generates
market power. Banks also differ in their costs, hence markups may vary across banks depending on
the magnitude of the search friction. Into this framework, we incorporate a power law distribution
of bank size. The model predicts that macroeconomic outcomes are driven in part by the “banking
granular residual”— the product of a measure of idiosyncratic fluctuations and the banking system’s
Herfindahl index as a measure of concentration. We characterize the necessary conditions in terms
of market concentration for granular effects to emerge: On the one hand, idiosyncratic shocks have
3

According
to a simple diversification argument, independent idiosyncratic shocks to firms should have an impact
√
of 1/ N on aggregate fluctuations (Gabaix 2011, p.735). In an economy with a small number of firms (small N ),
idiosyncratic shocks would thus be felt in the aggregate. However, if the number of firms is large, as in most economies
today, the effect of idiosyncratic firm-level shocks on the aggregate should tend towards zero. Gabaix shows that,
under a fat-tailed power law distribution of firm size, macroeconomic volatility arising solely due to firm-level shocks
decays much more slowly with 1/ln(N ).

2

to be passed through to firms via changes in lending rates. On the other hand, the distribution of
bank size has to follow a fat-tailed power law to be sufficiently dispersed. We show that, under these
conditions, the higher the concentration or volatility of idiosyncratic fluctuations in the banking
sector, the larger are fluctuations in the aggregate supply of credit and output. Hence, the presence
of big banks magnifies the effects of bank-level shocks on aggregate credit and output compared to
an economy where the banking sector is less concentrated.
The presence of granular effects in banking hinges crucially upon the size distribution of banks.
Thus, we take our model to the data and use Bankscope data to explore whether the distribution
of bank sizes exhibits a fat right tail. Maximum likelihood estimates reveal tails for the banking
sector in the world’s largest economies that are fatter than those found for manufacturing firms by
Di Giovanni et al. (2011).4 These patterns in the data suggest that shocks hitting large banks may
indeed have aggregate effects.
Our work is linked to two strands of literature which study the effects of heterogenous banks
for macroeconomic outcomes. First, among a small number of recent empirical studies, Buch and
Neugebauer (2011) show that granularity in banking matters for short-run output fluctuations in
a subsample of Eastern European banks. Blank et al. (2009) use data for German banks and find
that shocks to large banks affect the probability of distress among small banks. Using industrylevel data, Carvalho and Gabaix (2011) show that the exposure of the macroeconomy to tail risks
in what is called the “shadow banking system” has been fairly high since the late 1990s. Our
analysis is distinct from these studies in that we include a larger set of countries, explicitly test
for dispersion in bank size, and investigate the importance of the factors driving granular effects
within the framework of a structural model.
A second strand of literature incorporates banks into dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
models. Several of these models assume the presence of a representative bank in modeling links
between banks and the macroeconomy in the presence of financial frictions (see, e.g., Angeloni
and Faia 2009, Meh and Moran 2010, Zhang 2009, and Ashcraft et al. (2011)). Kalemli-Ozcan
et al. (2012), van Wincoop (2011), Mandelman (2010), and Ghironi and Stebunovs (2010) show
the implications of foreign participation or domestic bank branching for the transmission of shocks
overseas in structural models. Several studies introduce nest heterogeneity in bank size by assuming
that deposits and loans are CES baskets of differentiated products (Andres and Arce 2012, Gerali
et al. 2010), yielding constant markups when banks set interest rates on loans that do not vary
by bank size. Two important exceptions are Mandelman (2010), who incorporates heterogeneous
bank lending costs into a limit price framework, and Corbae and D’Erasmo (2013), who combine
heterogeneous lending costs with Cournot competition. Markups in these two cases are endogenous
and, in particular, sensitive to market structure. The focus of these papers is on the impact of bank
market structure on the propagation of macroeconomic shocks rather than the feedback between
bank-level shocks and macroeconomic outcomes. In contrast, we study how idiosyncratic changes
4

The tails are truncated in our case because the cost of financing is neither infinitely low nor infinitely high
for banks. We demonstrate numerically that this truncation need not prevent granular effects from occurring and
empirically that the truncation indeed does not prevent granular effect from occurring.

3

in bank lending behavior can add up to fluctuations in macroeconomic aggregates simply because
some banks are very large relative to their competitors.
In the following section, we present a theoretical framework which shows how concentration
in banking markets affects the link between idiosyncratic shocks and macroeconomic outcomes.
In Section 3, we describe the data that we use to test the predictions of this model, and we
provide descriptive statistics on the key features of the model. We demonstrate the link between
concentration in the banking sector, idiosyncratic bank-level shocks, and macroeconomic outcomes.
Section 4 concludes.

2

Market concentration and macroeconomic outcomes: Theoretical framework

In this section, we develop a model of an economy with a banking sector funded by customer
deposits and equity and providing working capital loans to firms. We choose firms as borrowers
to provide the simplest link between the credit market and aggregate output.5 Our focus is on
competition between heterogeneous banks on the loan market. We use this framework to explore
the link between bank-specific shocks and macroeconomic outcomes.

2.1

Consumers

The consumer side is captured by a representative consumer. Because the focus of our analysis is
on the supply side of the market, we do not explicitly model the labor market. Instead, we follow
Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) by supposing that the utility of the representative consumer is log-linear
in aggregate consumption Q and decreasing in the amount of effort expended in the production of
aggregate output Y . Thus, the utility function is given by
z
U (Qt , Yt ) = ln Qt − Yt2 ,
2
where z is a parameter reflecting the disutility of effort in producing output. The representative
consumer chooses whether to use income to purchase goods for immediate consumption or to save
by leaving some of her wealth in a bank. In particular, she maximizes lifetime utility
max

∞
X

β t U (Qt , Yt ),

t=0

where β is a constant with 0 < β < 1, subject to the intertemporal budget constraint
Pt Qt + Pt Dt+1 ≤ Pt Yt + (1 + rd )Pt Dt .
5

We can derive the qualitative results even if loans are made only to consumers for housing or durable goods, as
long as there is a constant (price) elasticity of substitution between the good purchased on credit and other goods.

4

P denotes the price of a bundle of consumption goods, D is the amount of real wealth deposited
in banks as savings, and rd is the interest rate banks pay on deposits.6 Households own the banks.
Since bank profits consist of payments from firms, they are embedded in the household budget
constraint within firm revenues, P Y .
The first-order conditions from the consumer’s problem for optimal consumption and deposit
holdings yield an endogenous steady-state equilibrium interest rate for deposits (Appendix A):
rd = (1 − β)/β. First-order conditions also yield an expression for consumption as a function of
aggregate output, Q = 1/(zY ). We focus on comparative statics in steady state and drop time
subscripts from this point.
By assumption, the market for deposits is perfectly competitive, i.e. consumers can deposit
funds in any bank without cost or other rigidities. Thus, in equilibrium rd is the deposit rate paid
by all banks. We abstract from imperfect competition on the deposit side of the market because
deposits are typically guaranteed by the government (implicitly or explicitly), so consumers are
indifferent as to where they hold their deposits. Kashyap et al. (2002) have also argued that banks’
deposit and lending business are de facto two sides of the same coin. Our objective is to emphasize
the effects of loan market competition by banks of different efficiency. For this purpose, it suffices to
focus on imperfect competition on the lending side. This does not preclude additional investigation
into the market for deposits in a more elaborate framework, but it is beyond the scope of this paper.

2.2

Firms

A sector with identical, perfectly competitive firms assembles a homogeneous final good Y . The
assembly process for this final good requires a continuum of intermediate goods, Y (i), produced
by a continuum of identical manufacturing firms along the [0,1] interval, each of which produces a
unique intermediate good i under monopolistic competition. These intermediate goods are bundled
as in Dixit and Stiglitz (1977),


µ
 µ−1

Z1

Y =

Y (i)

µ−1
µ

di

,

0

where µ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between the intermediate goods. Producer i sells its
good at a price P (i) per unit, with P representing the aggregate price index for intermediate goods,
given by


Z1

P =

1
 1−µ

P (i)1−µ di

.

0

Note that the price index P is the cost of all inputs required to produce one unit of the final good,
and it is thus the price of the final good as well.
6
This formulation is consistent with our assumption of a closed economy. In an open economy setting, it would
imply domestic ownership of banks, a reflection of home bias in asset holdings which is empirically important despite
the ongoing integration of international banking markets (Fidora et al. 2007, Schoenmaker and Bosch 2008).

5

The demand for any particular good is downward sloping in its price:

Y (i) =

P (i)
P

−µ
Y.

(1)

Production of intermediate goods requires capital as the sole variable input. Firms produce each
good Y (i) with working capital K(i) using the technology
Y (i) = αK(i).

(2)

where α is the productivity of capital. Therefore, the demand for capital is directly proportional
to the demand for a firm’s output.
Firms face a cash-in-advance constraint. To produce, firms must borrow working capital from
financial intermediaries. The need for loans arises because, in steady state, firms cannot accumulate
retained earnings but must pay out all profits to consumers in the form of a dividend ΠF (i), with
ΠF representing total profit from the manufacturing of intermediate goods, summed over all firms
i. While, in a dynamic setting, firms can amass retained earnings to provide self-financing, we focus
only on the steady-state equilibrium in which positive amounts of cash on hand cannot be optimal.
A firm’s fiduciary responsibility to its household-shareholder implies a transversality condition in
which, ultimately, it must remit any positive amounts of cash holdings to the shareholders. In
addition, there is empirical evidence that agency problems compel stockholders to collect dividends
and push the firm to seek external finance to benefit from the monitoring capabilities of outside
lenders (DeAngelo et al. (2006), Denis and Osobov (2008)).
Let R(i) denote the unit cost of borrowed working capital paid by firm i. Then variable profits
for a producer of intermediate goods borrowing at this interest rate is given by
ΠF (i) = P (i)Y (i) − R(i)K(i).

(3)

The first-order condition for profit maximization with respect to price yields the usual pricing rule
as a markup over marginal cost:
P (i) =

µ R(i)
.
µ−1 α

(4)

Note that the interest rate R(i) that a particular firm faces affects the price it charges. Setting
output equal to demand for good i and substituting in the pricing rule, Eq.(4), yields the firm’s
demand for capital and thus for loans:

L(i) = K(i) =

1
α

µR(i)
 (µ−1)α

P

−µ


Y.

(5)

All else equal, the demand for loans is decreasing in the interest rate and also in the productivity of
capital, α, because higher productivity everywhere allows firms to produce more output with less

6

capital.

2.3

Market concentration and heterogeneity

While we assume that firms are ex ante identical, we allow for heterogeneity of banks. The key
feature distinguishing banks in our model is their level of efficiency. We are agnostic as to exactly
what governs bank efficiency— whether it is better screening, a lower cost of financing, a lower
monitoring cost, or conversion of deposits into loans with lower overhead costs. We model efficiency
simply as a parameter augmenting the variable cost of lending in the spirit of the Monti-Klein model
(Freixas and Rochet 2008), and the more recent Corbae and D’Erasmo (2013).
2.3.1

Bank heterogeneity and loan pricing

In order to examine the effects of market concentration, our model must have banks that differ in
size. To keep the focus of our analysis on bank size in a straightforward manner, we model banks’
cost efficiency parameter as a random variable. Cost efficiency is a factor that governs banks’
variable cost of lending. We index banks by the letter j, calling the unspecified outcome for the
efficiency of any particular bank A(j) and a particular outcome a. More specifically, if a denotes
the cost efficiency of a bank, then an increase in a is associated with a decline in costs.
Suppose that there is a large number of banks J, each of which draws its efficiency parameter
a, which lies in some positive range a0 < a ≤ 1, from a doubly truncated Pareto distribution,
F (a) =

−θ
a−θ
0 −a
−θ
a0 −1

with θ > 0. We truncate the distribution from above using a ≤ 1 such that the

funding costs for the bank can never be less than the return required by depositors and equity
holders. We truncate it from below at a0 to capture the fact that banks’ funding costs are never
infinitely high, implying that efficiency will not fall below some minimum 0 < a0 < 1 due to, for
instance, some practical operating constraints.
The profit function for any bank j when making a loan to any firm i is thus given by
max ΠB (i, j) = (1 − δ)R(i, j)L(i, j) −
R(i,j)

i
1 h d
r D(i, j) + re E(i, j) ,
A(j)

(6)

where δ represents the probability with which the bank anticipates default on its loans, re is the
return that banks must pay to equity shareholders. Deposits D(i, j) and equity E(i, j) are used
to finance a loan of the amount L(i, j). We assume that the equity return is equal to the deposit
rate augmented by a tax applied to corporate profits, re = rd (1 + τ ), with τ > 0. The bank is also
required to meet a regulatory leverage ratio by keeping equity in the amount of a fraction κ of its
loans: E(i, j) = κ L(i, j). Given the truncation of the distribution of the efficiency parameter a,
we have

1
A(j)

≥ 1, such that the unit cost of lending— i.e. the bank’s funding cost multiplied by its

non-interest cost

1
A(j) —

cannot be less than the bank’s funding cost.

Maximizing profit with respect to the interest rate R(i, j) yields the unconstrained optimal
interest rate (see Appendix A). This rate would apply if there were no competition from other

7

banks, where marginal cost equals marginal revenue:

R(i, j) =

µ
µ−1



rd (1 + κτ )
.
(1 − δ)A(j)

(7)

The unconstrained interest rate varies only with respect to the bank’s own efficiency parameter:
more efficient banks can charge lower interest rates. Note that the cost of funds, or the marginal
cost of lending for a bank with efficiency level a, is C(a) =

rd (1+κτ )
(1−δ)a .

Thus, Eq.(7) states that

in the absence of head-to-head competition with other banks, the bank sets an interest rate with
a constant markup,

µ
µ−1 ,

over marginal cost. However, we show in the next section that when

borrowers can search for a lower-cost lender, banks can compete in a Bertrand-like fashion and this
unrestricted constant markup will be an upperbound for loan pricing.
2.3.2

How the threat of search constrains loan pricing

Due to perfect substitutability of loans from different banks in the eyes of the borrower, the bank’s
markup may be constrained because firms search for the best loan offer across different banks.
Banks operate under Bertrand-like competition which is modeled in the following way. The market
for loans is not completely transparent, i.e., firms must apply for a loan from a specific bank to
get an interest rate quote, incurring a fixed application cost of v > 0. This cost can be thought
of as a search friction: Firms can apply only to one bank at a time and decide after each offer
whether to apply to another bank. In other words, applications for loans take place sequentially.7
If a second bank offered a better interest rate, the firm would take out its loan from this bank,
otherwise it would stick to the first bank. Let C(a) denote the marginal cost of lending for a bank
with an efficiency parameter a. If a firm sends out a second application and finds a better bank,
with efficiency parameter a0 > a, this second bank can charge an interest rate equal to C(a) (or
trivially below C(a)) to undersell the first bank and to win the customer.
Anticipating the firm’s potential search for a better interest rate, the first bank to which a firm
applies will attempt to set its interest rate on loans low enough to make the firm’s expected gain
from applying to another bank no higher than the application fee. This ends the firm’s search
process after just one application. It is the threat of search which constrains the markup for many
banks to be less than the level

µ
µ−1

seen in Eq.(7).

Therefore, the condition determining the pricing behavior of the first bank with efficiency level
a is governed by the probability that a firm’s next draw will be some level a0 greater than its own
level a. We know already that the interest rate a bank sets will depend on its efficiency level even
in the unconstrained case. Let R(a) thus denote the interest rate charged on loans by the bank
7

De Blas and Russ (2013) consider an order-statistic framework where firms apply to multiple banks at once,
and they characterize the constrained markup in this scenario. We show below that the distribution of bank size is
consistent with a power law in the cumulative distribution. Mathematically, the power law distribution cannot be the
result of choosing the best bank from more than one application at a time. This is because there is no distribution
with a corresponding distribution of first order statistics from samples of n > 1 that is power-law in the cumulative
distribution (only in the probability density, which is not sufficient for granularity to emerge). Thus, we assume that
firms deal with only one bank at a time, which can be construed as a type of relationship lending.

8

with efficiency level a and R(a0 ) denote the interest rate charged by a bank with efficiency level
a0 > a that a firm may find if it sends out a second application. We assume that firms are naive
with respect to bank efficiency and randomly choose the banks to which they send applications.8
The probability that a firm finds a superior bank if it sends out another application is 1 − F (a). So
a borrower will stop its search for a lender after one application if the additional profit it expects
to gain from a lower interest rate is no greater than the application fee:



[1 − F (a)] ΠF R(a0 )|R(a0 ) = C(a) − ΠF [M (a)C(a)] = v.

(8)

If the first bank to which a borrower applies charges an interest rate so high that the borrower could
expect to increase its profits (net of the application fee) by searching for another bank, then the
borrower will send out another application and the bank risks losing its customer. The bank sets
R(a) to avoid this possibility. It wants to make sure that the borrower is just indifferent to taking
the loan and submitting an application to another bank. For this to be the case, the application fee
must be at least as great as the extra profit a firm expects from submitting one more application,
weighted by the probability that it finds a better bank. We call this the “search closure condition”.
Note that banks could conceivably compete in the way that they set the application fee v.
However, there are logistical considerations involved in assembling paperwork and negotiating with
the bank, such that we take v as an exogenous parameter to enable a sharper focus on competition
in interest rate setting. Similarly, we abstract from competition in the quality and range of services,
which is more difficult to quantify than net interest margins.
2.3.3

Deriving the constrained markup and interest rate

To derive the markup a bank will charge its customers based on Eq.(8), we first recall the implication
from Eq.(5) that the loan volume depends on the interest rate. This interest rate depends on the
efficiency level of its lender, while all borrowers are ex ante identical. To simplify notation from this
point, we index all firm and bank activity by the bank’s efficiency level a. Substituting Eqs.(1),
(4), and (5) into the variable profit function in Eq.(3), variable profit for a manufacturer of an
intermediate good borrowing from a bank charging interest rate R(a) can be expressed as
1
Π (a) =
R(a)1−µ
(µ − 1)α
F



µ
(µ − 1)α

−µ

P µ Y.

We assume that firms take the aggregate variables P and Y as given, as in Di Giovanni et al.
(2011). To find the relationship between the search friction and the restricted markup arising due
to head-to-head competition, we substitute this profit function (and its counterpart if the interest
rate were from a better bank R(a0 ) < R(a)) into the search closure condition in Eq.(8). Let M̃ (a)
8

This assumption is not necessary: we need only assume some noisiness in firms’ perceptions of bank efficiency
that is dispelled only by applying and getting a rate quote. Assuming some noise would simply augment banks’
market power by a constant term. The assumption merely helps us keep our analysis more transparent and a sharper
focus on the role that dispersion in bank costs may play in bank competition.

9

denote the markup associated with the interest rate that would just satisfy Eq.(8) for a bank with
efficiency level a. Then, the search closure condition becomes

M̃ (a) = 1 −

where Γ =

1
(µ−1)α

firm’s production



µ
(µ−1)α

−µ

technology.9



P µY

v
[1 − F (a)] Γaµ−1

rd (1+κτ )
(1−δ)

1−µ

−

1
µ−1

,

(9)

is a constant reflecting residual demand and the

Because µ is greater than one by assumption, the restricted markup

is increasing in the application cost v. It is also increasing in bank efficiency a, and all banks with
high enough efficiency that M̃ (a) >

µ
µ−1

can charge the unrestricted markup. Thus, the markup is

given by

M (a) = min M̃ (a),

µ
µ−1


.

The lending rate is then determined by the product of the endogenous markup and the bank’s
marginal cost, such that R(a) = M (a)C(a). A summary of the equations which determine the
steady state of the model can be found in Appendix C.
2.3.4

Zero profit and free entry conditions for banks

A bank cannot stay in business unless it earns positive profit sufficient to cover a fixed overhead
cost, implying a minimum markup m̂ > 1. The constrained markup over the cost of funds in Eq.(9)
is increasing in bank efficiency level a. This is because the most efficient banks gain market power
from the fact that additional search is less likely to yield a more efficient new bank for a firm. Thus,
there is some minimum level of efficiency â for which this minimum markup will bind.
Using Eq.(9), this minimum profit condition is given by
M (â) = m̂,
which reduces to



v a−θ
−
1
0
Γ(1 − m̂−(µ−1) )



= âµ−1 â−θ − 1 .

(10)

If we assume that θ is no smaller than µ − 1, then the right-hand side of this condition is strictly
decreasing in â. Note that this threshold efficiency is decreasing in the difficulty of search v –
greater search costs allow less efficient banks to stay in business – and in the size of the market.
It is also increasing in the minimum profit margin, m̂: banks with very low efficiency must charge
interest rates low enough to keep customers from searching for a new bank but their high lending
costs produce net interest margins that are just too low to stay in business.
Up to now, we have studied the banks’ pricing decision for a given number of banks, and we
9

Given that µ > 1, the expression 1 −

v
[1−F (a)]Γaµ−1

has to be positive in order for the restricted markup to be a

real number. Thus, the application fee has to satisfy v < [1 − F (a)] Γaµ−1 and F (a) must be strictly smaller than 1
in our simulations below.

10

have not modelled the free entry condition. How many banks enter in equilibrium depends on
the free entry condition which stipulates that the expected value of entry equals the fixed cost
of entry. Banks must pay a fixed cost f to enter the market, which pins down the total number
of banks J. These fixed costs are identical across banks. We think of them as being determined
by the documentation that is required to comply with regulatory standards before the issuance of
a banking license. For instance, banks have to submit the intended organization chart, financial
projections, financial information on main potential shareholders, or information about the sources
of capital funds (Barth et al. 2001). An entrepreneur considering entering the banking sector draws
an efficiency parameter at the beginning of some period t.
We take the steady state value of bank profits, given in Eq.(6), averaged over all possible
efficiency levels as the entrepreneur’s expected per-period profit. Discounting this by the probability
that an adverse shock generates losses that exceed equity yields the free entry condition:
∞
X

(1 − P r {E[Π(au)] < −κE[L(a)]}) E[Π(a)] = f,

(11)

t=0

where E[∗] represents the expectation operator taken over the distribution of a, F (a), while f is
the fixed cost of entry and κE[L(a)] is the level of equity held by the bank. More intuitively,
a potential lender decides whether to form a bank by calculating the expected stream of profit,
discounted by the probability that it might become insolvent. This determines whether profit is
sufficiently large to justify the fixed cost of entry. Insolvency in this context occurs when an adverse
shock generates losses that exceed equity holdings so that a bank would not be able to satisfy its
deposit liabilities. An increase in the capital requirement, κ, lowers the expected stream of profit
for the bank, reducing the level of entry, J. Entrants become active only if they have a sufficiently
high level of efficiency a to satisfy the zero profit condition (Eq.(10))in steady state.

2.4

Macroeconomic outcomes

We now turn to an analysis of the link between idiosyncratic bank risk and macroeconomic outcomes. Idiosyncratic bank risk is modelled as a multiplicative, independently, identically, and
lognormally distributed shock u to the bank-specific efficiency parameter a. These idiosyncratic
shocks affect macroeconomic outcomes through the loan market: Eq.(5) gives the size of the loan
to any firm i as a function of the interest rate it receives. Loan demand by any firm fluctuates
with the interest rate it pays, and this interest rate varies with banks’ idiosyncratic shock. Thus,
bank-specific shocks translate into fluctuations in the interest rates that banks charge and into the
loans supplied to (and demanded by) individual firms. When summing over these individual loans,
idiosyncratic shocks affect also the total supply of loans in the economy as a whole. The impact
of a multiplicative shock to any bank’s level of efficiency on the aggregate supply of credit depends
on the size distribution of banks – and thus on granular effects.
To model these links between the micro- and the macro-level, we will, in the following, use the
steady-state aggregate price level as a numeraire, setting P ≡ 1. The size of the loan that a bank
11

makes to any firm depends on its interest rate. This rate, taking into account the shock to bank
efficiency, can be expressed as the product between the bank’s markup and costs
R(au) = M (au)C(au),
where the efficiency of a bank with efficiency parameter a is simply au when augmented by the
shock, with u = 1 in the steady state. Combining the interest rate rule with loan demand in Eq.(5),
multiplied by the probability that any firm i applies to a particular bank,

1
J,

we have an expression

for bank size,
L(au) = [M (au)]−µ (ua)µ Φ,
where Φ =

Y
αJ



µrd (1+κτ )
α(µ−1)(1−δ)

−µ

(12)

is a constant reflecting the marginal cost and the effect of search on

loan demand common to all banks.
In Appendix B.1, we show that the restricted markup is a slowly varying function.10 In Appendix
B.2, we can thus show that Eq.(12) is a sufficient condition for bank size in terms of loan volume to be
power-law distributed with a fat right tail if the dispersion parameter of the bank size distribution,
ζ = µθ , fulfills the condition ζ < 2. Banks absorb part of any shock to efficiency by charging a higher
or lower markup. However, the entire shock is not absorbed in the markup so that the shocks to the
largest banks still affect their interest rates and will have measurable impacts on macroeconomic
outcomes. In the next section, we explain why in more detail.
2.4.1

Does granularity hold?

Granularity implies that shocks to the largest banks end up generating changes in the aggregate
supply of credit. For granularity to emerge, two key conditions are necessary.
First, banks must pass on some portion of cost shocks to the interest rates that they charge
borrowers. This would not be the case with a strict limit-pricing framework, where banks always
set exactly the same interest rate as their competitors (Mandelman (2010)), but it is the case in our
model where the interest rate varies with bank efficiency. Interest rates are never strictly bound
by those of a known rival, as in a more traditional Bertrand setting with perfect substitutability
among loans (De Blas and Russ (2013)).
Second, bank size must be sufficiently disperse. For this, bank size must be power law distributed, exhibiting a fat right tail. In our framework, two potential problems arise, because – as
opposed to other studies – (a) markups are endogenous and (b) the Pareto distribution of efficiency
is assumed to be doubly truncated to prevent the lending rate from being smaller than the deposit
rate.
Endogenous markups arise in our framework, and these markups vary with the efficiency parameter a. Under constant markups, the Pareto distribution of efficiency cleanly generates the
As laid out by Gabaix (2011), a function P (X > x) = x−ζ f (x) with ζ ∈ [0; 2] and f (x) slowly varying converges
in distribution to a Lévy law with exponent ζ. A function is slowly varying if limx→∞ f (tx)/f (x) = 1 for all t > 0
(Gabaix 2011, p.766). The applicability of the Lévy Theorem is needed for granular effects to emerge.
10

12

necessary power law distribution for size. This is because markups are a slowly varying function.
We have shown that the markup M (a) in our framework is a slowly varying function as well (Appendix B.1). So the endogenous markups need not override the effect of the power law on bank
size.
Double truncation of bank efficiency prevents the interest rates charged on loans from being
smaller than banks’ funding cost. No bank has infinitely high lending costs and no bank has lending
costs less than the market return on deposits and equity. Even though bank sizes can follow a power
law in a model with endogenous markups, the size distribution might not be sufficently disperse.
This is because our truncated efficiency distribution for banks necessarily has a finite variance,
unlike the standard singly truncated Pareto distribution used in Gabaix (2011) and Di Giovanni
et al. (2011). In those studies, the singly truncated Pareto distribution of efficiency yields a power
law distribution of firm size with infinite variance, such that the Central Limit Theorem gives way
to the Lévy theorem. As a consequence, idiosyncratic shocks do not cancel out in the aggregate,
and granularity holds.
The applicability of the Lévy theorem is the sufficient condition for granular effects to emerge.
However, in our framework with a doubly truncated Pareto distribution of efficiency and hence
finite variance, Lévy’s Theorem holds only under the following restriction: not only must bank size
be power-law distributed, but we must also have the number of applications that a firm sends out
be less than a−θ
0 (Sornette (2006, p. 103)). This condition assures sufficient dispersion in bank size,
which is needed for idiosyncratic, multiplicative shocks to bank efficiency not to average out too
quickly as the number of banks J increases. If dispersion is too low, shocks to large banks would
make little quantitative difference in macroeconomic outcomes, as would occur under the Central
Limit Theorem. Because we allow firms to apply sequentially and thus to only one bank at a time,
firms always stop after one application. Otherwise, due to the properties of order statistics, we can
not achieve a power-law distribution in bank size. Hence, the number of applications is always less
than a−θ
0 , so that the second condition for granularity – sufficient dispersion – is always satisfied in
our model. Thus, we have the necessary power law property.
In Appendix B.2, we show numerically that granular effects still emerge in our framework with
doubly-truncated Pareto efficiency and endogenous markups. More explicitly, because the variance
of our distribution of bank size is finite in the face of the double truncation, our numerical simulations show that Sornette’s condition for Lévy’s Theorem to apply holds in spite of the truncation.
Recall that granular effects arise when idiosyncratic shocks to bank lending do not average out
quickly as the number of banks increases as would be the case when the Central Limit Theorem
holds. To this end, we set the number of banks, J, to 500 and take one draw for each of these
banks from the Pareto distribution. We then calculate the markup and corresponding loan demand
for each bank given our calibration described in Appendix B.2. We apply idiosyncratic, identically
and lognormally distributed shocks (u) to the efficiency parameter of each bank and repeat the
process 1000 times. Figure 1 shows the average results across these 1000 simulations: the standard
deviation of the aggregate level of bank loans is not zero in response to the idiosyncratic shock.

13

Thus, the shocks do not average out, even when summing loans over a rather large number of
banks.11
Figure 2 further shows that fluctuations in the aggregate credit supply are positively correlated
with the level of concentration in the banking industry. The Herfindahl index measures bank
concentration – an increasing Herfindahl indicates an increasing market share for the largest banks
(the big are getting bigger). The positive relationship between the Herfindahl and macroeconomic
outcomes coincides with Gabaix’s theory of granularity, where shocks to the largest firms drive
macroeconomic outcomes. Note that the truncation of our distribution from above dampens the
relationship between idiosyncratic shocks and macroeconomic outcomes somewhat. Remarkably,
however, it can still result in granular effects.
In an economy where the lower bound of the efficiency spectrum, a0 , is close to one, so that
all banks have a similar efficiency level, granular effects would never occur. We consider this to be
a more likely situation in the most developed banking sectors, where banks have access to similar
technologies. This reduces dispersion from the bottom end of the efficiency spectrum. Similarly,
granular effects are unlikely to occur in an economy with no search costs or where the banking
market is sufficiently developed such that the number of loan applications n is always large enough
(greater than a−θ ) that the Central Limit Theorem would hold and Lévy’s Theorem would not
apply.

2.5

Linking idiosyncratic shocks with macroeconomic outcomes

We can calculate the change in the loans extended by a bank in response to the efficiency shock u
by taking the total derivative of bank size given in Eq.(12) with respect to u:
dL(au)
∂L(au) dM (au)
du +
du
du
∂M (a) du


1 dM (au)
=µ 1−
L(au)du.
M (au) du

dL(a) =

(13)
(14)

The term in brackets is the effect of the idiosyncratic shock on the bank’s markup due to the firstorder effect on the bank’s marginal cost and a second-order effect on the aggregate variable, residual
demand (Γ). If we define the steady state as the state where u = 1 for all banks and suppose for
a moment that markups are constant, there would be full pass-through of a shock relative to the
steady state. Eq.(14) also shows that, net of pass-through effects through the endogenous markup,
the change in loans supplied by a particular bank relative to the steady state is increasing in the
size of both the bank and the shock (dL̃(a) = L(a)du). The growth rate in an individual bank’s
11
As suggested by the theory of granularity, the shocks do average out (produce zero volatility in aggregate credit)
if we allow multiple loan applications or use a heavy-tailed distribution other than the power law, like the Weibull
with a dispersion parameter less than one. The fat tail of the power law is essential.

14

loan relative to the steady state net of pass-through effects is given by
dL̃(a)
L(a)du
=
= du,
L(a)
L(a)
with the variance of loans growth given by var



dL̃(a)
L(a)



(15)

= σu2 . Because the amount of working

capital that any firm uses is equal to the size of the loan it takes out from a bank, Eq.(2) implies a
variance in the growth rate of output relative tothe steady
state for an individual firm borrowing

dL̃(a)
2
from a bank with efficiency level a equal to var L(a) = σu .
The relationship between the change in lending and in lending costs implies that the variance
of the aggregate credit supply is a function of the Herfindahl index. To see this, we assume for
simplicity that the shocks u are uncorrelated across banks. We also want to be as conservative as
possible in assessing the role of bank size. Then, again using E[∗] to represent the expectations
operator, the change in the aggregate credit supply L with respect to the steady state, where u = 1
for all banks, is given by
J

X dL̃(a)
∆L
=
.
JE[L(a)]
JE[L(a)]
j=1

The variance of aggregate credit supply that is due to the first-order effects of idiosyncratic
shocks to bank efficiency is then given by the squared terms:

var

∆L
JE[L(a)]


=

J
X
j=1

dL̃(a)
JE[L(a)]

!2
=

σu2

J
X
j=1

L̃(a)
JE[L(a)]

!2
= hσu2 ,

(16)

where h represents the Herfindahl index of market concentration. By “first-order,” we mean exclusive of any effects on the markup. Thus, consistent with the discussion above regarding search
and the behavior of the markup, this expression is an upperbound for the variance of aggregate
output arising due to idiosyncratic shocks to bank lending. Because loan fluctuations are equal to
fluctuations of the capital stock, fluctuations in aggregate output are monotonically increasing in
fluctuations of the aggregate credit supply. Due to constant returns to scale in working capital,
the variance in firm output relative to the steady state is given by the same expression, hσu2 , which
again we view as an upperbound.
The following Proposition summarizes the determinants of aggregate fluctuations of credit and
aggregate output.
Proposition 1 Fluctuations in aggregate supply of credit and aggregate output are positively related
to both the variance of bank-specific shocks and the Herfindahl concentration index in the banking
sector.
Proof. Equation (16) above shows that the aggregate supply of credit is proportional to both
the variance of bank-specific shocks and the Herfindahl concentration index in the banking sector.
Recall that (1) loan market clearing implies the amount of capital that firms use in production
15

equals the size of their loan, and (2) firm size depends only on the interest rate, which is the same
for all firms borrowing from a particular bank. Therefore, the variance of production for a firm
equals the variance in the amount of the loan it procures and the variance of aggregate output must
equal the variance of the aggregate supply of credit.
We summarize the empirical prediction that follows from our theoretical framework here:
• The higher the level of concentration in the banking sector, the larger are changes in the aggregate supply of credit. This prediction follows from Proposition 1 and Eq.(16) and is confirmed
numerically by the simulation results presented in Appendix B.2 linking concentration with
macroeconomic outcomes.

3

Empirical Evidence

We bring the implications of our theoretical model to the data by providing evidence on the validity
of our assumptions and by testing the empirical predictions of the model. We next describe our data
sources, present evidence on the power law decay in bank sizes, and introduce the measurement
of granularity in the banking sector. Finally, we present empirical evidence of the link between
idiosyncratic shocks to banks and macroeconomic outcomes.

3.1

Data sources

In order to calculate idiosyncratic shocks to the growth of assets or loans of banks as well as the
market shares of these banks, we need bank-level data. We take these data from Bureau van Dijck’s
proprietary Bankscope database, which provides income statements and balance sheets for banks
worldwide. A number of standard screens are imposed on the banking data in order to eliminate
reporting errors: We keep banks with at least five consecutive observations to make sure that they
are included at least for one business cycle; we exclude the bottom 1% of observations for total
assets in order to eliminate very small and not very representative banks; and we drop implausible
observations where the loans-to-assets or the equity-to-assets ratio is larger than 1 as well as banks
with negative values recorded for equity, assets, or loans.
We do not have information on bank mergers. In order to eliminate large (absolute) growth rates
that might be due to bank mergers, we winsorize growth rates at the top and bottom percentile.
We use banks classified as holding companies, commercial banks, cooperative banks, and savings
banks, i.e. we exclude a number of specialized banks which are not representative of the banking
industry as a whole.
To compute aggregate real growth, we use data on real GDP per capita from the World Bank’s
World Development Indicators (WDI ). These data are available on an annual basis from the 1970s
through 2011. Due to missing data for bank-level variables and because we calculate growth rates,
our regression sample includes annual data for the years 1995-2009 (T = 13) and 83 countries
(N = 83). A list of countries can be found in Appendix D. Table 1 presents summary statistics.

16

We focus on two main macroeconomic indicators. Growth in real domestic credit is defined as
the growth rate of log real domestic credit in US dollars taken from the International Monetary
Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS ), with real values obtained by deflating nominal
values with the US consumer price index. The growth rate of log real GDP per capita is taken from
the WDI. All growth rates are winsorized at the top and bottom percentile in order to eliminate
the effect of outliers.

3.2

Power law decay in the distribution of bank sizes

To test whether the size distribution within the banking sectors considered here resembles the power
law patterns required for granular effects, we use several methods to measure the tail thickness of
bank size. Recall that granularity occurs only when the tail exhibits power law properties, implying
a Pareto distribution of bank size with a dispersion or shape parameter less than 2. To check whether
this is the case, we estimate the parameter using different methods from the literature.
Table 2 presents estimates of power law coefficients for banks’ total assets, distinguishing a
panel of all banks appearing between 1997 and 2009 (Table 2a) and a cross section for the year
2009 (Table 2b). For each specification, we show five different estimates of the power law coefficient.
First, we use a maximum likelihood estimator for the shape parameter, ζ, in a truncated Pareto
distribution
P r(L(a) > l) =



Lζmin L(a)−ζ − L−ζ
max
1 − (Lmin /Lmax )ζ

,

where 0 < Lmin ≤ L(a) ≤ Lmax < ∞, such that Lmin and Lmax denote the lower and upper
truncation of the distribution of bank size, respecively. The results are given in Columns (1)-(4)
of Table 2. We use the methodology proposed by Aban et al. (2006) to estimate the dispersion
parameter ζ for a doubly truncated Pareto function of banks’ total assets. Column 2 gives the
estimation results for the upper tail of the distribution, while Column 3 displays the r largest
order statistics on which this estimator is based. We test the fit of the doubly truncated against
the standard Pareto distribution. The null hypothesis of “no upper truncation” is rejected for all
countries in the full sample (Column 4) meaning that the doubly truncated Pareto function is the
better fit for the tail of the bank size distributions.12
Figure 3 provides graphical evidence on truncation in the data. It shows plots of log bank size,
measured by banks’ total assets, on the log rank of bank size. Bank size observations are ranked
in a decreasing order such that L(1) > L(2) > ... > L(J) determine bank size rank 1 to J. The
graphs in log-log-scale illustrate the upper truncation: as is characteristic of a truncated power law,
the graphs curve downwards for the largest banks. In case of a standard (singly truncated) Pareto
function, the plot of bank size on bank size rank in logarithmic scale would show a straight line.13
For our purposes, the presence of the truncation is less important than the dispersion preceding
12

In the 2009 cross section, where there are fewer observations, it is rejected in the majority of cases, but not all,
at the 5 percent level.
13
Due to the logarithmic scaling of both axes, a function of the form F (x) = Cx−ζ would give a straight line on a
log-log scale with −ζ being the slope of that line.

17

it. Estimating ζ =

θ
µ

< 2 demonstrates a distribution of bank size that is sufficiently disperse for

granular effects to emerge in our framework (Column 2).
Second, we estimate the power law coefficient without assuming a truncation, such that
P r(L(a) > l) = Lζmin L(a)−ζ .

(17)

Column 5 in Table 2 shows estimation results using the Hill (1975) estimator. This is a maximum
likelihood approach based on the average computed distance between the largest r order statistics,
with r determined as the sample where the estimates of ζ become stable.
Third, we employ the Stata code PARETOFIT developed by Jenkins and Kerm (2007) which
uses a maximum likelihood approach to estimate ζ over the whole sample of bank sizes (Column
6).
Fourth, we estimate the dispersion parameter using the log-rank method proposed by Gabaix
and Ibragimov (2011) where the logarithm of (Rankj − 0.5) of each bank j is regressed on the
logarithm of its total assets (Column 7):
ln (Rankj − 0.5) = α + ζlnL(a) + εj .
Fifth, we estimate the power law coefficient using the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
method used by Di Giovanni et al. (2011) (Column 8). This method directly uses the logarithm of
Eq.(17) to obtain estimates of the dispersion parameter ζ.14
All estimates are of the same order of magnitude and all are less than 1, with standard errors
implying 95 percent confidence intervals below 1, implying power law properties. In our context,
granularity requires ζ =

θ
µ

< 2. In other words, demand for firms’ output must be sufficiently

elastic. Then, the borrowing firms adjust the amount they borrow in response to differences in the
interest rates charged by banks with different efficiency levels. If banks are less disperse (high θ),
this requires that firms are more sensitive due to more elastic demand for their goods (high µ).
In Figure 4, we graph the fitted estimates without the truncation against the density from the
data for the same countries as in Figure 3, with the top 10% of observations omitted to enhance
the visibility of the results. The densities coincide quite closely. The estimated parameter is of the
same order of magnitude regardless of the method of estimation. Failing to allow for the truncation
increases the size of the estimates for ζ, but not enough to compromise the necessary condition for
granular effects to emerge.
Note that previous studies (Gabaix 2011, Di Giovanni et al. 2011) focus on power law properties
in sales revenues rather than sales quantities. We focus on loan quantities here, as fluctuations in
the aggregate credit supply, rather than bank revenues, are our variable of interest. Our estimates
also imply granular properties for bank revenues, since they would in our model be characterized
by the dispersion parameter ζ + 1, which is less than two in all cases according to our regressions,
14

We are extremely grateful to these authors for kindly sharing their code to ensure exact replication of their
methodology. Estimates of the parameter ζ using their p.d.f. method are very similar to the estimates in Columns
(5)-(8) and thus are unreported due to space constraints.

18

since all estimates of ζ are less than one.

3.3

Computing the banking granular residual (BGR)

According to our theoretical model, the transmission from bank-specific shocks to the real economy
runs through banks’ provision of loans. For an empirical application, we thus need an estimate of
bank-specific, idiosyncratic changes in loan growth that are unrelated to macroeconomic conditions.
For this purpose, we need to compute a conditional measures of idiosyncratic loan growth. The
main difference between our data and data used in previous papers calculating idiosyncratic growth
across firms is that we have relatively short time strings for each bank included in our dataset. At
a minimum, banks are in the sample for 5 years, at the maximum for 12 years. This a priori
limits the use of regression-based empirical models because (bank) fixed effects would be estimated
based on very short strings of data. Also, we need to account for the fact that the banks reside
in different countries and thus face different macroeconomic environments. We thus employ and
adapt Gabaix’s method to calculate idiosyncratic bank-level growth rates.
Using long time strings of data for US manufacturing firms, Gabaix (2011) obtains proxies for
idiosyncratic growth rates of firms by subtracting the mean growth rate across all firms from each
individual firm’s growth rates. In a similar vein, we calculate a banking granular residual (BGR)
by taking the difference between bank-level loan growth and the mean growth rate of loans for each
country and year. We calculate mean growth rates for each country separately to take into account
differences in the macroeconomic environments facing the banks. We include each individual bank
from this average because, in some countries, the number of banks is rather small. Thus, we take
the difference between each bank j’s loan growth and the country-mean of loan growth across all
other banks in country i, i.e. except bank j. Results are robust to a version of the BGR including
each individual bank in the country mean. The differences between bank-specific and average loan
growth per country and year then
 serve as a simple measure of idiosyncratic, bank-specific growth:
dL̃(au)
L(au)du
dL̃(au)
= σu2 .15
L(au) = L(au) = du, with var
L(au)
Because we want to avoid a somewhat arbitrary choice when classifying large and small banks,
we compute the product of idiosyncratic growth and the market share of each bank and then
compute the Banking Granular Residual (BGR) for each country i at time t as the sum of these
products across all J banks:
BGRit =

J
X
j=1

c jt creditijt .
du
creditit

The BGR thus represents the weighted sum over all banks’ idiosyncratic credit growth rates, the
15

Idiosyncratic firm-level growth could alternatively be measured using a regression-based approach as in Bloom
et al. (2012). Like Gabaix (2011), they also use data for a large sample of US firms with relatively long time series.
Using their approach, one would regress log loan growth of an individual bank on its first lag and on bank- and
country-year fixed effects. Due to our short panel, the use of bank-specific fixed effects and lagged bank-level loan
growth rates presents a nontrivial issue with Nickell (1981) bias that cannot be corrected without a longer panel.
Nickell bias directly impacts the residuals from the regression, which would be the measure of the idiosyncratic shock
critical to our analysis.

19

weights being each bank j’s market share in country i. Note that we do not take any stance about
whether the size of shocks is linked to the size of banks: large banks may have more or less volatile
loan supply than smaller banks.

3.4

Determinants of macroeconomic growth

Our empirical prediction states that aggregate growth fluctuations are a function of market concentration in banking and fluctuations in loan growth by individual banks. Our main interest in
this paper is how idiosyncratic shocks affect macroeconomic outcomes. Thus, we regress aggregate
growth on our measure for granular loan growth shocks of banks (the BGR), on time fixed effects,
and on log GDP per capita and inflation as additional controls. The model is estimated using a
panel fixed effects regression with robust standard errors. We use the log growth rate of domestic
credit (Table 3a) and log GDP per capita growth (Table 3b) as alternative dependent variables.
In each Table, we show results using the Banking Granular Residual (BGR) calculated for
banks’ loans. Columns 1-4 show the results for the BGR based on the difference between banks’
loan growth and the country-mean of loan growth as in Gabaix (2011).
We proceed in the following steps. We first estimate the baseline model for the full sample
(1997-2009). Second, we estimate the model separately for the periods 1997-2006 and 2007-2009 in
order to test whether the global financial crisis affects our results. Finally, we add a set of additional
regressors that might affect growth in order to filter out macroeconomic effects embodied in the term
Γ, which reflects residual demand and firms’ technology (see Eq. (9)). These additional regressors
include money and quasi money, domestic credit, stock market capitalization as a percentage of
GDP, and trade openness from the WDI database. Total foreign assets plus liabilities are taken
from the IFS, while banking sector concentration, measured as the Herfindahl index is computed
from the Bankscope database. The banking system’s z -score as a measure of the risk of the entire
banking system comes from the World Bank Financial Structure Database by Beck et al. (2000).16
Table 3a shows results using growth in log domestic credit as the dependent variable. We find
a positive and significant impact of idiosyncratic loan growth in the full sample for the BGR based
on differences (Column 1). The crisis does not seem to affect this result: If we exclude the period
2007-2009 from the regression (Column 2), the effect of the BGR on aggregate credit growth is
about the same as in the full sample and it remains statistically significant. Moreover, including
additional control variables (Column 4) does not alter the positive impact of the BGR. Estimating
the model for the crisis years only (2007-2009) renders the BGR insignificant, but does not change
the sign of its coefficient.
The beta coefficient for the BGR is 0.11 – i.e., the BGR accounts for about 11% of the variation
in aggregate credit growth in our panel 17 . The BGR plus time fixed effects and the control variables
that are included in all models explain about 30% of the variation in credit growth across countries
16

We use data from the latest update of the Financial Structures Database by Cihak et al. (2012).
The beta coefficient is calculated as the coefficient estimate, multiplied with the standard deviation of the explanatory variable, divided by the standard deviation of the dependent variable.
17

20

and across time, depending on the model specification. When dropping the time fixed effects and
the control variables (unreported), the BGR remains significant, and the R2 declines to about 3%.
Log GDP per capita has a positive effect on aggregate credit growth, whereas higher inflation leads
to less credit growth.
Table 3b shows similar results using growth in GDP per capita as the dependent variable. The
economic significance of the BGR is similar to the corresponding model for aggregate credit growth:
the beta coefficient reveals that the variation in the BGR contributes about 10% to the variation in
GDP growth. In the model for GDP growth, the R2 falls from 32% to 1% when time fixed effects
and controls are dropped.
A higher rate of inflation harms GDP growth. Log GDP per capita has a positive and significant
effect on growth which might seem counter intuitive at a first glance. However, in unreported regressions where we include initial log GDP per capita instead of country fixed effects, the coefficient
on GDP per capita has the expected negative sign. Thus, the negative effect of a high level of GDP
per capita on growth is absorbed by the country fixed effects. The positive effect in our regressions
with country fixed effects can be interpreted as the growth-enhancing effect of higher institutional
quality in countries with a higher level of GDP per capita.
In unreported regressions, we check whether the positive effect of the BGR is robust to changes
in the sample composition. We find that droppping countries or years from the regressions, one
at a time, does not affect the results. Moreover, if the BGR is computed based on banks’ total
assets instead of loans (using differences), we find a positive and significant impact on GDP growth.
However, idiosyncratic asset growth is not significantly related to changes in aggregate domestic
credit.

4

Conclusions

This paper is a step towards exploring the link between concentration in banking, idiosyncratic
shocks in the banking sector, and macroeconomic outcomes. We present a baseline framework
which abstracts from channels of propagation through asset price effects or through the interbank
market or covariance arising from exposure to a common macro shock. We show that, even without
these channels of propagation, the presence of large banks by itself can drive fluctuations in the
aggregate supply of credit and output. The reason for this is that, if bank sizes are sufficiently
dispersed, idiosyncratic shocks to bank loan growth do not cancel out in the aggregate.
Our contribution to the literature is two-fold. First, we generalize the theory of granularity
used in studies of manufacturing firms by Gabaix (2011) and Di Giovanni et al. (2011). These
studies assume that firms charge a constant markup. We instead develop a model with endogenous
markups. In this model, a large number of rival banks compete in a Bertrand-like fashion to
provide homogenous loans. Banks are heterogenous with regard to their efficiency. They can
charge markups over their cost of funds, subject to an endogenous upper bound on the markup
and on market share. The model predicts that macroeconomic outcomes are driven in part by the

21

banking granular residual – the product of a measure of idiosyncratic fluctuations and the banking
system’s Herfindahl index. Granular effects arise if bank sizes are sufficiently dispersed and follow
a power law distribution.
Second, in an empirical application using bank-level data, we find support for our assumption
that bank size follows a power law distribution. Our results show that a doubly truncated distribution fits the bank size distribution better than the standard singly truncated one, but also
that the truncation needn’t preclude granular effects. Finally, we demonstrate that the banking
granular residual is associated with aggregate growth in domestic credit and GDP. Hence, idiosyncratic shocks to large banks may affect macroeconomic outcomes via the concentration of banking
markets.
Our findings have implications for the regulation of banks. The current regulatory framework
lays a strong emphasis on the stability of individual banks by requiring, most importantly, that
banks hold a certain minimum level of capital. Because dealing with the distress and insolvency of
large banks through market exit is difficult, regulators often rely on consolidation through mergers.
Issues related to systemic risk in banking arising through differences in the size of banks are largely
ignored. Because fostering mergers between large players is a common policy response to distress in
the banking sector,18 our results fill an important hole in the existing literature on macroprudential
policy and bank regulation. We show that policies that may ultimately increase concentration in
the banking sector can increase aggregate volatility in macroeconomic outcomes.
Our analysis presents several new avenues for further research on the topic. It points to the
importance of analyzing the effects of capital requirements on concentration in credit markets.
Increasing capital requirements for banks may be associated with a lower probability of insolvency
for individual institutions, but may also lead to increased concentration which, according to our
model, could increase the granular effects shown here. It is difficult to assess the net effect of the
tradeoff without a detailed analysis of the impact of bank insolvency on the supply of credit and
market concentration, as insolvencies are often followed by takeovers of failing banks by larger,
healthier ones. Also, the effects of bank mergers on idiosyncratic risk could be explored in more
detail. We consider this fertile ground for future research.

18

Liquidation and consolidation of ailing banks, transferring their assets to more robust incumbents, was a common
theme in the regulatory response to the recent financial crisis in the U.S. and Europe. As a result, the big got bigger.
In the U.S., for instance, the asset portfolios of the largest three surviving banks in 2009-Wells Fargo, J.P. Morgan
Chase, and Bank of America-grew by 43 percent, 51 percent, and 138 percent, respectively, after they acquired large,
ailing rivals. Their market share also grew by at least a third in both deposits and some types of loans, more than
doubling on both fronts for Wells Fargo to exceed 10 percent of the market (Cho 2009).

22

23

Source
International Monetary Fund, IFS
World Bank, World Development Indicators
Bankscope, own calculations
Bankscope, own calculations
World Bank, World Development Indicators
World Bank, World Development Indicators
World Bank, World Development Indicators
World Bank, World Development Indicators
International Monetary Fund, IFS
World Bank, World Development Indicators
World Bank, Financial Structures Database

Variable

Growth of log real domestic credit
Growth of log real GDP per capita
BGR (loans, differences)
Herfindahl index (loans)
Log real GDP per capita
Inflation (GDP deflator, annual %)
Money and quasi money (M2) as % of GDP
(Exports + imports) / GDP
(Total foreign assets + liabilities) / GDP
Market capitalization of listed companies (% of GDP)
Bank risk (Z-Score)

744
1059
1059
1059
1059
1059
997
993
1036
882
1055

Obs

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for the Regression Sample (1996-2009)

.090
.024
.008
24.62
8.11
.078
61.54
.806
2.14
53.25
17.77

Mean

.187
.036
.098
18.87
1.55
.317
43.81
.420
2.60
55.37
11.43

Std. Dev.

-.660
-.149
-.480
1.12
4.96
-.270
7.40
.170
.390
.020
-1.99

Min

.628
.124
.782
100
10.64
9.87
242.23
2.53
30.93
510.38
118.58

Max

24

801

2,438

1,230

17,665

3,012

5,573

599

87,586

France

United
Kingdom

Germany

Italy

Japan

Norway

United States

589

China

Spain

3,215

Switzerland

818

1,909

Austria

Denmark

128,301

(1)
Obs

All countries

Country

0.800

0.594

0.664

0.606

0.593

0.400

0.579

0.567

0.489

0.499

0.542

0.482

0.639

(2)
ζ̂

1,000

300

800

600

400

500

400

400

800

500

600

600

1,000

(3)
r

Truncated MLE

0.000

0.011

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.001

0.000

0.000

(4)
Trunc.
p-value

0.960

0.675

0.786

0.692

0.707

0.502

0.706

0.677

0.527

0.582

0.591

0.600

0.967

(5)
ζ̂

Hill (MLE)

(a) Full sample (1996-2009)

0.910***
(0.00184)
0.643***
(0.00683)
0.693***
(0.00649)
0.580***
(0.0123)
0.589***
(0.00871)
0.574***
(0.0127)
0.634***
(0.00861)
0.474***
(0.00962)
0.910***
(0.00266)
0.589***
(0.00563)
0.639***
(0.00425)
0.668***
(0.00970)
0.748***
(0.000708)

(0.0220)
0.713***
(0.0132)
0.480***
(0.0147)
0.517***
(0.0175)
0.681***
(0.0624)
0.617***
(0.00555)

(7)
ζ̂

log rank

0.478***
(0.00308)
0.632***
(0.0393)
0.762***
(0.0441)
0.527***
(0.0478)
0.520***
(0.0403)
0.379***
(0.0190)
0.468***
(0.0171)
0.391***

(6)
ζ̂

Paretofit
(MLE)

Table 2: Estimates of Power Law Coefficients for Total Assets

(0.0125)
0.893***
(0.0316)
0.712***
(0.0482)
0.639***
(0.0176)
0.678***
(0.0141)
0.734***
(0.0126)

0.660***
(0.0167)
0.580***
(0.0189)
0.601***
(0.0293)
0.541***
(0.0137)
0.572***
(0.0201)
0.627***
(0.0499)
0.611***
(0.0250)
0.432***

(8)
ζ̂

CDF

25

447

476

102

7,064

Italy

Japan

Norway

United States

0.624

0.506

0.542

0.544

0.746

0.138

0.441

0.379

0.380

0.321

0.373

0.361

0.582

(2)
ζ̂

400

60

300

300

900

60

126

50

65

80

50

90

1,000

(3)
r

Truncated MLE

0.009

0.43

0.009

0.05

0.08

0.01

0.05

0.18

0.24

0.04

0.33

0.03

0.000

(4)
Trunc.
p-value

691

0.669

0.619

0.597

0.769

0.376

0.577

0.796

0.502

0.493

0.535

0.546

0.658

(5)
ζ̂

Hill (MLE)

0.900***
(0.00184)
0.562***
(0.00683)
0.694***
(0.00649)
0.545***
(0.0123)
0.548***
(0.00871)
0.525***
(0.0127)
0.524***
(0.00861)
0.382***
(0.00962)
0.824***
(0.00266)
0.598***
(0.00563)
0.631***
(0.00425)
0.670***
(0.00970)
0.748***
(0.000708)

(0.0220)
0.613***
(0.0132)
0.451***
(0.0147)
0.503***
(0.0175)
0.639***
(0.0624)
0.617***
(0.00555)

(7)
ζ̂

log rank

0.453***
(0.00308)
0.496***
(0.0393)
0.718***
(0.0441)
0.429***
(0.0478)
0.408***
(0.0403)
0.352***
(0.0190)
0.358***
(0.0171)
0.328***

(6)
ζ̂

Paretofit
(MLE)

(0.00966)
0.815***
(0.0260)
0.681***
(0.0418)
0.659***
(0.0281)
0.671***
(0.0226)
0.738***
(0.0128)

0.601***
(0.0129)
0.517***
(0.0172)
0.599***
(0.0334)
0.481***
(0.0142)
0.515***
(0.0193)
0.580***
(0.0515)
0.484***
(0.0270)
0.308***

(8)
ζ̂

CDF

This table provides estimates for the power law shape parameter ζ > 0 of the cumulative distribution function of banks’ total assets (in 1.000 USD).
r is the number of order statistics used to estimate the shape parameter of the truncated Pareto distribution. p-value is the p-value of the Pareto test
(H0 : no truncation). CDF estimates are from the log of the cumulative distribution function, as described in Di Giovanni et al. (2011). Estimates are
performed excluding the bottom quartile of observations, using robust standard errors where applicable, and clustering observations at the bank-level. In the
log-rank estimations over the full sample (column (7), Table 2a), time fixed-effects are included. Robust standard errors are given in brackets, and *, **, ***
indicates significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

1,204

114

Spain

Germany

80

Denmark

105

86

China

United
Kingdom

294

Switzerland

196

174

Austria

France

10,541

(1)
Obs

All countries

Country

(b) Cross section (2009)

26
-2.453**
(1.051)
744
0.301
62

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries

0.212**
(0.082)
0.293**
(0.123)
-0.094***
(0.009)

Constant

Bank risk (Z-Score)

Market capitalization of listed companies (% of GDP)

(Foreign assets + liabilities) / GDP

HHI (loans)

Domestic credit / GDP (%)

(Exports + imports) / GDP

Money and quasi money (M2) as % of GDP

Inflation, GDP deflator (annual %)

Log GDP per capita

BGR (loans, differences)

(1)
Full sample

602
0.269
62

-3.901**
(1.564)

0.197**
(0.086)
0.462**
(0.183)
-0.092***
(0.010)

(2)
1997-2006

(a) Growth in log domestic credit

142
0.679
61

-5.876*
(2.948)

0.121
(0.218)
0.668**
(0.333)
0.842*
(0.473)

(3)
2007-2009

Table 3: Determinants of Aggregate Growth Fluctuations

630
0.357
60

0.198**
(0.093)
0.280**
(0.133)
-0.101***
(0.010)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.012
(0.071)
-0.093
(0.089)
0.001*
(0.001)
-0.000
(0.006)
0.000
(0.000)
0.000
(0.001)
-2.271**
(1.130)

(4)
Full sample

27
1,059
0.317
83

Observations
R-squared
Number of countries

815
0.210
83

-0.715***
(0.130)

0.024**
(0.010)
0.093***
(0.016)
-0.009***
(0.003)

(2)
1997-2006

244
0.799
83

-4.563***
(0.458)

0.014
(0.024)
0.550***
(0.055)
0.116**
(0.053)

(3)
2007-2009

773
0.471
72

0.022*
(0.012)
0.073***
(0.020)
-0.007***
(0.001)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.017
(0.013)
-0.062***
(0.020)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.004*
(0.002)
0.000**
(0.000)
-0.000
(0.000)
-0.580***
(0.163)

(4)
Full sample

This table reports regressions using the growth of banks’ aggregate loans in (a) and GDP per capita growth in (b) as the dependent variables. The sample
period is 1996-2009. A set of year dummies and country fixed effects is included in each regression (not reported). BGR is the Banking Granular Residual
which is computed using the differences between banks’ loan growth and the country-mean of loan growth, as described in the main body of the text. Robust
standard errors are given in brackets, and *, **, *** indicates significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level.

-0.617***
(0.116)

0.037***
(0.010)
0.072***
(0.014)
-0.008***
(0.002)

Constant

Bank risk (Z-Score)

Market capitalization of listed companies (% of GDP)

(Foreign assets + liabilities) / GDP

HHI (loans)

Domestic credit / GDP (%)

(Exports + imports) / GDP

Money and quasi money (M2) as % of GDP

Inflation, GDP deflator (annual %)

Log GDP per capita

BGR (loans, differences)

(1)
Full sample

(b) Growth in log GDP

28

This figure displays the dispersion parameter of banks’ efficiency distribution, θ, on the horizontal axis. As θ increases, the dispersion of efficiency parameters
falls— the tails of the efficiency-distribution get thinner. On the vertical axis, the Figure shows the deviations of aggregate credit from the steady state after
banks each receive an idiosyncratic shock u.

Figure 1: Deviations of aggregate credit from steady state

29

On the horizontal axes, this figure plots the dispersion parameter of the distribution of banks’ efficiency parameters, θ. As θ increases, the dispersion of
efficiency parameters falls. This means that the tails of the efficiency-distribution get thinner. On the vertical axes, the Figure shows (1) concentration in the
banking sector, measured by the square root of the Herfindahl index, and (2) the variance of aggregate credit relative to the variance of the idiosyncratic shock.

Figure 2: Banking Sector Concentration and Aggregate Volatility

Figure 3: Distribution of Ranks and Bank Size by Country

This figure displays the distribution of bank size (log rank of bank size vs. the log of bank size), measured by total
assets (in bn USD). Data are for the year 2009, countries with less than 80 banks are excluded.

30

Figure 4: Distribution of Bank Size by Country

(a) Austria

(b) China

(c) Denmark

(d) France

(e) Germany

(f) Italy

This figure displays the distribution of bank size (A = total assets in billion USD) against the density. The dark line
is the estimated Pareto p.d.f value f (A) for each A. Estimates are performed excluding the bottom quartile of
observations, using robust standard errors, and clustering observations at the bank-level. In order to enhance
visibility, the top 10% of banks in terms of size are not plotted but are included in the estimates of the probability
density function.

31

Figure 4 (continued)

(g) Japan

(h) Norway

(i) Spain

(j) Switzerland

(k) United Kingdom

(l) United States

This figure displays the distribution of bank size (A = total assets in billion USD) against the density. The dark line
is the estimated Pareto p.d.f value f (A) for each A. Estimates are performed excluding the bottom quartile of
observations, using robust standard errors, and clustering observations at the bank-level. In order to enhance
visibility, the top 10% of banks in terms of size are not plotted but are included in the estimates of the probability
density function.

32

References
Aban, I., M. Meerschaert, and A. Panorska (2006): “Parameter estimation for the truncated
Pareto distribution,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101, 270–277.
Adrian, T. and M. Brunnermeier (2009): “CoVaR,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Report, 348.
Anderson, S., A. De Palma, and J. Thisse (1987): “The CES is a discrete choice model?”
Economics Letters, 24, 139–140.
Andres, J. and O. Arce (2012): “Banking Competition, Housing Prices and Macroeconomic
Stability,” The Economic Journal, Forthcoming.
Angeloni, I. and E. Faia (2009): “A tale of two policies: Prudential regulation and monetary
policy with fragile banks,” Kiel Working Papers, 1569.
Ashcraft, A., J. McAndrews, and D. Skeie (2011): “Precautionary reserves and the interbank
market,” Journal of money, Credit, and Banking, 43, 311–348.
Barth, J., G. Caprio, and R. Levine (2001): “The regulation and supervision of banks around
the world: A new database,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 2588.
Beck, T. and A. Demirgüç-Kunt (2009): “Financial Institutions and Markets Across Countries
and over Time: Data and Analysis,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 4943.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine (2000): “A New Database on Financial Development and Structure,” World Bank Economic Review, 14, 597–605.
Berger, A. N., R. S. Demsetz, and P. E. Strahan (1999): “The consolidation of the financial
services industry: Causes, consequences, and implications for the future,” Journal of Banking &
Finance, 23, 135–194.
Blank, S., C. Buch, and K. Neugebauer (2009): “Shocks at Large Banks and Banking Sector
Distress: The Banking Granular Residual,” Journal of Financial Stability, 5, 353–373.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2012): “Really uncertain business cycles,” NBER Working Paper No. 18245.
Boyd, J. and M. Gertler (1993): “US commercial banking: Trends, cycles, and policy,” in
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1993, Volume 8, MIT Press, 319–377.
Broda, C. and D. E. Weinstein (2006): “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 541–585.
Buch, C. and K. Neugebauer (2011): “Bank-specific Shocks and the Real Economy,” Journal
of Banking & Finance, 35, 2179–2187.
33

Calderon, C. and K. Schaeck (2012): “Bank bailouts, competitive distortions, and consumer
welfare,” mimeo.
Cho, D. (2009): “Banks Too Big to Fail Have Grown Even Bigger: Behemoths Born out of Failure
Reduce Consumer Choice, Tempt Moral Hazard,” Washington Post, 6175, A01.
Cihak, M., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, E. Feyen, and R. Levine (2012): “Benchmarking Financial
Development Around the World,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 6175.
Corbae, D. and P. D’Erasmo (2013): “A Quantitative Model of Banking Industry Dynamics,”
Working Paper, University of Wisconsin.
Corvoisier, S. and R. Gropp (2002): “Bank concentration and retail interest rates,” Journal of
Banking & Finance, 26, 2155–2189.
Davis, K. (2007): “Banking Concentration, Financial Stability and Public Policy,” in The Structure
and Resilience of the Financial System, ed. by C. Kent and J. Lawson.
De Bandt, O. and E. . Davis (1999): “A cross-country comparison of market structures in
European banking.” ECB Working Paper 7.
De Blas, B. and K. Russ (2010): “Understanding Markups in the Open Economy under Bertrand
Competition,” NBER Working Paper, 16587.
——— (2013): “All Banks Great, Small, and Global: Loan Pricing and Foreign Competition,”
International Review of Economics & Finance, 26.
De Nicolo, G., P. Bartholomew, J. Zaman, and M. Zephirin (2004): “Bank consolidation,
internationalization, and conglomeration: trends and implications for financial risk,” Financial
markets, institutions & instruments, 13, 173–217.
DeAngelo,

H.,

L. DeAngelo,

and R. Stulz (2006):

“Dividend policy and the

earned/contributed capital mix: a test of the life-cycle theory,” Journal of Financial Economics,
81, 227–254.
Denis, D. and I. Osobov (2008): “Why do firms pay dividends? International evidence on the
determinants of dividend policy,” Journal of Financial Economics, 89, 62–82.
Di Giovanni, J. and A. Levchenko (2009): “Trade openness and volatility,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 91, 558–585.
Di Giovanni, J., A. Levchenko, and R. Ranciere (2011): “Power laws in firm size and
openness to trade: Measurement and implications,” Journal of International Economics, 85,
42–52.
Dixit, A. and J. Stiglitz (1977): “Monopolistic competition and optimum product diversity,”
The American Economic Review, 297–308.
34

Fidora, M., M. Fratzscher, and C. Thimann (2007): “Home bias in global bond and equity
markets: the role of real exchange rate volatility,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
26, 631–655.
Freixas, X. and J. Rochet (2008): Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press Cambridge, MA
and London, 2 ed.
Gabaix, X. (2011): “The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 79, 733–772.
Gabaix, X. and R. Ibragimov (2011): “Rank-1/2: a simple way to improve the OLS estimation
of tail exponents,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 29, 24–39.
Gerali, A., S. Neri, L. Sessa, and F. Signoretti (2010): “Credit and Banking in a DSGE
Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42, 107–141.
Ghironi, F. and V. Stebunovs (2010): “The Domestic and International Effects of Interstate
U.S. Banking,” NBER Working Paper No. 16613.
Group of Ten (2001): “Report on Consolidation in the Financial Sector,” Tech. rep., Bank for
International Settlements.
Hale, G. (2012): “Bank relationships, business cycles, and financial crises,” Journal of International Economics, 88, 312 – 325.
Hawkins, J. and D. Mihaljek (2001): “The banking industry in the emerging market economies:
competition, consolidation and systemic stability: an overview,” BIS Papers, 1–44.
Hill, B. (1975): “A simple general approach to inference about the tail of a distribution,” The
Annals of Statistics, 3, 1163–1174.
Jenkins, S. P. and P. V. Kerm (2007): “PARETOFIT: Stata module to fit a Type 1 Pareto
distribution,” Available online at http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s456832.html.
Kalemli-Ozcan, S., E. Papaioannou, and F. Perri (2012): “Global Banks and Crisis Transmission,” NBER Working Paper No. 18209.
Kashyap, A., R. Rajan, and J. Stein (2002): “Banks as liquidity providers: An explanation
for the coexistence of lending and deposit-taking,” The Journal of Finance, 57, 33–73.
Mandelman, F. (2010): “Business cycles and monetary regimes in emerging economies: A role
for a monopolistic banking sector,” Journal of International Economics, 81, 122–138.
Meh, C. and K. Moran (2010): “The role of bank capital in the propagation of shocks,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34, 555–576.
Nickell, S. (1981): “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Effects,” Econometrica, 49, 1417Ű1426.

35

Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff (1995): “Exchange rate dynamics redux,” Journal of Political
Economy, 102, 624–660.
OECD (2010): “Competition, Concentration and Stability in the Banking Sector,” Tech. rep.,
Policy Roundtables.
Schargrodsky, E. and F. Sturzenegger (2000): “Banking regulation and competition with
product differentiation,” Journal of Development Economics, 63, 85–111.
Schoenmaker, D. and T. Bosch (2008): “Is the home bias in equities and bonds declining in
Europe?” Investment Management and Financial Innovations, 5, 90–102.
Sornette, D. (2006): Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences: Chaos, Fractals, Selforganization
and Disorder: Concepts and Tools (Springer Series in Synergetics), Springer.
Tarashev, N., C. Borio, and K. Tsatsaronis (2009): “The systemic importance of financial
institutions,” BIS Quarterly Review, 75, 1–87.
——— (2010): “Attributing systemic risk to individual institutions,” BIS Working Paper, 308.
van Wincoop, E. (2011): “International Contagion Through Leveraged Financial Institutions,”
NBER Working Paper No. 17686.
Walkner, C. and J.-P. Raes (2005): “Integration and consolidation in EU banking - an unfinished business,” European Commission Economic Papers Number 226.
Zhang, L. (2009): “Bank capital regulation, the lending channel and business cycles,” Deutsche
Bundesbank Discussion Paper Series 1: Economic Studies, 33.

36

A
A.1

Maximization Problems
Consumers

The first order conditions of the consumer’s maximization problem, subject to her budget constraint,
are as follows:
∂L
∂Qt
∂L
∂Yt
∂L
∂Dt

1
− λt Pt ≡ 0
Qt

(18)

: zYt − λt Pt ≡ 0

(19)

: λt − βλt+1 (1 + rt ) ≡ 0

(20)

:

(21)
Solving Eq. (18) for the Lagrange multiplier t and substituting into (19) we can derive consumption
as a function of aggregate output,
Qt =

1
zYt

(22)

Using the expression for t implied by Eq. (18) and substituting it into Eq. (20), one obtains the
Euler equation
1 − zCt+1
1 − zCt
= β(1 + rt )
Pt
Pt+1

(23)

From Eq. (23), we can solve for the steady state interest rate (where Ct = Ct+1 = C and Pt =
Pt+1 = P , and rt = rd for all periods t),
rd =

A.2

1−β
β

(24)

Firms

Firms maximize profits given by ΠF (i) = P (i)Y (i) − R(i)K(i) Demand for the firm’s good is
downward sloping in its price. Taking the derivative of the demand for any intermediate good with
respect to its price yields
∂Y (i)
Y (i)
= −µP (i)−µ−1 P µ Y =
.
∂P (i)
P (i)
Noting from the firm’s technology that K(i) = (1/α)Y (i), the first derivative of the firm profit
function with respect to price is given by
∂ΠF (i)
∂Y (i) R(i) ∂Y (i)
= Y (i) + P (i)
−
≡0.
∂P (i)
∂P (i)
α ∂P (i)
Then, substituting ∂Y (i)/∂P (i) into the derivative of the profit function yields the pricing equation
given in Eq.(7) of the main text.

37

A.3

Banks

The profit earned by bank j when serving firm i as given in the main text is
ΠB (i, j) = (1 − δ)R(i, j)L(i, j) −

i
1 h d
r D(i, j) + re E(i, j) .
A(j)

We note that a fraction κ of the loan must be financed through equity, allowing the remainder to
be financed through deposits. Thus, the profit function can be rewritten as
rd
[(1 − κ) + (1 + τ )κ] L(i, j)
A(j)
rd (1 + κτ )
= (1 − δ)R(i, j)L(i, j) −
L(i, j) .
A(j)

ΠB (i, j) = (1 − δ)R(i, j)L(i, j) −

We note that the external financing assumption and loan market clearing implies L(i, j) = K(i, j),
so that ∂L(i, j)/∂R(i, j) = −µL(i, j)/R(i, j). The first-order condition with respect to R(i, j) is
then
∂ΠB (i, j)
∂R(i, j)



∂L(i, j)
rd (1 + κτ ) ∂L(i, j)
= (1 − δ) L(i, j) + R(i, j)
−
∂R(i, j)
A(j) ∂R(i, j)
d
µr (1 + κτ ) L(i, j)
= [(1 − δ) − µ(1 − δ)] L(i, j) +
≡0.
A(j)
R(i, j)

Cancelling L(i, j) in both terms and rearranging yields the unconstrained interest rate rule in the
main text.

B
B.1

Applicability of the Lévy Theorem
The restricted markup function is slowly varying

M̃ (a) is slowly varying as long as, for any constant t greater than zero,
lim M̃ (at)

a→∞

M̃ (a)

 −1
µ−1
v
1 − [1−F (at)](at)
µ−1 Γ
= lim 
 −1 ≡ 1 ,
a→∞
µ−1
v
1 − [1−F (a)](a)µ−1 Γ


which is true.

38

B.2

Bank size is power law distributed

Using Eq.(12) in the main text, the probability that an individual bank’s supply of credit is greater
than some positive constant l in steady state is given by
−µ µ

P r M (a)

a Φ>l





 1 !
l
l µ
−µ µ
−1
= P r M (a) a >
= P r M (a) a >
Φ
Φ
θ

= lµΦ

θ
−µ

ψ(l) .

If the bank has a large enough efficiency parameter a such that it can charge the unrestricted
markup

µ
µ−1 ,

then ψ(l) = M (a) =

µ
µ−1 ,

a constant which is clearly a slowly varying function and

thus bank size follows a power law. Because lim M̃ (a) = ∞, then there must be some a < 1
a→1

above which all banks charge the (constant) unrestricted markup and the far-right tail is powerlaw distributed up to the right truncation at a = 1. The dispersion parameter of the bank size
distribution, i.e. the exponent of loan volume l, is thus given by ζ =

θ
µ.

If ζ < 2, the bank size

distribution follows a fat-tailed power law.
We simulate the model to demonstrate that granular effects emerge in spite of the right truncation. We set the elasticity of substitution between goods, µ, equal to 3, close to the median
estimate in Broda and Weinstein (2006), then simulate data for different values of the dispersion
parameter of the efficiency distribution, θ, such that µ − 1 < θ < 2µ.19 For each value of θ, we draw
an efficiency parameter a for each of the J banks which are hit by a log-normally distributed shock
u with mean one and a standard deviation of one percent. We repeat this procedure 1000 times
and average across repetitions. We must discretize the number of banks and choose the number
J = 500, with 5000 firms sending applications to a randomly chosen bank. In addition, we set
β = 0.96 and a0 = 0.1, and, as scaling factors,α = 0.36, z = 0.01 and Y = 10. The results of the
simulation are in Figures 1 and 2.

C

Steady State

Representative consumer:
Aggregate demand

rd

Euler equation
19

This ensures that

θ
µ

1
zY
= (1 − β)β

Q =

< 2, the condition identified by Gabaix (2011) for granular effects to arise.

39

Firms:

µR(i,j) −µ
 α(µ−1) 

Loan demand

L(i, j) =

Technology

1
α

P

Y

Y (i) = αL(i)
µ
P (i) =
R(i)
α(µ − 1)

Optimal price
Banks:
Unrestricted loan rate
Restricted loan rate

µ
C(a)
µ−1
 −1

µ−1
v
R(i) = 1 −
C(a)
(1 − F (a))Γaµ−1
R(i) =

Aggregation and market clearing:
Goods market clearing
Aggregate loans

 1
1 2
Y = Q=
z
Z J
L =
L(i, j)di
0

Z
Aggregate price

P

1
 1−µ

1
1−µ

=

P (i)

di

0

Z
Aggregate production

Y

=

1

Y (i)

µ−1
µ

µ
 µ−1

di

0

D

List of Countries

Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan ,Jordan, Kenya, Korea, Kuwait, Latvia, Lithuania, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Mozambique, Nepal,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Senegal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan,Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, United Kingdom, United States,
Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe.

40

