                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 DO FIRST IMPRESSIONS MATTER? IMPROVEMENT IN EARLY CAREER TEACHER
                           EFFECTIVENESS

                                         Allison Atteberry
                                           Susanna Loeb
                                          James Wyckoff

                                       Working Paper 19096
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19096


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We appreciate helpful comments from Matt Kraft, Eric Taylor, and Tim Sass on previous versions
of the paper. We are grateful to the New York City Department of Education and the New York State
Education Department for the data employed in this paper. We appreciate financial support from the
National Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research (CALDER). CALDER
is supported by IES Grant R305A060018. Support has also been provided by IES Grant R305B100009
to the University of Virginia and by a grant from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed
in the paper are solely those of the authors and may not reflect those of the funders or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. Any errors are attributable to the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Allison Atteberry, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do First Impressions Matter? Improvement in Early Career Teacher Effectiveness
Allison Atteberry, Susanna Loeb, and James Wyckoff
NBER Working Paper No. 19096
June 2013
JEL No. I21

                                              ABSTRACT

Educational policymakers struggle to find ways to improve the quality of the teacher workforce. The
early career period represents a unique opportunity to identify struggling teachers, examine the likelihood
of future improvement, and make strategic pre-tenure investments in improvement as well as dismissals
to increase teaching quality. To date, only a little is known about the dynamics of teacher performance
in the first five years. This paper asks how much teachers vary in performance improvement during
their first five years of teaching and to what extent initial job performance predicts later performance.
We find that, on average, initial performance is quite predictive of future performance, far more so
than typically measured teacher characteristics. Predictions are particularly powerful at the extremes.
We employ these predictions to explore the likelihood of personnel actions that inappropriately distinguish
performance when such predictions are mistaken as well as the much less discussed costs of failure
to distinguish performance when meaningful differences exist. The results have important consequences
for improving the quality of the teacher workforce.


Allison Atteberry                                    James Wyckoff
Curry School of Education                            Curry School of Education
University of Virginia                               University of Virginia
P.O. Box 400277                                      P.O. Box 400277
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277                       Charlottesville, VA 22904-4277
acma@virginia.edu                                    wyckoff@virginia.edu

Susanna Loeb
524 CERAS, 520 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sloeb@stanford.edu
                                                Introduction

       Teachers vary widely in their ability to improve student achievement, and the difference

between effective and ineffective teachers has substantial effects on standardized test outcomes

(Rivkin et al., 2005; Rockoff, 2004) as well as later life outcomes (Chetty, Friedman, & Rockoff,

2011). Given the research on the differential impact of teachers and the vast expansion of student

achievement testing, policy-makers are increasingly interested in how measures of teacher

effectiveness, such as value-added, might be useful for improving the overall quality of the

teacher workforce. Some of these efforts focus on identifying high-quality teachers for rewards,

to take on more challenging assignments, or as models of expert practice (see for example,

teacher effectiveness policies in the District of Columbia Public Schools). Others attempt to

identify struggling teachers in need of mentoring or professional development to improve skills

(Taylor & Tyler, 2011; Yoon, 2007). Finally, because some teachers may never become

effective, some researchers and policymakers are exploring meaningful increases in dismissals of

ineffective teaches as a mechanism for improving the overall quality of teachers. One common

feature of all of these efforts is the need to establish a system to identify teachers’ effectiveness

as early as possible in a way that accurately predicts how well these inexperienced teachers

might serve students in the long run.

       To date, only a little is known about the dynamics of teacher performance in the first five

years. As in other occupations, the early career period represents a unique opportunity to identify

struggling teachers, examine the likelihood of future improvement, and make strategic pre-tenure

investments in improvement as well as dismissals to increase teaching quality. While there are

several possible measures of teacher performance, this paper examines value-added estimates in

particular. Value-added scores are illustrative of teacher performance more broadly, and their use




                                                                                                        1
herein is not intended to suggest that value-added scores should be used in isolation, without

regard to classroom practice, or in place of a principal’s judgment. The research community

acknowledges the limitations of value-added scores as measures of teacher quality, though

existing research also suggests that these measures capture something meaningful about how

teachers influence student’s math and reading skills, as well as longer term outcomes. This

paper relies on value-added measures only due to the lack of an alternative measure of teacher

effectiveness that covers the first five years of teachers’ careers. Similar analyses could use

alternative measures as they become available.

       This paper explores how teacher performance in the first two years as measured by value-

added predicts future teacher performance. In service of this larger goal, we lay out a set of

questions designed to provide policy makers with concrete insight into how well teacher value-

added scores from the first two years of a teacher’s career would perform as an early signal of

how that teacher would develop over the next five years. The analyses are based on panel data

from the New York City Department of Education that follows all new teachers who began

teaching between the 1999-00 and 2006-07 school years through 2011-12 to pursue the

following research questions:

      How much do teachers vary in performance improvement during their first five years of
       teaching?
      To what extent does initial job performance relate to later performance improvement?
      How accurately do measures of initial performance predict future performance?
      Extending the third question, we ask: When predictions are not accurate, what are the
       tradeoffs associated with making errors?


       The following section provides background for the relevance of the research questions, as

well as a review of existing literature that helps frame the issue. We then describe the data from




                                                                                                  2
New York City used in the analysis, as well as the analytic approach used to answer these three

research questions. The Results section follows, and is organized by research question.



                                    Background and Prior Literature

        Research documents substantial impact of assignment to a high-quality teacher on student

achievement, as well as the fact that teachers are not uniformly effective (Aaronson, Barrow, &

Sander, 2007; Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, Ronfeldt, & Wyckoff, 2011; Clotfelter et al., 2007;

Hanushek, 1971; Hanushek, Kain, O'Brien, & Rivkin, 2005; Harris & Sass, 2011; Murnane &

Phillips, 1981; Rockoff, 2004). The difference between effective and ineffective teachers affects

short term outcomes like standardized test scores, as well as longer term outcomes such as

college attendance, wages, housing quality, family planning, and retirement savings (Chetty et

al., 2011).

        Despite the variation in teacher effectiveness, teacher workforce policies generally ignore

variation in quality. In the Widget Effect, Weisberg, Sexton, Mulhern, & Keeling, (2009)

surveyed twelve large districts across four states and found that performance measures were not

considered in recruitment, hiring or placement, professional development, compensation,

granting tenure, retention, or layoffs except in three isolated cases (Weisberg, Sexton, Mulhern,

& Keeling, 2009). While evaluation and compensation reform is currently popular, the vast

majority of districts in the U.S. still primarily use teacher educational attainment, additional

credentialing, and experience to determine compensation. In addition, while principal

observations of teachers is common practice, there is very little variation in principals’

evaluations of teachers (Weisberg et al., 2009).




                                                                                                    3
       Given the growing recognition of the differential impacts of teachers, policy-makers are

increasingly interested in how measures of teacher effectiveness such as value-added or

structured observational measures might be useful for improving the overall quality of the

teacher workforce. The Measures of Effective Teaching (MET Project), Ohio’s Teacher

Evaluation System (TES), and D.C.’s IMPACT policy are all examples where value-added

scores are considered in conjunction with other evidence from the classroom, such as

observational protocols or principal assessments.

       The utility of teacher effectiveness measures for policy use depends on properties of the

measures themselves, such as validity and reliability. Measurement work on the reliability of

teacher value-added scores has typically characterized reliability using a perspective based on the

logic of test-retest reliability, in which a test administered twice within a short time period is

judged based on the equivalence of the results over time. Researchers have thus examined the

stability of value-added scores from one year to the next, reasoning that a reliable measure

should be consistent with itself from one year to the next (e.g., Aaronson et al., 2007; D

Goldhaber & Hansen, 2010; Kane & Staiger, 2002; Koedel & Betts, 2007; McCaffrey, Sass,

Lockwood, & Mihaly, 2009). When value-added scores fluctuate dramatically in adjacent years,

this presents a policy challenge—the measures may reflect statistical imprecision more than true

teacher performance. In this sense, stability is a highly desirable property in a measure of

effectiveness, because the conclusions one would draw based on value-added in one year are

more likely to be consistent with conclusions made in another year.

       Year to year variation in value-added measures may be due to errors in measurement but

it may also be due to true differences in performance from one year to the next. These true

differences over time may be particularly pronounced for new teachers. Researchers have




                                                                                                     4
documented substantial increases in value-added over the first years of teacher with a leveling

off of returns to experience after five to seven years (Clotfelter, Ladd, & Vigdor, 2006; Clotfelter

et al., 2007; Rivkin et al., 2005; Rockoff, 2004).1 Given that teachers exhibit the largest returns

to experience during their early phase, one might expect teacher quality measures to be less

stable during this time even if they reliably measure latent true quality as it develops. In theory

performance measures early in a teacher's career may be just as predictive of future scores as

later measures despite their instability.

        That said, there are reasons to be skeptical about our ability to make fair and accurate

judgments about teachers based on their first one or two years in the classroom. Anecdotally, one

often hears that the first two years of teaching are a “blur,” and that virtually every teacher is

overwhelmed and ineffective. If, in fact, first-year teachers’ effectiveness is more subject to

random influences and less a reflection of their true abilities, their early evaluations would be

less predictive of future performance than evaluations later in their career, with important

implications for targeted professional development, tenure and other personnel policies. This

paper explores the how actual value-added scores from new teachers’ first two years might be

used by policy makers to anticipate the future effectiveness of their teaching force and to identify

teachers early in their career for particular human capital responses.




1
  There are clearly higher average student outcomes for students when exposed to teachers with more experience,
though there has been more debate about which years are most formative and whether there are no additional returns
to experience after a certain point (Papay & Kraft, 2011).


                                                                                                                5
                                             Data

       The backbone of the data used for this analysis is administrative records from a range of

sources including the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE), the New York State

Education Department (NYSED). The combination of sources provides the student achievement

data and the link between teachers and students needed to create measures of teacher

effectiveness and growth over time.

       New York City students take achievement exams in math and English Language Arts

(ELA) in grades three through eight; however, for the current analysis, we restrict the sample to

elementary school teachers (grades four and five), because of the relative uniformity of

elementary school teaching jobs compared with middle school teaching where teachers

specialize. All the exams are aligned to the New York State learning standards and each set of

tests is scaled to reflect item difficulty and are equated across grades and over time. Tests are

given to all registered students with limited accommodations and exclusions. Thus, for nearly all

students the tests provide a consistent assessment of achievement from grade three through grade

eight. For most years, the data include scores for 65,000 to 80,000 students in each grade. We

normalize all student achievement scores by subject, grade and year to have a mean of zero and a

unit standard deviation. Using these data, we construct a set of records with a student’s current

exam score and lagged exam score(s). The student data also include measures of gender,

ethnicity, language spoken at home, free-lunch status, special-education status, number of

absences in the prior year, and number of suspensions in the prior year for each student who was

active in any of grades three through eight in a given year. For a rich description of teachers, we

match data on teachers from the NYCDOE Human Resources database to data from the NYSED




                                                                                                      6
databases. The NYCDOE data include information on teacher race, ethnicity, experience, and

school assignment as well as a link to the classroom(s) in which that teach taught each year.

Analytic Sample and Attrition

        The paper explores how measures of teacher effectiveness—value-added scores—change

during the early career. To do this, we rely on the student-level data linked to elementary school

teachers to estimate teacher value-added. Value-added scores can only be generated for the

subset of teachers assigned to tested grades and subjects. In addition, because we herein analyze

patterns in value-added scores over the course of the first five years of a teacher’s career, we can

only include teachers who do not leave teaching before their later performance can be observed.

Not only is limiting the sample to teachers with a complete vector of value-added central to the

research question, it also addresses a possible attrition problem. The attrition of teachers from the

sample threatens the validity of the estimates because one cannot observe how these teachers

would have performed had they remained in the profession, and there is some reason to believe

that early attriters may have different returns to experience (Boyd et al., 2007; Dan Goldhaber,

Gross, & Player, 2011; Hanushek et al., 2005). As a result, the primary analyses focus on the set

of New York City elementary teachers who began between 2000 and 2007 who have value-

added scores in all of their first five years.

        Despite the advantages to limiting the sample in this way, the restriction introduces a

different problem having to do with external validity. If teachers who are less effective leave

teaching earlier or are removed from tested subjects or grades, the estimates of mean value-

added across the first five years would be biased upward because the sample is limited at the

outset to a more effective subset of teachers. That is, teachers who are consistently assigned to

tested subjects and grades for five consecutive years may be quite different from those who are




                                                                                                     7
not. Given this tradeoff, we conduct sensitivity analyses and present results also for a less

restrictive subsample that requires a less complete history of value-added scores.

       Table 1 gives a summary of sample sizes by subject and additional requirements based on

minimum value-added scores required. There are 7,656 math teachers (7,611 ELA) who are tied

to students in NYC, began teaching during the time period in which they could possibly have at

least five years of value-added scores, and teach primarily elementary grades during this time. At

a very minimum, teachers must possess a value-added score in the first year, which in itself

limits the math sample to 4,170 teachers (4,180 for ELA). Our primary analytic sample for the

paper is the subset of 842 math teachers who possess a value-added score in at least each of her

first five years (859 ELA). The sample sizes decrease dramatically as one increases the number

of required value-added scores, which demonstrates our limited ability to look much beyond the

first five years. The notable decrease in sample size reveals that teachers generally do not receive

value-added scores in every school year, and in research presented elsewhere we examine why

so few teachers receive value-added over a consecutive panel (Atteberry, Loeb, & Wyckoff,

2013). Because the requirement of having five consecutive years of value-added scores is

somewhat restrictive, we also examine results for the somewhat larger subsample of teachers

who remain in the New York City teacher workforce for at least the first five years but have

value-added scores in their first year and two of the following four years (n=2,068 for math,

2,073 for ELA).



                                           Methods

       The overarching analytic approach in this paper is to follow a panel of new teachers as

they go through their first five years and retrospectively examine how performance in the first




                                                                                                   8
two years predicts performance thereafter. In order to do so, we first estimate yearly value-added

scores for all teachers in New York City. We then use these value-added scores to characterize

teachers’ developing effectiveness over the first five years to answer the research questions

outlined above. We begin by describing the methods used to estimated teacher-by-year value-

added scores, and then we lay out how these scores are used in the analysis.



Estimation of Value Added

        Although there is no consensus about how best to measure teacher quality, this paper

defines teacher effectiveness using a value-added framework in which teachers are judged by

their ability to stimulate student standardized test score gains. While imperfect, these measures

have the benefit of directly measuring student learning and they have been found to be predictive

of other measures of teacher effectiveness such as principals’ assessments and observational

measures of teaching practice (Atteberry, 2011; Grossman et al., 2010; Jacob & Lefgren, 2008;

Kane & Staiger, 2012; Kane, Taylor, Tyler, & Wooten, 2011; Milanowski, 2004), as well as long

term student outcomes (Chetty et al., 2011). Our methods for estimating teacher value-added are

consistent with the prior literature. Equation 1 describes our approach.2



                      ,               ,                                                                      (1)




2
  To execute the model described in equation (1), we use a modified version of the method proposed by the Value-
Added Research Center (VARC). This approach involves a two-stage estimation process, which is intended to allow
the researcher to account for classroom characteristics, which are collinear with the teacher-by-experience fixed
effects that serve as the value-added models themselves. This group of researchers is currently involved in
producing value-added scores for districts such as New York City, Chicago, Atlanta, and Milwaukee (among
others). For more information, see http://varc.wceruw.org/methodology.php


                                                                                                               9
The outcome             is the achievement of student i, with teacher t, in grade g, in school s, at time

y, and it is modeled as a function of a vector             ,    of that student’s prior achievement in the

prior year in the same subject and            ,    in the other subject (math or ELA); the students’

characteristics,         ; classroom characteristics,            , which are the aggregate of student

characteristics as well as the average and standard deviation of student prior achievement;                         ,

school time-varying controls, grade fixed effects,             ; teacher-by-experience fixed effects (         );

as well as a random error term,              .3 The teacher-by-experience fixed effects become the

value-added measures which serve as the outcome variable in our later analyses. They capture

the average achievement of teacher t’s students in year y, conditional on prior skill and student

characteristics, relative to the average teacher in the same subject and grade. Finally, we apply an

Empirical Bayes shrinkage adjustment to the resulting teacher-by-year fixed effect estimates to

adjust for measurement error.

        In the model presented above for the estimation of teacher-by-year value-added scores,

we make several important analytic choices about model specification. Our preferred model uses

a lagged achievement approach wherein a student’s score in a given year serves as the outcome,

with the prior year score on the right-hand side (as opposed to modeling gain scores as the

outcome).4 The model attends to student sorting issues through the inclusion of all available

student covariates rather than using student fixed effects, in part because the latter restricts the


3
  The effects of classroom characteristics are identified from teachers who teach multiple classrooms per year. The
value-added models are run on all teachers linked to classrooms from 2000 on, however the analytic sample for this
paper is limited to elementary grade teachers.
4
  Some argue that the gain score model is preferred because one does not place any prior achievement scores which
are measured with error on the right-hand side, which introduces potential bias. On the other hand, the gain score
model has been criticized because there is less variance in a gain score outcome and a general loss of information
and heavier reliance on the assumption of interval scaling. In addition, others have pointed out that the gain score
model implies that the impacts of interest persist undiminished rather than directly estimating the relationship
between prior and current year achievement (McCaffrey, Lockwood, Koretz, Louis, & Hamilton, 2004; McCaffrey
et al., 2009).


                                                                                                                 10
analysis to comparisons only between teachers who have taught at least some students in

common.5 At the school level we also opt to control for all observed school-level covariates that

might influence the outcome of interest rather than including school fixed effects, since this

would also only allow valid comparisons within the same school. In an appendix, we examine

results across a variety of value-added models, including models with combinations of gain score

outcomes, student, and school fixed effects.




RQ 1. How Much Do Teachers Vary in Performance Improvement during their First Five Years

of Teaching?

         We first estimate the mean returns to experience for teachers during their first five years

in order to establish that findings from this dataset are consistent with prior literature.

Importantly, however, we also consider whether teachers vary around that overall pattern. That

is, we look for evidence of variability in the developmental trajectories of teacher in terms of

effectiveness in the early career.

         Annual student-level test score data provide the base for estimating returns to experience.

In creating measures of growth, we tackle common problems researchers face when estimating

returns to experience, particularly isolating the impact of experience on student achievement. We

estimate teachers’ improvement with experience using a standard education production function

quite similar to Equation 1 in that both include the same set of lagged test scores, student,

classroom, and school covariates, as well as grade fixed effects. We remove teacher-by-


5
  A student fixed effects approach has the advantage of controlling for all observed and unobserved time-invariant
student factors, thus perhaps strengthening protections against bias. However, the inclusion of student-level fixed
effects entails a dramatic decrease in degrees of freedom, and thus a great deal of precision is lost (see discussion in
McCaffrey et al., 2009). In addition, experimental research by Kane and Staiger (2008) suggests that student fixed
effects estimates may be more biased than similar models using a limited number of student covariates.




                                                                                                                     11
experience fixed effects and replace them with experience level and year fixed effects. The

coefficients of interest are those on the set of experience variables. If the experience measures

are indicator variables for each year of experience, the coefficient on the binary variable that

indicates an observation occurred in a teacher’s fifth year represents the expected difference in

outcomes between students who have a teacher in her first versus fifth year, controlling for all

other variables in the model. We plot these estimated coefficients alongside estimates from other

research projects since the mean trend has been the focus of considerable prior work.

       We are primarily interested in the extent to which teachers vary around this mean trend.

In order to explore this, we randomly sample 50 teachers from our analytic sample and plot their

observed value-added scores during their first five years. We also present the standard deviation

of estimated value-added scores across teachers at each year of experience to examine whether

the variance in teacher effectiveness appears to be widening or narrowing during the early career.

If we observe a narrowing in the range of effectiveness during the early career, one might

assume that teachers converge to some extent in terms of performance. If, on the other hand, the

standard deviation remains the same or widens, it suggests that existing differences in

performance may be sustained over time.



RQ 2. To What Extent Does Initial Job Performance Relate to Later Performance Improvement?

       To build off the analyses exploring variability around mean returns to experience, we

explore whether one possible source of that variability is differences in teachers’ initial

effectiveness. We therefore begin by estimating mean value-added score trajectories during the

first five years separately by quintiles of teachers’ initial performance. Policy makers often

translate raw evaluation scores into multiple performance groups in order to facilitate direct




                                                                                                    12
action for top and bottom performers. We also adopt this general approach for characterizing

early career performance for a given teacher for many of our analyses. (The creation of such

quintiles, however, requires analytic decisions that we delineate in Appendix A.) In addition, we

estimate the proportion of variability in future performance that can be accounted for using

performance measures in the first and second year.

       In order to examine how the development of teacher effectiveness during the early career

varies by quintile of initial performance, we model the teacher-by-year value-added measures

generated by Equation (1) as outcomes using a non-parametric function of experience with

interactions for initial quintile. We plot the coefficients on the interactions of experience and

quintile dummy variables to illustrate separate mean value-added trajectories by initial quintile.

       Quintile groupings may obscure differences between teachers at either extreme within the

same quintile, or it may exaggerate the differences between teachers just on either side of one of

these cut points. For this reason, we present analyses that move away from reliance on quintiles

in order to characterize the relationship between continuous measures of initial and future

performance among new teachers. We estimate regression models that predict a teacher’s

continuous value-added score in a future period as a function of a set of her value-added scores

in the first two years of teaching.

       We use Equation (3) to predict each teacher’s value-added score in a given “future” year

(e.g., value-added score in years three, four, five, or the mean of these) as a function of value-

added scores observed in the first and second year. We present results across a number of value-

added outcomes and sets of early career value-added scores, however Equation (3) describes the

fullest specification which includes a cubic polynomial function of all available value-added data

in both subjects from teachers’ first two years:




                                                                                                     13
          ,   , ,      +         ,               ,              ,              ,                 (3)




We summarize results from forty different permutations of Equation (3)—by subject and by

various combinations of value-added scores used—by presenting the adjusted R-squared values

from each model. This comparison illustrates the proportion of variance in future performance

that can be accounted for using early value-added scores, and to easily consider the comparative

improvements of using more scores or different scores in combination with one another.



RQ 3. How Accurately do Measures of Initial Performance Predict Future Performance?

       We characterize the predictive power of early career performance measures from the first

two years in order to provide guidance to policy-makers and district leaders seeking to anticipate

the longer-run performance of their developing workforce. First, we are interested in whether

any initially high-performing teachers are later among the lowest-performing teachers and

whether any initially low-performing teachers are later among the highest-performing teachers.

For this we present a quintile transition matrix that tabulates the number of teachers in each

initial quintile (rows) by the number of teachers in each quintile of the mean of their following

three years (columns), along with row percentages.

       We next examine residuals and confidence intervals around forecasted future scores from

the most promising specifications of Equation (4) above. We conclude the section by presenting

the distribution of future performance scores separately by quintiles of initial performance. This

allows one to visually examine the extent to which initial teacher groupings based on initial

performance quintiles overlap in estimated skill in future years. To the extent that these




                                                                                                       14
distributions are distinct from one another, it suggests that the initial performance quintiles

accurately predict future performance, and the extent to which the distributions overlap indicates

potential errors in predictions.



RQ 4: When Predictions are Not Accurate, What Are the Tradeoffs Associated with Making

Errors?

       Because we know that errors in prediction are inevitable, we present evidence on the

nature of the miscategorizations one might make based on value-added scores from a teacher’s

first two years. We present a framework for thinking about the kinds of mistakes likely to be

made and for whom those mistakes are costly. We base this framework loosely on the statistical

concept of Type I and Type II errors, and we then apply this framework to historical data from

New York City. We propose a hypothetical policy mechanism in which value-added scores from

the early career are used to rank teachers and identify the strongest or weakest for any given

human capital response (be it merit pay, professional development, probation, dismissal, etc.).

We then follow teachers into their third through fifth years and calculate the proportion of the

initially identified teachers who actually turn out to be high- or low- effective teachers in the

long run. In addition, we present some evidence on how teachers of different race/ ethnicity

might be differentially affected by policies which attempt to predict future performance based on

initial performance measures.




                                                                                               15
                                                   Results


RQ 1. How Much Do Teachers Vary in Performance Improvement during their First Five Years

of Teaching?

         Figure 1 depicts returns to experience from eight studies, as well as our own estimates

using data from New York City.6 Each study shows increases in student achievement as teachers

accumulate experience such that by a teacher's fifth year her or his students are performing, on

average, from five to 15 percent of a standard deviation of student achievement higher than when

he or she was a first year teacher. This effect is substantial, given that a one standard deviation

increase in teacher effectiveness is typically 15 to 20 percent of standard deviation of student

achievement. Thus, the average development over the first few years of teaching is from one-

third to a full standard deviation in overall teacher effectiveness.7

        Figure 1 demonstrates that early career teacher experience is associated with large student

achievement gains, on average. However, average early career improvement may obscure the

substantial variation across teachers around this mean trajectory—that is, some teachers may

improve a lot over time while others do not. Indeed, we find evidence of substantial variance in

value-added to student achievement across teachers. Figure 2 plots the observed value-added

score trajectories for 50 teachers who were randomly sampled from the set of New York City

elementary teachers that have value-added scores in their first five years (our analytic sample),

6
  Results are not directly comparable due to differences in grade level, population, and model specification, however
Figure 1 is intended to provide some context for estimated returns to experience across studies for our preliminary
results.
7
  See Hanushek, Rivkin, Figlio, & Jacob (2010) for a summary of studies that estimate the standard deviation of
teacher effectiveness measures in terms of student achievement. The estimates for Reading are between 0.11 and
0.26 standard deviations across studies, while the estimates for math are larger and also exhibit somewhat more
variability (0.11 to 0.36, but with the average around 0.18 standard deviations (Aaronson et al., 2007; Hanushek &
Rivkin, 2010; Jacob & Lefgren, 2008; Kane, Rockoff, & Staiger, 2008; Thomas J. Kane & D.O. Staiger, 2008;
Koedel & Betts, 2011; Nye, Konstantopoulos, & Hedges, 2004; Rivkin et al., 2005; Rockoff, 2004; Rothstein,
2010).


                                                                                                                  16
alongside the mean value-added scores (red) in the same period. This graph illustrates notable

variability around the mean growth during this time period, which suggests that the mean returns

to experience may not characterize individual teachers well.

         To further explore variation in returns to experience, we calculate the standard deviation

of teacher value-added scores across teachers within each year of experience for both the

complete analytic sample and the teachers randomly selected for Figure 2. For English Language

Arts (ELA) the standard deviations in teacher value-added is 0.18 across teachers in their first

year (experience = 0). For math, the standard deviation of first-year teacher value-added is

approximately 0.21.8 As Figure 2 shows, the variance in both ELA and math value-added scores

increases yearly. The standard deviation in math value added is 0.24 by the fifth year of teaching,

representing an increase of 15 to 30 percent from the first year. The trends suggest that the

processes associated with teacher development create greater differences in teaching

effectiveness over these early years of teaching.



RQ 2. To What Extent Does Initial Job Performance Relate to Later Performance Improvement?

         One way to make sense of the substantial variability observed above is to examine mean

value-added scores over years of experience separately by quintiles of initial performance. If

initial performance provides insight into future performance, we should see that the highest

quintile of initial performance continues to be the highest performing quintile over time (and vice

versa for the initially lowest quintile). We group teachers by initial performance quintiles of the

mean of their first two years. Figure 3 plots mean value-added scores by experience for each


8
  The standard deviations reported here are calculated as the standard deviation of estimated value-added scores, and
recall that the primary value-added scores used throughout the paper are shrunk. These standard deviations are not
intended to estimate the true variance of teacher effectiveness by experience year, but rather to show a trend over
time. The subject of estimating the true variance is taken up in a separate paper.


                                                                                                                  17
quintile of performance in the first two years among teachers with value-added scores in at least

the first five years. (See Appendix for a series of checks using different samples of teachers

based on minimum years of value-added scores required, definitions of initial performance

quintiles, and specifications of the value-added model.)

       Figure 3 provides evidence of consistent differences in value-added across quintiles of

initial performance. On average, the initially lowest-performing teachers are consistently the

lowest-performing, the highest are consistently the highest. While the lowest quintile does

exhibit the most improvement, this set of teachers does not, on average, “catch up” with other

quintiles, nor are they typically as strong as the median first year teacher even after five years.

       The results in Figures 1-3 begin to provide a picture of how teachers improve over the

first five years. First, consistent with prior findings this is a period of growth overall. Second, in

the face of this overall trend, we also observe considerable variability in the patterns of

development during this time frame, as evidenced by the plots of individual teachers in Figure 2

and the depiction of quintile-based trajectories in Figure 3.

       In Table 3, we present adjusted R-squared values from various specifications of Equation

(4) above, and we present results across five possible sets of early career value-added scores to

explore the additional returns to using more value-added scores. One evident pattern is that

additional years of value-added predictors improve the predictions of future value-added—

particularly the difference between having one score and having two scores. The lowest adjusted

R-squared values come from models that predict a value-added score in one future year using

one value-added score from a single prior year. For example, teachers’ math value-added scores

in the first year only explains 7.9 percent of the variance in value-added scores in the third year.

The predictive power is even lower for ELA (2.5 percent). A second evident pattern in Table 4 is




                                                                                                      18
that value-added scores from the second year are typically two- to three times stronger predictors

than value-added in the first year for both math and ELA.

          Recall that elementary school teachers typically teach both math and ELA every year and

thus we can estimate both a math and an ELA score for each teacher in each year. When we

combine all available value-added scores from both subjects in both of the first two years, and

also include cubic polynomial terms for theses scores, we can explain slightly more variance in

future scores. Table 4 also shows that the measure of future score is as important as the measure

of initial score. Initial scores do a far better job of predicting a teachers’ average value-added

over a group of years than of predicting value-added in any of the individual years. For math,

when including all first and second year value-added measures, we explain about 26.1 percent of

the variance in average future performance compared with no more than 17.6 percent of the

variance in any of the individual future years. (For ELA, the comparable results are 17.8 percent

and 11.3 percent.)

          Table 3 shows early scores can explain up to approximately one-fourth to one-fifth of the

variation in future scores; however, it is not necessarily clear whether this magnitude is relatively

big or relatively small. For comparison, we estimate the predictive ability of measured

characteristics of teachers during their early years. These include typically available measures:

indicators of a teacher’s pathway into teaching, available credentialing scores and SAT scores,

competiveness of undergraduate institution, teacher’s race/ ethnicity, and gender. When we

predict math mean value-added scores in years three through five using this set of explanatory

factors, we explain only 2.8 percent of the variation in the math outcome and 2.5 percent of the

variation in the ELA outcomes.9 The measured teacher characteristics that district leaders



9
    These results not shown, available upon request.


                                                                                                     19
typically have at their disposal to predict who will be the most or least effective teachers clearly

do not perform as well as value-added scores from the first two years.



RQ 3. How Accurately do Measures of Initial Performance Predict Future Performance?

         The prior analyses provide evidence that future performance depends in part on initial

performance; however, the analyses also imply that this predictive ability is far from perfect. In

this section we further describe the degree of accuracy associated with these predictions. One

shortcoming of the mean improvement trajectories by quintile shown above in Figure 3 is that it

may obscure further important within-quintile variance. That is, it provides little information

about whether any initially high-performing teachers become among the lowest-performing

teachers in the future (or vice versa). In Table 4, we present a quintile transition matrix that

tabulates the number of teachers in each initial quintile (rows) by the number of teachers in each

quintile of the mean of their following three years (columns), along with row percentages.10 The

majority—61.9 percent—of the initially lowest quintile math teachers ultimately show up in the

bottom two quintiles of future performance. On the other end, the initially highest-performing

teachers exhibit even more consistency: About 68.9 percent of these teachers remain in the top

two quintiles of mean math performance in the following years. Movements from one extreme to

the other are comparatively rare. About 21.0 percent of bottom- and 10.2 percent of top- quintile

initial performers end up in the opposite extreme two quintiles. Results are similar for ELA

teaching. Overall, the transition matrix suggests that measures of value-added in the first two

years predict future performance for most teachers.




10
  We use the mean of years 3, 4, and 5 rather than just the fifth year to absorb some of the inherently noisy nature of
value-added scores over time.


                                                                                                                    20
        To provide another perspective on our ability to predict future value-added scores, we

return to Equation (4) above, in which we model mean value-added scores in years three through

five as cubic polynomial functions of value-added scores in both subjects in the first two years.

Using this model, we can predict future performance and present a conservative confidence

interval for each forecasted prediction point (see Figure 4).

        As Figure 4 shows, even 80 percent confidence intervals are quite large for individual

predictions. The mean squared error for teachers in this sample is about 0.14, which is

approximately equivalent to a standard deviation in the overall distribution of teacher

effectiveness. The degree of error for individual predictions is substantively large, and we can

see that teachers’ predicted future value-added scores differ markedly from the observed scores

based on distance from the y=x line. That said, recall that the adjusted r-squared from this simple

model of future performance is high—about 27.8 percent of the variance in future performance

can be accounted for using value-added scores in the first and second years. Certainly the value-

added based predictions of future performance are imprecise, and accordingly most policy

makers argue that value-added scores should not be used in isolation to reward or sanction

teachers. The Measures of Effective Teaching (MET) study explores the potential benefits to

combining multiple measures to generate more reliable teacher effectiveness estimates.

Nonetheless, the movement towards a more strategic approach to human capital management in

the K-12 setting drives us to consider the utility of the tools at hand in light of the current lack of

strong alternatives on which to base predictions of how teachers will serve students throughout

their career.

        Given the confidence intervals shown in Figure 4, a policy that uses value-added scores

to group teachers based on performance will produce groups that are not entirely distinct from




                                                                                                     21
one another in future years. Figure 5 presents the complete distribution of future value-added

scores by initial quintile. These depictions provide a more complete sense of how groups based

on initial effectiveness overlap in the future.11 For each group, we have added two reference

points, which are helpful for thinking critically about the implications of these distributions

relative to one another. First, the “+” sign located on each distribution represents the mean of

future performance in each respective initial-quintile group. The color-coded vertical lines

represent the mean first year performance by quintile. This allows the reader to compare

distributions both to where the group started on average, as well as to where other groups have

ended up on average in future years.

        The vast majority of policy proposals based on value-added target teachers at the top (for

rewards, mentoring roles, etc.) or at the bottom (for support, professional development, or

dismissal). Thus, even though the middle quintiles are not particularly distinct in Figure 5, it is

most relevant that the top and bottom initial quintiles are. In both math and ELA, there is some

overlap of the extreme quintiles in the middle—some of the initially lowest-performing teachers

appear to be just as skilled in future years as initially high-performing teachers. However, the

majority of these two distributions are distinct from one another.

        We can take a closer look at the initially lowest quintile of performance relative to some

meaningful comparison points. For example in math, the large majority (76.5 percent) of the

density of the red distribution lies to the left of the mean of the distribution of future scores for

the middle quintile (the comparable percentage is 74.4 percent for ELA). Thus, three fourths of

the initially lowest performers never match the performance of an average fifth year teacher (of

course this implies that about a quarter of the initially-lowest performing quintile—those who


11
  The value-added scores depicted in each distribution are each teacher’s mean value-added score in years three,
four, and five. For brevity, we refer to these scores as “future” performance.


                                                                                                             22
appear at the very top of the red distribution of future performance— do surpass the mean of the

middle quintile). One can conduct a similar analysis using smaller groupings of teachers than the

quintiles described here. For example, one could examine what percentage of the top/bottom

decile (or even bottom twentieth) out-perform an average teacher in the future. We address this

below by making use of more fine-grained groupings of teachers.



RQ 4: When Predictions are Not Accurate, What are the Tradeoffs Associated with Making

Errors?

        This discussion lends itself naturally to a consideration of the tradeoffs associated with

identifying teachers as low-performing based on imperfect measurements from a short period of

time in the early career. The goal is to maximize the percentage of teachers for whom we

accurately predict future performance based on early performance. There are two possible

errors—Type I and Type II—that one could make in service of this goal. We begin with the null

hypothesis that a given teacher is not ineffective in the long run (for the sake of simplicity, think

of this as assuming a teacher is effective). Type I error is rejecting a true null hypothesis, which

in this case means to falsely identify a teacher as low-performing when she turns out to be at

least average in the long run. The degree of Type I error could be quantified by examining the

percentage of teachers who are initially identified as ineffective who turn out to be effective in

future years. This type of error typically dominates the value-added debate, because this error

negatively and unfairly penalizes teachers who would be identified as ineffective even though

they would have emerged as effective over time. On the other hand, Type II error is often

overlooked even though it directly affects students’ instructional experiences. In the case of Type

II error, one fails to reject a false null hypothesis. For the case at hand, this implies that one fails




                                                                                                      23
to identify a teacher as ineffective when she actually is ineffective in the long run. This error

might be quantified as the percentage of teachers who were not identified as low-performing

initially but nonetheless perform poorly in the long run. Students who are assigned to teachers

who persist as a result of Type II error receive a lower quality of instruction than they would

have had the teacher been replaced. In practice, school districts typically seek to identify only a

small proportion of the workforce as either very effective of ineffective. In this scenario, Type I

errors are minimized, though likely at the expense of Type II errors. At the low end of the

distribution, this penalizes students with more ineffective teachers.

       While we have framed the discussion of Type I and Type II error in terms of identifying

ineffective teachers, a parallel approach can be taken to identifying excellent teachers. In this

case, the null hypothesis is that a given teacher is not high performing in the long run. Type I

error is rejecting a true null hypothesis—predicting that a teacher will be excellent when he or

she is not. Type II error is not rejecting the null when it is true—thinking that a teacher will not

be excellent when he or she is. To the extent that excellent teachers deserve recognition, Type II

errors could impact teachers individually and collectively.

       In practice, identifying Type I and Type II errors is complex, in part because it requires a

clear criterion for identifying future ineffectiveness and excellence. The measures we have of

future quality are imprecise; narrow, as they are based only on student test performance in math

and ELA; and relative instead of absolute, as they compare teacher to each other rather than to a

set standard. We have addressed to some extent the measurement error in a teacher’s value-

added measure in a given year by using Bayes shrunk estimates which attenuates extreme

measures in proportion to their imprecision, as well as averaging across multiple future years to

lessen the influence of any one outlier result. We, however, cannot address the narrowness of the




                                                                                                    24
value-added measure, nor its relative nature. Again, we return to the idea that using multiple

measures of teacher effectiveness—e.g., value-added augmented by rigorous observation

protocols and other measures—would increase reliability and broaden the domains that are

measured. In the end, policy makers will establish thresholds for teacher effectiveness to

differentiate teachers depending on the particular human resource objective at hand.

        To illustrate the potential tradeoffs between Type I and Type II errors, we use the current

data as an opportunity to examine how well one could have predicted teachers’ future

performance based on early career value-added measures. There are a number of reasons why

district leaders might try to make such predictions. For example, if one can identify early

teachers who are likely to struggle in their future careers, a policy could target this set of teachers

for professional development or additional support. Another possibility would be to delay tenure

decisions for teachers who perform relatively low in their first year or two.12 In the current

example, we describe a generic policy which identifies a certain percentage of new teachers as

initially low-performing, inherently predicting that these teachers are likely to be low-performing

in the future. We compare those who are identified by this generic policy (i.e., below some initial

performance threshold) to those who are not identified (above that threshold), and we see the

frequency with which Type I and Type II errors are made.

        For this analysis, we calculate the mean of a teacher’s value-added scores in years one

and two and translate that into percentiles of initial performance. Figure 6 plots future terciles of

performance as a function of these initial performance percentiles. Moving from left to right

12
   There are reasons to identify high-performing teachers early, as well. For example, these teachers might
themselves be strong mentors to other new teachers. In addition, if initially highly-effective teachers are likely to
continue to be among the highest performing in the future, then a policy might attempt to compensate these teachers
to encourage their continued participation in the teacher workforce. In practice, one could analyze the impact of any
number of strategic policy responses using this same approach of balancing Type I and Type II errors (e.g., support,
professional development, mentoring, compensation, tenure, dismissal). In our example, we describe a generic
policy which merely identifies a teacher who is predicted to be low-performing in the future, but we are not
suggesting a particular policy response to these teachers.


                                                                                                                  25
along the x-axis represents an increase in the threshold for identifying a teacher as ineffective

based on these percentiles. In the left panel of Figure 6, we depict the set of teachers who fall

below a given threshold and thus are identified as low-performing. The y-axis depicts the

percentage of each group—those who fall either below the threshold (left) or above the threshold

(right)—who subsequently appear in each tercile of future performance, with separate lines for

the bottom, middle, and highest third of the distribution. If we imagine a vertical line that passes

through X=10 on the horizontal axis, this line would provide information on the results of

classifying the lowest ten percent of teachers as low performing. The solid red line shows that

approximately 64 percent of these teachers would fall in the lowest tercile. That is, 64 percent

would be in the bottom third of future performers. The dashed yellow line show that

approximately 24 percent would be in the middle third of future performers, while the dotted

green line shows that the remaining approximately 13 percent would be in the top third of future

performers.

       In the right panel of Figure 6, we depict the corresponding set of teachers who fall above

that same threshold (i.e., the other 90 percent who are not identified as low-performing). Of the

90 percent of teachers not identified as low performing in the above example, approximately 39

percent would be in the top third, another 39 percent would be in the middle third, and

approximately 22 percent would be in the bottom third.

       We can garner a great deal of information from this figure. First, it is clear that while

there are errors in identifying ineffective teachers even when initial ineffectiveness is defined at a

low level, most of the teachers identified as low-performing also show up in the bottom third of

the distribution of future performance. Type I errors—captured by the green line on the left

panel—are thus relatively infrequent. These are the set of teachers who were initially identified




                                                                                                    26
as low-performers but who in the future appear in the top third of the performance distribution.

Type I errors become slightly more frequent as one raises the threshold of initial performance

and thus aims to identify a higher proportion of teachers as ineffective.

       Type II errors are depicted on the right panel based on the red line: These are the teachers

who were not initially identified as low-performing based on the given threshold (x-axis), but

who ultimately appear in the bottom third (red) of future performance. When the threshold for

low-performance is the bottom ten percent, then by definition the other 90 percent of teachers are

not identified as low-performing. The right panel shows that group of unidentified teachers are

about equally likely to appear in the top two terciles of future performance. Here, the red line

summarizes the rate of Type II errors.

       Consider another hypothetical policy that identifies the bottom 5 percent of teachers in

initial value-added as low-performing and thus eligible for some policy response (e.g.,

mentoring, PD, additional oversight). In this case, we are attempting to test a hypothesis about

whether a teacher will be ineffective or not (the null hypothesis). For math, Figure 6 indicates

that, among the 5 percent of teachers identified, 75.0 percent subsequently appear in the bottom

third of the distribution of future performance, 16.7 percent appear in the middle third of the

distribution, and only 8.3 percent appear in the top third. At the 5 percent threshold, the top 95

percent of teachers are not identified as ineffective. Of those, 37.6 percent appear in the top third

of the future performance distribution, 38.3 percent appear in the middle third, and 24.1 percent

appear in the lowest third. At this threshold, the Type I error rate among those identified as low-

performing is 8.3 percent, and the Type II error rate among those not identified is 24.1 percent.

However, it is also important to keep in mind the relative size of these groups—8.3 percent of

the bottom 5 percent of teachers is less than 1 percent of the overall group, while 24.1 percent of




                                                                                                     27
the top 90 percent of teachers is about 20 percent of the overall group. In the current analytic

sample of new elementary teachers with at least five years of value-added scores (966 teachers in

math), these error rates imply a Type I error for fewer than ten teachers, but a Type II error with

approximately 200 teachers.

       Overall, Figure 6 graphically displays the inherent tradeoffs that come along with making

policy decisions based on imperfect information in the early career (first two years). We do see

evidence of Type I error—in the range depicted in the graph we see the virtually no Type I errors

are made when the identification threshold is low (e.g., below 5 percent of teachers). As one

identifies an increasing percentage of teachers as low performing, we see that Type I error rate

increase, but only slightly. Even among the bottom 40 percent of teachers identified—the highest

threshold depicted in the graph—we see that only 15 percent are observed in the top third in the

future. When we look at the right panel, however, we do also see that as Type I error rates

increase, Type II error rates go down among teachers who fall above the selected threshold. This

illustrates a classic balance at play here between false identifications and failures to identify.

Figure 6 also depicts the corresponding rate of making “accurate” predictions at these same

thresholds, by looking at the other two lines in each panel.

       In the example above, we posited that the top and bottom third of the distribution of

future performance could be characterized as high- and low-performing respectively; however

one could debate about the appropriate criteria for future effectiveness. Another reasonable

assertion might be to characterize every teacher who is ultimately less effective than an average

teacher and then retained as a Type II error, and every teacher who would have become

significantly more effective than an average teacher but is inappropriately identified as a Type I

error. We are agnostic about what should be used by policy makers in practice as the “right”




                                                                                                     28
criteria, however we acknowledge the very real need to provide evidence for those who must

make such decisions. In Table 5, we therefore describe the frequency of transitions to the top,

middle, and bottom third of the distribution of future performance, alongside the same

information but instead simply by top and bottom half of the distribution. We also now focus on

teachers who are in the extremes of the initial performance distribution—that is, the top 5, 10,

15, and 20 percent (the initially highest performers), as well as the bottom 5, 10, 15, and 20

percent. While Figure 6 focuses only on initially low-performing teachers, Table 5 also reports

on long term performance of initially high performers. Table 5 shows that these teachers are even

more likely to remain consistent in terms of future performance than their initially low-

performing counterparts. The row percentages reported in Table 5 for the bottom 5, 10, 15, and

20 percent of initial performers correspond perfectly with the visual relationship depicted in

Figure 6; the table simply provides concrete numbers at specific thresholds and allows the reader

to look for one’s self at different ways of defining adequate future performance.

       Ultimately, policymakers will need to make their own decisions about what criteria are

used to characterize levels of teacher performance. We have explored quintiles, terciles and

top/bottom half of the distribution in this paper thus far. Another possibility is to compare a

novice teacher’s ongoing performance to that of an average first year teacher, as this represents

an individual that could serve as a feasible replacement. In fact, among the teachers in the bottom

5 percent of the initial math performance distribution, the vast majority—83.3 percent—do not

perform in their future third, fourth and fifth years as well as an average first year teacher in

math. The corresponding figure is 72.2 percent for ELA. In other words, had students who were

assigned to these initially lowest-performing teachers instead been assigned to an average new

teacher, they would have performed at much higher levels on their end-of-year tests.




                                                                                                    29
       More concretely, the average math value-added score of a third-year teacher who initially

performed in the bottom 5 percent in years one and two is about -0.15 standard deviation units.

The average first-year teacher, on the other hand, has a math value-added score of -0.03 standard

deviation units. The difference between the two is almost a full standard deviation in

effectiveness for teachers in our data. We therefore expect a large negative difference (around

0.11 standard deviations) in the potential outcomes for students assigned to these initially very

low-performing teachers as opposed to an average new teacher, even in the third year alone.

Further, an ineffective teacher retained for three additional years imposes three years of below-

average performance on students. The longer a teacher with low true impacts on students is

retained, the expected differential impact on students will be the sum of the difference between

an average new teacher and the less effective teacher across years of additional retention.

       The same logic can be applied to teachers at the high end of the teacher effectiveness

spectrum. The average math value-added score of a third-year teacher who initially performed in

the top 5 percent in years one and two is 0.24 standard deviation units. Imagine a scenario in

which a school system cannot manage to retain this high-performing teacher, and as a result the

students who would have been assigned to this teacher are instead assigned to her replacement—

an average first year teacher (who would typically have a mean math value-added score of -0.03

standard deviation units). The impacts for these students would be dramatic in magnitude.

       One final concern arose as we thought about the implications of any policy that attempts

to predict future performance based on imperfect information from the early career. We worried

that the value-added measures used to detect early performance might also identify teachers in

other systematic ways. For example, it might be possible that value-added scores tend to be

lower for teachers of certain demographic backgrounds and thus subgroups of teachers might be




                                                                                                    30
disproportionately identified by such a policy. In the case that being identified early as low-

performing increases the likelihood that a teacher exits the profession, it would be possible to see

a demographic shift in the composition of the teacher workforce toward less diversity.

         To explore this concern, we examine the racial/ethnic breakdown of teachers at different

points in the distribution of initial effectiveness (again, according to a teacher’s mean value-

added in the first two years). Table 6 follows the basic structure as the preceding table. We

examine characteristics of teachers who are in the extremes of the initial performance

distribution—that is, the top 5, 10, 15, and 20 percent (the initially highest performers), as well

as the bottom 5, 10, 15, and 20 percent. For example, we find that 38 of the 59 teachers who are

in the top 5 percent of the initial performance distribution for math are white, 9 are black, 5 are

Hispanic, and 7 are of another or unknown race. Table 6 also contains the corresponding row

percentages for these groups. Of course, the row percentages are not equal to one another—

indeed, there are simply far more white teachers in New York City than any other group. Instead,

we examine whether relative proportions vary across the initial performance distribution. We

find that these proportions are quite similar at the top and bottom of the distribution. White

teachers make up about 64.4 percent of the top five percent, 61.9 percent of the top 10 percent,

62.9 percent of the top 15 percent, and 66.7 percent of the top 20 percent. Proportions are again

similar for black, Hispanic, and teachers of other or unknown race/ethnicity. Importantly, this is

also the case among the lowest performing teachers—relative stability in the demographics of

teachers in the bottom 5, 10, 15, and 20 percent of the distribution. If anything, it appears that

white teachers are slightly less likely to be in the top quintile of performance than in the bottom

quintile.13 These findings suggest that a policy based on early career value-added scores would


13
  In a separate analysis (not shown), we conduct a similar analysis examining the racial breakdown by initial
performance, however we separate results across all five quintiles of the distribution of initial performance, rather


                                                                                                                  31
not also incidentally identify higher proportions of minority teachers, at least in the case of New

York City.



                                               Conclusions


       From a policy perspective, the ability to predict future performance is most useful for

inexperienced teachers because policies that focus on development (e.g. mentoring programs),

dismissal, and promotion are likely most relevant during this period. In this paper we describe

the trajectory of teachers’ performance over their first five years as measured by their value-

added to ELA and math test scores of students and how this trajectory varies across teachers. Our

goal is to assess the potential for predicting future performance (performance in years 3, 4, and

5) based on teachers’ performance in their first two years. We focus particularly on Type I and

Type II error where Type I error is falsely classifying teachers into a group to which they do not

belong (e.g. ineffective or excellent) and Type II error is failing to classify teachers into a group

to which they belong.

       We find that, on average, initial performance is quite predictive of future performance, far

more so than measured teacher characteristics such as their own test performance (e.g. SAT) or

education. On average the highest fifth of teachers remain the highest fifth of teachers; the

second fifth remains the second fifth; the third fifth remains the third fifth; and so on. Predictions

are particularly powerful at the extremes. Initially excellent teachers are far more likely to be




than simply the top/ bottom 5, 10, 15, and 20 percent. The findings are similar: There is no evidence that minority
teachers are more likely to appear in lower quintiles—there are only slight fluctuations in the racial/ demographic
breakdown of quintiles but for black and Hispanic teachers there is no clear pattern in those fluctuations. Again,
white teachers appear to be slightly more likely to be identified as initially low-performing rather than high-
performing, but the differences across quintiles are not large: 63.6, 62.4, 67.4, 67.0, and 76.0 percent of each
quintile—top to bottom respectively—are white. Results are available upon request.


                                                                                                                32
excellent teachers in the future than are teachers who were not as effective in their first few

years.

         This said, any predictions we make about teachers’ future performance are far from

perfect. The predicted future scores we estimated were, on average, about 0.14 standard

deviation units off from actual scores (RMSE), which represents a substantial range of possible

effectiveness. Certainly, when it comes to making policy based on imprecise measures of teacher

effectiveness, there is no avoiding that some mistakes will be made. Thinking about these errors

using the lens of Type I versus Type II errors emphasizes the fact that there are tradeoffs to be

made in practice. While most attention has been paid to the former—falsely identifying teachers

as ineffective when they ultimately are not—the latter represents the failure to identify and

address teaching that does not serve students well in terms of their academic outcomes. The

paper highlights the balance between these two kinds of error and also sheds light on how

complex it is to definitively know when these mistakes are made.




                                                                                                    33
                                         Tables

Table 1:
Analytic Sample Sizes by Cumulative Restrictions
                                                   MATH                   ELA
                                              # Tchrs   # Obs       # Tchrs     # Obs

    All Teachers Tied to Students in NYC       18,919      62,779   19,567      63,632

           Started Teaching in 2000- 2007      16,502      57,603   17,053      58,413
                     Modal Grade in First
                      Five Years is 4 or 5         5,099   23,633    5,099      23,613

       In HR Dataset for At Least 5 Years          3,734   20,641    3,731      20,649

       Has VA Score in At Least 1st Year           3,360   16,102    3,307      15,954

 Has at Least 2 VA Scores in Next 4 Years          2,333   14,232    2,298      14,080

        Has VA in At Least Years 1 thru 3          2,053   12,697    2,026      12,562

        Has VA in At Least Years 1 thru 5           966     7,548      972       7,597

        Has VA in At Least Years 1 thru 7           376     3,681      390       3,786

        Has VA in At Least Years 1 thru 9           145     1,626      148       1,650




                                                                                    34
Table 2:
Difference in Mean Value Added and Numbers of Final Analytic Sample Teachers in each
Quintile of Initial Performance, by Approach to Quintile Construction
                                                 Q1         Q2        Q3     Q4                                   Q5

Math Quintiles….

      … of All Teacher-Years (1)               n           224           207          194           219          122
                                            mean        -0.165        -0.049        0.015         0.092        0.222
    ... After Limiting to Teachers
                  in First Year (2)            n           171           171          198           212          214
                                            mean        -0.224        -0.100       -0.018         0.063        0.227
              … And Limiting to
          Elementary Teachers (3)              n           150           187          207           213          209
                                            mean        -0.235        -0.107       -0.018         0.065        0.230
     … And Limiting to Teachers
          with 5+ VA score (4)                 n           194           193          193           193          193
                                            mean        -0.214        -0.083       -0.002         0.077        0.239
ELA Quintiles…

      … of All Teacher-Years (1)               n           246           196          208           181          141
                                            mean        -0.156        -0.059        0.002         0.066        0.158
    ... After Limiting to Teachers
                  in First Year (2)            n           214           163          185           198          212
                                            mean        -0.206        -0.088       -0.022         0.046        0.180
              … And Limiting to
          Elementary Teachers (3)              n           185           176          201           208          202
                                            mean        -0.217        -0.098       -0.025         0.048        0.185
     … And Limiting to Teachers
          with 5+ VA score (4)                 n           195           194          195           194          194
                                            mean        -0.213        -0.090       -0.016         0.054        0.188
Note: We construct quintiles of performance in a teacher's first two years. The final analytic sample of teachers is
restricted to the teachers who taught primarily fourth or fifth grade and for whom we observe at least five
consecutive years of VA scores, beginning in the teacher's first year of teaching. Note that method (3) above is the
preferred approach for this paper.




                                                                                                                   35
Table 3:
Adjusted R-Squared Values for Regressions Predicting Future (Years 3, 4, and 5) VA Scores
as a Function of Sets of Value-Added Scores from the First Two Years
                                                                   Outcome
  Early Career VA Predictor(s)             VA in Y3     VA in Y4     VA in Y5      Mean(VAY3-5)
Math
  Math VA in Y1 Only                          0.079       0.052        0.077           0.111
  Math VA in Y2 Only                          0.153       0.149        0.117           0.223
  Math VA in Y1 & Y2                          0.176       0.158        0.146           0.256
  VA in Both Subjects in Y1 & Y2              0.176       0.171        0.147           0.262
  VA in Both Subjects in Y1 & Y2
  (cubic)                                     0.178       0.171        0.146           0.261
ELA
  ELA VA in Y1 Only                           0.025       0.019        0.016           0.040
  ELA VA in Y2 Only                           0.058       0.080        0.042           0.117
  ELA VA in Y1 & Y2                           0.068       0.084        0.048           0.131
  VA in Both Subjects in Y1 & Y2              0.085       0.102        0.058           0.161
  VA in Both Subjects in Y1 & Y2
  (cubic)                                     0.090       0.113        0.061           0.168




                                                                                            36
Table 4:
Quintile Transition Matrix from Initial Performance to Future Performance, By Subject
(Number, Row Percentage, Column Percentage)

                                         Quintile of Future Math Performance
Math Initial Quintile          Q1         Q2          Q3        Q4        Q5            Row
       Q1              n       47         47          26        25          7            152
                (row %)     (30.9)     (30.9)     (17.1)     (16.4)     (4.6)
                 (col %)    (39.8)     (24.7)     (11.2)     (10.6)     (3.6)
       Q2              n       28         47          60        33        16            184
                (row %)     (15.2)     (25.5)     (32.6)     (17.9)     (8.7)
                 (col %)    (23.7)     (24.7)     (25.8)     (14.0)     (8.2)
       Q3              n       24         47          44        59        34            208
                (row %)     (11.5)     (22.6)     (21.2)     (28.4)    (16.3)
                 (col %)    (20.3)     (24.7)     (18.9)     (25.0)    (17.3)
       Q4              n       14         32          58        64        46            214
                (row %)      (6.5)     (15.0)     (27.1)     (29.9)    (21.5)
                 (col %)    (11.9)     (16.8)     (24.9)     (27.1)    (23.5)
       Q5              n         5        17          45        55        93            215
                (row %)      (2.3)      (7.9)     (20.9)     (25.6)    (43.3)
                 (col %)     (4.2)      (8.9)     (19.3)     (23.3)    (47.4)
          Column Total        118        190         233       236       196            973
                                         Quintile of Future ELA Performance
ELA Initial Quintile           Q1         Q2          Q3        Q4        Q5            Row
       Q1           n          49         51         44         26         16           186
             (row %)        (26.3)     (27.4)     (23.7)     (14.0)      (8.6)
              (col %)       (39.2)     (25.1)     (19.0)     (11.0)      (8.6)
       Q2           n          31         40         45         40         22           178
             (row %)        (17.4)     (22.5)     (25.3)     (22.5)     (12.4)
              (col %)       (24.8)     (19.7)     (19.5)     (16.9)     (11.9)
       Q3           n          19         52         44         58         31           204
             (row %)         (9.3)     (25.5)     (21.6)     (28.4)     (15.2)
              (col %)       (15.2)     (25.6)     (19.0)     (24.5)     (16.8)
       Q4           n          13         41         48         59         47           208
             (row %)         (6.3)     (19.7)     (23.1)     (28.4)     (22.6)
              (col %)       (10.4)     (20.2)     (20.8)     (24.9)     (25.4)
       Q5           n          13         19         50         54         69           205
             (row %)         (6.3)      (9.3)     (24.4)     (26.3)     (33.7)
              (col %)       (10.4)      (9.4)     (21.6)     (22.8)     (37.3)
         Column Total         125        203        231        237        185           981




                                                                                          37
Table 5:
Movements of Initially Highest- and Lowest- Performing Teachers to Groups of Future of
Performance (by Thirds, and by Top and Bottom Half)
                   Initial
             Percentage        Bottom        Middle            Top        Bottom           Top
               Identified        Third        Third          Third            Half        Half
MATH           top    5%              1             5            53               2          57
               top    5%         (1.69)        (8.47)       (89.83)          (3.39)     (96.61)
               top 10%                7            22            89              17        101
               top 10%           (5.93)      (18.64)        (75.42)        (14.41)      (85.59)
               top 15%               12            37          121               27        143
               top 15%           (7.06)      (21.76)        (71.18)        (15.88)      (84.12)
               top 20%               16            64          148               42        188
               top 20%           (7.02)      (28.07)        (64.91)        (18.42)      (82.46)
           bottom     5%             18             4             2              20           4
           bottom     5%        (75.00)      (16.67)         (8.33)        (83.33)      (16.67)
           bottom 10%                47            18            10              56          19
           bottom 10%           (62.67)      (24.00)        (13.33)        (74.67)      (25.33)
           bottom 15%                68            29            16              86          27
           bottom 15%           (60.18)      (25.66)        (14.16)        (76.11)      (23.89)
           bottom 20%                83            44            25            114           39
           bottom 20%           (54.61)      (28.95)        (16.45)        (75.00)      (25.66)
ELA            top    5%              6            15            44              10          55
               top    5%         (9.23)      (23.08)        (67.69)        (15.38)      (84.62)
               top 10%               12            39            63              24          91
               top 10%          (10.53)      (34.21)        (55.26)        (21.05)      (79.82)
               top 15%               20            56            89              35        132
               top 15%          (12.12)      (33.94)        (53.94)        (21.21)      (80.00)
               top 20%               26            78          111               50        167
               top 20%          (12.09)      (36.28)        (51.63)        (23.26)      (77.67)
           bottom     5%             19            13             4              29           7
           bottom     5%        (52.78)      (36.11)        (11.11)        (80.56)      (19.44)
           bottom 10%                37            29            20              58          28
           bottom 10%           (43.02)      (33.72)        (23.26)        (67.44)      (32.56)
           bottom 15%                64            44            29              95          42
           bottom 15%           (46.72)      (32.12)        (21.17)        (69.34)      (30.66)
           bottom 20%                85            63            38            126           60
           bottom 20%           (45.70)      (33.87)        (20.43)        (67.74)      (32.26)
Table reports the number of teachers in each cell, along with corresponding row percentages
(below each number, in parentheses). Note that the first three column percentages correspond to
the bottom, middle, and top third of the distribution of future performance (as measured by the
teacher’s mean value-added score in years 3 through 5), and these three percentages sum to 100
percent. The final two columns break the distribution of future performance into to bottom and
top half only, and they also sum to 100 percent.



                                                                                            38
Table 6:
Teacher Demographics (Count & Row Percentage), by Groups of Initially Highest- and Lowest-
Performing Teachers and Subject
                     Initial
                Percentage
                  Identified     White      Black     Hispanic          Other Row Total
MATH            top      5%          38           9            5             7          59
                top      5%     (64.41)    (15.25)       (8.47)        (11.86)       59.00
                top    10%           73         19           13             13         118
                top    10%      (61.86)    (16.10)      (11.02)        (11.02)      118.00
                top    15%         107          29           19             15         170
                top    15%      (62.94)    (17.06)      (11.18)         (8.82)      170.00
                top    20%         152          35           23             18         228
                top    20%      (66.67)    (15.35)      (10.09)         (7.89)      228.00
            bottom       5%          16           3            3             2          24
            bottom       5%     (66.67)    (12.50)      (12.50)         (8.33)       24.00
            bottom     10%           56           7            8             4          75
            bottom     10%      (74.67)     (9.33)      (10.67)         (5.33)       75.00
            bottom     15%           83         13           11              6         113
            bottom     15%      (73.45)    (11.50)       (9.73)         (5.31)      113.00
            bottom     20%         109          22           13              8         152
            bottom     20%      (71.71)    (14.47)       (8.55)         (5.26)      152.00
ELA             top      5%          48           6            4             7          65
                top      5%     (73.85)     (9.23)       (6.15)        (10.77)       65.00
                top    10%           77         18           10              9         114
                top    10%      (67.54)    (15.79)       (8.77)         (7.89)      114.00
                top    15%         108          27           14             16         165
                top    15%      (65.45)    (16.36)       (8.48)         (9.70)      165.00
                top    20%         143          34           21             17         215
                top    20%      (66.51)    (15.81)       (9.77)         (7.91)      215.00
            bottom       5%          23           7            3             3          36
            bottom       5%     (63.89)    (19.44)       (8.33)         (8.33)       36.00
            bottom     10%           57         13             9             7          86
            bottom     10%      (66.28)    (15.12)      (10.47)         (8.14)       86.00
            bottom     15%           85         27           14             11         137
            bottom     15%      (62.04)    (19.71)      (10.22)         (8.03)      137.00
            bottom     20%         120          34           17             15         186
            bottom     20%      (64.52)    (18.28)       (9.14)         (8.06)      186.00




                                                                                       39
                                                                                                       Figures


Figure 1:
Student Achievement Returns to Teacher Early Career Experience, Preliminary Results from Current
Study (Bold) and Various Other Studies

                                                               Student Achievement Returns to Experience
                                                                 in Early Career, Across Various Studies
                                                                                ELA                                                                                                           Math
                                                      .2                                                                                                          .2
     Student Achievement Increases with Experience




                                                                                                                 Student Achievement Increases with Experience
                                                     .15                                                                                                         .15




                                                      .1                                                                                                          .1




                                                     .05                                                                                                         .05




                                                      0                                                                                                           0
                                                           0     1        2       3        4       5      6                                                            0       1        2       3        4       5       6
                                                                     Teachers' Years of Experience                                                                                 Teachers' Years of Experience

                                                           Current          C,L,V 2007        P,K 2011                                                             Current             C,L,V 2007       P,K 2011
                                                           H,S 2007         R,H,K 2005        R(1) 2004                                                            H,S 2007            R,H,K 2005       R(3) 2004
                                                           R(2) 2004        O 2009                                                                                 R(4) 2004           O 2009           B,L,L,R,W 2008



Results are not directly comparable due to differences in grade level, population, and model specification,
however Figure 1 is intended to provide some context for estimated returns to experience across studies for our
preliminary results. Current= Results for grade 4 & 5teachers who began in 2000+ with at least 9 years of
experience. For more on model, see Technical Appendix. C,L V 2007= = Clotfelter, Ladd, Vigdor (2007;
Rivkin, Hanushek, & Kain, 2005), Table 1, Col. 1 & 3; P, K, 2011 = Papay & Kraft (2011), Figure 4 Two-Stage
Model; H, S 2007 = Harris & Sass (2011), Table 3 Col 1, 4 (Table 2); R, H, K, 2005= Rivkin, Hanushek, Kain
(2005), Table 7, Col. 4; R(A-D) 2004 = Rockoff (2004), Figure 1 & 2, (A= Vocab, B= Reading Comprehension,
C= Math Computation, D= Math Concepts); O 2009 = Ost (2009), Figures 4 & 5 General Experience;
B,L,L,R,W 2008 = Boyd, Lankford, Loeb, Rockoff, Wyckoff (2008).




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             40
Figure 2:
Variance across Teachers in Quality (VA) over Experience, by Subject and Attrition Group.

                                Value-Added Score Trajectories for 50 Randomly Sampled Teachers
                                                 (Sample: Elementary Teachers Observed with 5+ VA Scores in First Five Years)

                                                                Math                                                                           ELA


                                      .75                                                                                 .75
    Observed Math Value-Added Score




                                                                                         Observed ELA Value-Added Score
                                        .5                                                                                  .5




                                      .25                                                                                 .25




                                        0                                                                                   0




                                      -.25                                                                                -.25




                                       -.5                                                                                 -.5




                                      -.75                                                                                -.75


                                             0         1            2          3   4                                             0   1            2          3   4
                                                           Years of Experience                                                           Years of Experience




Supplement to Figure 2.
Standard Deviation of Estimated Value Added Scores, by Levels of Experience in Figure 2
(Across All Teachers in the Sample, versus 100 Teachers Randomly Sampled for the Figure)
                               Math                                            ELA
                E= 0      E=1    E=2     E=3     E=4           E= 0    E=1      E=2     E=3                                                                       E=4
Full Sample    0.192 0.207 0.213 0.224 0.220                  0.177 0.184 0.190 0.193                                                                            0.196
100 Teachers 0.209 0.229 0.226 0.238 0.241                    0.177 0.188 0.195 0.202                                                                            0.205




                                                                                                                                                                     41
Figure 3:
Mean VA Scores, by Subject (Math or ELA), Quintile of Initial Performance, and Years of
Experience for Elementary School Teachers with VA Scores in at Least First Five Years of
Teaching.

                                             Math                                                                    ELA
                      .4                                                                      .4


                    .35                                                                     .35

                      .3         215                                                          .3

                    .25                                                                     .25
                                                                                                         205
                      .2
                           215                  215                                           .2
                                       215            215                                          205
                                                                5th Q                                                                   5th Q
    Mean VA Score




                                                                            Mean VA Score
                    .15
                                                                                            .15

                      .1         214
                                                                4th Q                                                   205
                                                                                                                                        4th Q
                                                214   214                                     .1
                                       214                      3rd Q                                    208   205            205       3rd Q
                           214                        208
                    .05                208      208                                                                     208   208
                                                                                            .05    208
                                 208            184             2nd Q                                          208
                                                                                                               204                      2nd Q
                      0                184            184                                                               204   204
                                                                                                                              178
                           208                                  1st Q                         0          204            178             1st Q
                                                152                                                204         178
                    -.05                                                                                                186
                                 184   152            152                                   -.05               186            186
                     -.1                                                                                 178
                           184                                                               -.1   178
                    -.15
                                                                                            -.15
                                 152
                                                                                                         186
                           152                                                                     186


                           0     1     2       3      4     5           6                          0     1     2       3      4     5           6
                                           Experience                                                              Experience

  Experience Required= (observed at least 1st 05 years with VA)
  Quintiles Of Mean of First 2 Years




                                                                                                                                          42
Figure 4:
Predicted Future Value-Added Scores (Mean of Years, 3,4, and 5) based on Observed Valued-
Added Scores in Years 1 and 2, by Actual Future Value-Added Scores, with 80% Confidence
Intervals Around Individual Predictions.

                                                      Predicted vs. Observed Math Future Performance
                                        (Predict Mean of Math VA in 3rd, 4th, 5th Year with VA in Both Subjects in Y1 & Y2 (cubic)
                                         1
   Predicted Future Math Score, yhat




                                       .75


                                         .5


                                       .25


                                         0


                                       -.25                                                              80% CI for Forecast of Y
                                                                                                         Predicted
                                                                                                         Actual
                                        -.5
                                               -.2             0               .2              .4                .6                 .8
                                                           Actual Future VA (Mean of Math VA in 3rd, 4th, 5th Year)



                                                      Predicted vs. Observed ELA Future Performance
                                        (Predict Mean of ELA VA in 3rd, 4th, 5th Year with VA in Both Subjects in Y1 & Y2 (cubic)
                                         1
   Predicted Future ELA Score, yhat




                                       .75


                                         .5


                                       .25


                                         0


                                       -.25                                                              80% CI for Forecast of Y
                                                                                                         Predicted
                                                                                                         Actual
                                        -.5
                                               -.2             0               .2              .4               .6                  .8
                                                           Actual Future VA (Mean of ELA VA in 3rd, 4th, 5th Year)



                                                                                                                                     43
Figure 5:
Distribution of Future Value-Added Scores, by Initial Quintile of Performance

                    Math Mean VA Score in Years 3, 4, & 5, by Initial Quintiles
    4                                         Experience Required= (observed at least 1st 05 years with VA)
                                                                        Quintiles Of Mean of First 2 Years


                                                                                               Initial
    3
                                                                                              Quintiles
                                                                                                Q1 (152)
                                                                                                Q1 Mean
                                                                                                Q2 (184)
    2                                                                                           Q2 Mean
                                                                                                Q3 (208)
                                                                                                Q3 Mean
                                                                                                Q4 (214)
                                                                                                Q4 Mean
    1                                                                                           Q5 (215)
                                                                                                Q5 Mean



    0


        -.5                               0                                 .5                             1
                                              Math Future Effectiveness
                                    (Mean VA Score in Years 3, 4, & 5 of Experience)




                    ELA Mean VA Score in Years 3, 4, & 5, by Initial Quintiles
    4                                         Experience Required= (observed at least 1st 05 years with VA)
                                                                        Quintiles Of Mean of First 2 Years


                                                                                               Initial
    3
                                                                                              Quintiles
                                                                                                Q1 (186)
                                                                                                Q1 Mean
                                                                                                Q2 (178)
    2                                                                                           Q2 Mean
                                                                                                Q3 (204)
                                                                                                Q3 Mean
                                                                                                Q4 (208)
                                                                                                Q4 Mean
    1                                                                                           Q5 (205)
                                                                                                Q5 Mean



    0


              -.4             -.2              0                   .2                .4            .6
                                              ELA Future Effectiveness
                                    (Mean VA Score in Years 3, 4, & 5 of Experience)




                                                                                                               44
Figure 6:
                                                         Math: Depiction of Type I & Type II Errors
                                        Teachers Predicted to be Low-Performing                                                              Teachers NOT Predicted to be Low-Performing
                                  100                                                                                                      100
                                   95            Terciles of Future Performance                                                             95             Terciles of Future Performance
                                   90                     Q1 (lo)    Q2      Q3 (hi)                                                        90                       Q1 (lo)    Q2      Q3 (hi)
                                   85                                                                                                       85
                                   80                                                                                                       80




                                                                                                      Percent of NOT Identified Teachers
                                   75                                                                                                       75
 Percent of Identified Teachers




                                   70                                                                                                       70
                                   65                                                                                                       65
                                   60                                                                                                       60
                                   55                                                                                                       55
                                   50                                                                                                       50
                                   45                                                                                                       45
                                   40                                                                                                       40
                                   35                                                                                                       35
                                   30                                                                                                       30
                                   25                                                                                                       25
                                   20                                                                                                       20
                                   15                                                                                                       15
                                   10                                                                                                       10
                                    5
                                                                    Type I Error                                                             5
                                                                                                                                                                                    Type II Error
                                    0                                                                                                        0

                                          5    10     15     20     25       30    35   40                                                        95     90     85     80     75      70    65      60
                                               Bottom X% of Teachers Identified as                                                               Corresponding Top X% of Teachers NOT Identified as
                                                Low-Performing Based on Initial VA                                                                      Low- Performing Based on Initial VA



                                                         ELA: Depiction of Type I & Type II Errors
                                        Teachers Predicted to be Low-Performing                                                             Teachers NOT Predicted to be Low-Performing
                                  100                                                                                             100
                                   95            Terciles of Future Performance                                                            95              Terciles of Future Performance
                                   90                     Q1 (lo)    Q2     Q3 (hi)                                                        90                       Q1 (lo)    Q2      Q3 (hi)
                                   85                                                                                                      85
                                   80                                                                                                      80
                                                                                             Percent of NOT Identified Teachers




                                   75                                                                                                      75
 Percent of Identified Teachers




                                   70                                                                                                      70
                                   65                                                                                                      65
                                   60                                                                                                      60
                                   55                                                                                                      55
                                   50                                                                                                      50
                                   45                                                                                                      45
                                   40                                                                                                      40
                                   35                                                                                                      35
                                   30                                                                                                      30
                                   25                                                                                                      25
                                   20                                                                                                      20
                                   15                                                                                                      15
                                   10                                                                                                      10
                                    5                       Type I Error                                                                    5                                  Type II Error
                                    0                                                                                                       0

                                          5    10     15     20     25       30    35   40                                                        95     90     85     80     75      70    65      60
                                               Bottom X% of Teachers Identified as                                                               Corresponding Top X% of Teachers NOT Identified as
                                                Low-Performing Based on Initial VA                                                                      Low- Performing Based on Initial VA




                                                                                                                                                                                                     45
                                          Appendix A

       The most straightforward approach to making quintiles would be to simply break the full

distribution of teacher-by-year fixed effects into five groups of equal size. However, we know

that value-added scores for first year teachers are, on average, lower than value-added scores for

teachers with more experience. For the purposes of illustration, imagine that first year teacher

effects comprise the entire bottom quintile of the full distribution. In this case, we would observe

no variability in first year performance—that is, all teachers would be characterized as “bottom

quintile” teachers, thus eliminating any variability in initial performance that could be used to

predict future performance. We thus chose to center a teacher’s first year value-added score

around the mean value-added for first year teachers and then created quintiles of these centered

scores. By doing so, quintiles captured whether a given teacher was relatively more or less

effective than the average first year teacher, rather than the average teacher in the district.

       In order to trace the development of teachers’ effectiveness over their early career, we

limited the analytic sample to teachers with a complete set of value-added scores in the first five

years. As is evident from Table 1 above, relatively few teachers meet this restrictive inclusion

criterion. We hesitated to first restrict the sample and then make quintiles solely within this small

subset, because we observed that teachers with a more complete value-added history tended to

have higher initial effectiveness. In other words, a “bottom quintile” first year teacher in the

distribution of teachers with at least five consecutive years of value-added might not be

comparable to the “bottom quintile” among all first years teachers for whom we might wish to

make predictions. For this reason, we made quintiles relative to the sample of all teachers

regardless of the number of value-added scores they possessed, and subsequently limited the

sample to those with at least five years of value-added. As a result of this choice, we observe



                                                                                                    46
slightly more top quintile teachers than bottom quintile teachers in the initial year. However by

making quintiles before limiting the sample, we preserve the absolute thresholds for those

quintiles and thus ensure that they are consistent with the complete distribution of new teachers.

In addition, it is simply not feasible for any districts to make quintiles in the first year or two

depending on how many value-added scores will have in the first five years.

        Finally, our ultimate goal is to use value-added information from the early career to

produce the most accurate predictions of future performance possible. Given the imprecision of

any one year of value-added scores, we average a teacher’s value-added scores in years one and

two and make quintiles thereof. We present some specification checks by examining our main

results using value-added from the first two years in a variety of ways (e.g., first year only,

second year only, a weighted average of the first two years, teachers who were consistently in the

same quintile in both years). In Table 2, we present the number of teachers and mean of value-

added scores in each of five quintiles of initial performance, based on these various methods for

constructing quintiles. One can see that the distribution of the teachers in the analytic sample

(fourth and fifth grade teachers with value-added scores in first five years) depends on quintile

construction.


                                          Appendix B


        In Figure 3 of the paper, we present mean value-added scores over the first five years of

experience, by initial performance quintile. Here we recreate these results across three

dimensions: (A) minimum value-added required for inclusion in the sample, (B) how we defined

initial quintiles, and (3) specification of the value-added models used to estimate teacher effects:

        (A) We examine results across two teacher samples based on minimum value-added

required for inclusion. The first figure uses the analytic sample used throughout the main

                                                                                                      47
paper—teachers with value-added scores in at least all of their first five years. The second

widens the analytic sample to the set of teachers who are consistently present in the dataset for at

least five years, but only possess value-added scores in their 1st , and 2 of the next 4 years.

       (B) We examine results across four possible ways of defining quintiles: (1) "Quintile of

First Year"—this is quintiles of teachers' value-added scores in their first year alone; (2)

"Quintile of the Mean of the First Two Years"—this is quintiles of teacher's mean value-added

scores in the first two years and is the approach we use throughout the paper; (3) "Quintile

Consistent in First Two Years"—here we group teachers who were consistently in the same

quintiles in first and second year (i.e., top quintile both years); and (4) "Quintile of the Mean of

Y1, Y2, & Y2"—the quintiles of teacher's mean value added score in first and second year,

double-weighting the second year.

       (C) Finally, we examine results using two alternative value-added models to the one used

in the paper. "VA Model B" uses a gain score approach rather than the lagged achievement

approach used in the paper. "VA Model D" differs from the main value-added model described

in the paper in that it uses student-fixed effects in place of time-invariant student covariates such

as race/ ethnicity, gender, etc. See next page for results.




                                                                                                  48
                             Elem Teachers with VAM in All of First Five Years
                                      Quintile Among All 1st-Yr Tchrs                                                                                                          Quintile Of Mean of First 2 Years
                 .4
                                     Math                                             .4
                                                                                                          ELA                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                       183
                                                                                                                                                                              Math                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ELA
                .35                                                                  .35                                                                  .35                                                                  .35
                       185
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            165

                 .3                                                                   .3    168                                                            .3                                                                   .3
                                                                                                                                                                 183                        183
                                                                                                                                                                                   183
                             185                                                                                                                                                                         183
                .25                               185                                .25                                                                  .25          192
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .25          176
                                         185                                                                                                                                                                                          165                        165
                                                                                            177                                                                                             173
                                                               185
                                                                                                                                                                       173
                       207
                 .2                                                                   .2                                                                   .2                      173
                                                                                                                                                                                            192
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2                      165                   165
                                                  188                                                                  168
                       188   188                               188                                                                                               192               192                   173                          176                        176
                             207         188      207                                                                                                            173
                                                                                                  168                                                                                                                                       176
                             173         173
                                         207      173                                                         168
                                                                                                                                    168                                                                  192                                            176                   176
                .15                                                                  .15                                                                  .15                                                                  .15
Mean VA Score




                                                                     Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                          Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean VA Score
                                                                                            194                        177                                             181         180      181
                                                               173                                                                                                     180                  180                                                                  176          176
                                                               207                                                                                                                 181                   180                          176   170
                                                  164
                                                  132                                             177                  173
                                                                                                                       194          173                                                     163                                                         176
                             180         180      180          180                                194         177                   177
                                                                                                                                    194                                                                  181                                                     170
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 183
                       180               164                                                      173                                                                                                                                                   183
                                                  154                                       189               194      189          189                          181               163
                                         157      157          164                                            173
                                                                                                              189                                                                  171      171          163
                 .1          157                                                      .1                                                                   .1          171                               171                    .1    170               170
                                                  144          157
                                                               154                                189                                                                                                                                       183                               170
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              183
                             164                                                                  173                  173          156                          180
                                         154                                                                  164
                                                                                                              173      156
                                                                                                                       164          164
                                                                                                                                    173                                                     163                                                                  171          171
                       173   154                               132                                            156                                                                           143                                             171         171
                                         132                                                                                                                                                             163                                                                  166
                                                               144                                                                                               171               163      135
                                         144                                                      156                                                                                                                                                   177
                       157   132                                                                  164         160      160
                                                                                                                       164                                                                               135                          183                        166          165
                             144                                                                  164         164                                                      163                                                                              166      177          177
                .05                                                                  .05    173
                                                                                            173
                                                                                                  160                               160
                                                                                                                                    164                   .05          163
                                                                                                                                                                                   135
                                                                                                                                                                                   143                   143
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .05    171               169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        165      165
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 169
                                                                                                                                                                 163                                                                        177
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            166
                       154                                                                                                                                       163
                  0                                                                    0                                                                    0                                                                    0    177
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      166
                       164
                                                                                            156                                                                        135

                                                                                            164
                -.05                                                                 -.05                                                                 -.05   135
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.05         165
                                                                                                                                                                       143
                       144                                                                                                                                                                                                                  169

                 -.1                                                                  -.1                                                                  -.1                                                                  -.1   165
                                                                                                                                                                 143


                -.15
                                   VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                            164         VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      169         VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q
                       132
                                   VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q
                 -.2
                                   VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                            160         VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q
                                   VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q
                -.25
                                   VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                        VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q

                       0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2         3            4
                                    Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience



                                   Quintile Consistent in First Two Years                                                                                                       Quintile Of Mean of Y1, Y2, Y2
                             78
                                                                                                                                                                       190


                 .4                  Math                                             .4
                                                                                                  59
                                                                                                          ELA                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                              Math                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ELA
                                                                                                                                                          .35                                                                  .35          173

                .35    78                                                            .35

                                                  78                                        59                                                             .3                                                                   .3
                                         78                                                                                                                                                 190
                 .3                                                                   .3          53
                                                               78                                                                                                                  190                                                      171
                                                                                                                                                                                                         190
                                                                                                                       59                                        190
                             93                                                                                                                           .25          206                                                     .25
                .25                                                                  .25                                                                                                                                                                         173
                                                                                            53                59
                             40                                                                                                                                        220
                                                  40
                                                                                                                       53
                                                                                                                                    59                     .2                               220
                                                                                                                                                                                            206
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2    173
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              173
                       93                                                                                                                                                          220                                                                  173
                 .2                      93
                                         40
                                                  93                                  .2                      53                                                                   206                                                      187
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 171
                                                                                                                                                                                                         220
                       40                                      40                                 42                   43
                                                                                                                                                                 206                                     206                                            171                   171
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      171
                                                                                                                                                          .15                                                                  .15
Mean VA Score




                                                                     Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                          Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean VA Score
                                                               93                                                                                                                                                                                                187
                                                                                                                                                                 220   210                                                                  199
                .15                      39                    39                    .15                      43                    53                                                      210                                                         187
                             46                   41                                                                                                                               177
                                                                                                                                                                                   210      177          177
                                                                                            42    41                                42                                                      147          210                                                     199
                                         41                    46                                                      42                                                                                                                                                     187
                                         46                                                                            41                                              177                                                                                       212
                             39                   27                                                          42                                                                   147                                                187
                       46                         46                                        41                                                                                                                                                          212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        199
                                                                                                              41                                           .1    210               169
                                                                                                                                                                                            169
                                                                                                                                                                                            152          169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1                                            199
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              212
                                                                                                                                                                                                         147
                 .1                      34
                                                  39
                                                               41
                                                               34                     .1                               32           41
                                                                                                                                    43
                                                                                                                                                                       169                                                            199   212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        194
                       39    34                                27                                 43          41                    32                           177               152                                                                                        194
                                                  34                                                                                                                                                     152                                194                  194          172
                                                                                                              32       41
                                                                                                  41                   31                                        169                                                                                             194          194
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              101
                                                                                                                                    41                                                      108                                                         194
                       34                27       34
                                                                                                                                    31                    .05                               105          105                   .05    212               172      172
                .05                                                                  .05    43                31                                                                                                                      194
                                                                                            41                                                                                     108
                                                                                                                                                                                   105                                                                  115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        101      101          115
                                                  38                                                                                                             152                                     108
                             27                                                                                                     37                                 152                                                                                       115
                             41                                38                                                                                                      147
                                                                                                              40       37
                                         38                                                                                         40
                       27
                                         34                    34                                 32                   40                                   0    147                                                             0    194   194
                  0                                                                    0          31          37                                                                                                                            172
                       41                                                                                                                                                                                                             172
                                                                                            32
                                                                                                                                                                 105
                                                                                                                                                          -.05         105                                                     -.05
                -.05                                                                 -.05   31

                             38                                                                                                                                                                                                       101
                                                                                                                                                                 108

                 -.1
                       38
                                                                                      -.1                                                                  -.1                                                                  -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      115   101
                                                                                                  37                                                                   108

                                   VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                                37          VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15         115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q
                -.15                                                                 -.15
                             34    VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                      40
                                                                                                        VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q
                 -.2
                       34          VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                            40
                                                                                                        VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q
                                   VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q
                -.25
                                   VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                        VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q

                       0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2         3            4
                                    Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    49
                       Elem Teachers with VAM in 1st, and 2 of Next 4 Years
                                      Quintile Among All 1st-Yr Tchrs                                                                                                          Quintile Of Mean of First 2 Years
                 .4
                                     Math                                             .4
                                                                                                          ELA                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                       484    Math                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ELA
                .35                                                                  .35                                                                  .35                                                                  .35
                       557


                                                                                            565                                                                                                                                             489
                 .3                                                                   .3                                                                   .3    484                                                            .3
                                                                                                                                                                                            303
                                                                                                                                                                                   455

                                                                                                                                                                                                         216
                .25          522                  350                                .25                                                                  .25                                                                  .25    489
                                         511                                                                                                                           488                                                                  491
                                                                                            551
                       576                                     248
                                                                                                                                                                       506                                                                                       313
                 .2                                                                   .2                                                                   .2    488
                                                                                                                                                                                   476      308                                 .2                      458
                                         500                                                                                                                                                                                          491
                                                  338                                                                                                                              461      309                                                                               196
                       535
                             512                               245                                                                                               506                                     213
                             543                                                                                       374                                                                                                                  468                  316
                                         533      370                                                         518                                                                                        225
                .15                      473                                         .15          534                                                     .15                                                                  .15
Mean VA Score




                                                                     Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                          Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean VA Score
                             481                  326                                       509                                     229                                501         442      299                                                         459                   208
                                                                                                                                                                                                         223                          468                        298
                                                               233
                                                               273                                                     365                                                                  315                                             465
                                                                                                  482                  311                                             474         462
                                         483      322          233                                518         470
                                                                                                              507                                                                                                                                       438                   213
                       524   503                  327                                       527                        348          245                                            431                   226                                                     320
                                         439                                                                                        223
                                                                                                                                    250                          501                                                                                             297
                                                  312                                                                                                                              437      302                                       465
                 .1          463
                                         461      316
                                                  297
                                                               226                    .1          473
                                                                                                  504
                                                                                                              459
                                                                                                              485      311
                                                                                                                       351          243                    .1    474   468
                                                                                                                                                                                            292          210
                                                                                                                                                                                                         193                    .1                      455
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        436
                             446                               222                                                                                                                          300                                             487                  299
                                                               211                                                                  215                                                                                                                                       220
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              209
                       511               431                   182                                465         457                                                                  437                                                                  441                   207
                                                  308                                                         461      307
                                                                                                                       304          226
                                                                                                                                    226                          468                                     188                                471         454
                             439                               195                                            441                                                                                                                                       440                   204
                       497               424
                                         409                                                                           315
                                                                                                                       324                                                                                                            487                                     202
                                                                                                  462
                                                                                                  450         448                                                                           283                                       471                        296
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 310
                                                                                                              430                   218
                                                                                                                                    219                                                     287          179
                .05                                                                  .05    492
                                                                                            484   442                                                     .05          460
                                                                                                                                                                       460         425                                         .05                               298          216
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              209
                             429                                                                                                                                                                         183
                                                                                                  428                                                                                                                                                   435      293
                             416                                                                                                                                                                                                            482         434
                                                                                                                                                                 460               418                                                      466
                       469                                                                                                                                       460
                  0                                                                    0                                                                    0                                                                    0    482
                       477                                                                                                                                                                                                            466
                                                                                            481
                                                                                                                                                                       460
                                                                                            493
                -.05                                                                 -.05                                                                 -.05   460                                                           -.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            470
                       459                                                                                                                                             453                                                            470
                 -.1                                                                  -.1                                                                  -.1                                                                  -.1         469
                                                                                                                                                                 453
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      469

                -.15
                                   VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                            484
                                                                                                        VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q
                       445         VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q
                 -.2
                                   VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                            468         VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q
                                   VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q
                -.25
                                   VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                        VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q

                       0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2         3            4
                                    Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience



                                   Quintile Consistent in First Two Years                                                                                                       Quintile Of Mean of Y1, Y2, Y2
                             211



                 .4                  Math                                             .4                  ELA                                              .4          500

                                                                                                                                                                              Math                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ELA
                                                                                                                                                          .35                                                                  .35
                       211                                                                        171
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            506
                .35                                                                  .35

                                         199      128                                                                                                      .3                                                                   .3
                                                                                            171
                 .3                                                                   .3                                                                         533
                                                                                                                                                                                   494      349
                                                                                                  161                                                                                                                                       482
                             226                               91                                                                                                                                        244
                                                                                                                                                          .25          525                                                     .25
                .25                                                                  .25
                                                                                            161                                                                                                                                       536
                       226                                                                                             108                                             587
                             137                                                                              159
                                         130      74
                                                                                                                                                           .2                                                                   .2                               346
                                                                                                                                    68                                             568      375                                                         496                   222
                 .2                      215
                                                  145                                 .2                                                                                           516
                                                                                                                                                                                            359
                                                                                                                                                                 554                                                                        498
                                                                                                  103                  102                                                                               284                          514
                       137                                                                                    148                                                                                        258                                                     336
                                                                                                                                                          .15    608                                                           .15
Mean VA Score




                                                                     Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                          Mean VA Score




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mean VA Score
                                                               108
                                                               53                                                                                                                                                                                                             220
                                                                                                                       69                                              558         493                                                      525         476      348
                .15          143                                                     .15                                                                                                    343
                                                               52                           103   109                  69                                                          526                                                                  489
                                                                                                                                    67                                                      368          235
                                         103                   60                                             100                   48                                                                   278                          525                        351
                                         133                                                                           73
                       143   108                                                            109                                                                  577   511                  320                                                                               246
                                         107      83
                                                  58                                                          103                                          .1                      494
                                                                                                                                                                                   435
                                                                                                                                                                                            339          212
                                                                                                                                                                                                         229
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1                      508
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        539
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 373
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      541                                     255
                 .1                      99       79
                                                  75
                                                  55
                                                               42                     .1                                                                         534   493
                                                                                                                                                                                            318
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        513
                             101                               49                                             100
                                                                                                              99       71           52
                                                                                                                                    47                                                                                                      563                  356          269
                                                                                                  110                               39                                             447                   202                                                                  234
                       108                                     37                                                                   39                           527                                                                        533                               162
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              255
                                                                                                  105                                                                                                                                 576               498      368
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 336
                                         100                                                                           60
                                                                                                                       58                                                                                                                               462                   255
                       101                                                                                    85                                          .05                               246
                                                                                                                                                                                            249          167                   .05    555                        244
                                                                                                                                    48                                                                                                                           252          176
                .05                                                                  .05    110
                                                                                            105                                     43
                                                                                                                                                                                   349                   159                                            343
                                                  84                                                          90                                                 482   456                                                                              352
                             109         132                   46                                                                                                      439         342
                             114                                                                                       67           46
                                                  90                                                                                                                                                                                  536
                       109                                     41                                 92
                                                                                                              109
                                                                                                              102      70                                   0    478                                                             0          509
                  0                      138                                           0          92
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      498
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            467
                       114
                                                                                            92
                                                                                                                                                                 385
                                                                                            92                                                            -.05                                                                 -.05
                -.05                                                                 -.05                                                                              345

                             141                                                                                                                                                                                                      381
                       141
                 -.1                                                                  -.1                                                                  -.1   372                                                            -.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      392   330
                                                                                                  110

                                   VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                                110         VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                       340
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q                         -.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 5th Q   VA B, 5th Q
                -.15         147                                                     -.15
                                   VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                            VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q                                      345
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 4th Q   VA B, 4th Q
                       147

                 -.2
                                   VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                            117
                                                                                                  117   VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q                          -.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 3rd Q   VA B, 3rd Q
                                   VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q                                            VA D, 2nd Q   VA B, 2nd Q
                -.25
                                   VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                        VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                             VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q                         -.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VA D, 1st Q   VA B, 1st Q

                       0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2        3             4                            0     1          2         3            4
                                    Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience                                                           Experience



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    50
                                        References


Aaronson, D., Barrow, L., & Sander, W. (2007). Teachers and student achievement in the
        Chicago public high schools. Journal of Labor Economics, 25(1).
Atteberry, A. (2011). Stacking up: Comparing Teacher Value Added and Expert Assessment.
        Working Paper.
Atteberry, A., Loeb, S., & Wyckoff, J. (2013). Teacher Attrition from High Stakes Testing:
        Strategic Behavior or the Normal Chaos? CEPWC Working Paper. University of
        Virginia.
Boyd, D. J., Grossman, P., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Wyckoff, J., & Urban, I. (2007). Who leaves.
        The implications of teacher attrition for school achievement. Retrieved April, 17, 2007.
Boyd, D. J., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Rockoff, J. E., & Wyckoff, J. (2008). The narrowing gap in
        New York City teacher qualifications and its implications for student achievement in
        high‐poverty schools. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 27(4), 793-818.
Boyd, D. J., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., Ronfeldt, M., & Wyckoff, J. (2011). The role of teacher
        quality in retention and hiring: Using applications to transfer to uncover preferences of
        teachers and schools. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 30(1), 88-110.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J. N., & Rockoff, J. E. (2011). The long-term impacts of teachers: Teacher
        value-added and student outcomes in adulthood. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Clotfelter, C., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2006). Teacher-student matching and the assessment
        of teacher effectiveness. Journal of Human Resources, 41(4), 778.
Clotfelter, C., Ladd, H. F., & Vigdor, J. L. (2007). Teacher credentials and student achievement:
        Longitudinal analysis with student fixed effects. Economics of Education Review, 26(6),
        673-682.
Goldhaber, D., Gross, B., & Player, D. (2011). Teacher career paths, teacher quality, and
        persistence in the classroom: Are public schools keeping their best? Journal of Policy
        Analysis and Management, 30(1), 57-87.
Goldhaber, D., & Hansen, M. (2010). Is It Just a Bad Class? Assessing the Stability of Measured
        Teacher Performance. Center for Education Data and Research.
Grossman, P. L., Loeb, S., Cohen, J., Hammerness, K. M., Wyckoff, J., Boyd, D. J., & Lankford,
        H. (2010). Measure for Measure: The relationship between measures of instructional
        practice in middle school English Language Arts and teachers’ value-added scores. NBER
        Working Paper.
Hanushek, E. A. (1971). Teacher characteristics and gains in student achievement: Estimation
        using micro data. The American Economic Review, 61(2), 280-288.
Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J., O'Brien, D., & Rivkin, S. (2005). The market for teacher quality.
        NBER Working Paper.
Hanushek, E. A., & Rivkin, S. G. (2010). Constrained Job Matching: Does Teacher Job Search
        Harm Disadvantaged Urban Schools? : National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hanushek, E. A., Rivkin, S. G., Figlio, D., & Jacob, B. (2010). Generalizations about using
        value-added measures of teacher quality. American Economic Review, 100(2), 267-271.
Harris, D. N., & Sass, T. R. (2011). Teacher training, teacher quality and student achievement.
        Journal of Public Economics, 95(7), 798-812.




                                                                                              51
Jacob, B. A., & Lefgren, L. (2008). Can principals identify effective teachers? Evidence on
       subjective performance evaluation in education. Journal of Labor Economics, 26(1), 101-
       136.
Kane, T. J., Rockoff, J. E., & Staiger, D. O. (2008). What does certification tell us about teacher
       effectiveness? Evidence from New York City. Economics of Education Review, 27(6),
       615-631.
Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2002). The promise and pitfalls of using imprecise school
       accountability measures. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16, 91-114.
Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2008). Are Teacher-Level Value-Added Estimates Biased? An
       Experimental Validation of Non-Experimental Estimates. Working Paper. Retrieved
       from http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic245006.files/Kane_Staiger_3-17-08.pdf
Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2008). Estimating teacher impacts on student achievement: An
       experimental evaluation: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kane, T. J., & Staiger, D. O. (2012). Gathering Feedback for Teaching, Measures of Effective
       Teaching Project: Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Kane, T. J., Taylor, E. S., Tyler, J. H., & Wooten, A. L. (2011). Identifying Effective Classroom
       Practices Using Student Achievement Data. Journal of Human Resources, 46(3), 587-
       613.
Koedel, C., & Betts, J. R. (2007). Re-examining the role of teacher quality in the educational
       production function. University of Missouri Department of Economics Working Paper,
       (708).
Koedel, C., & Betts, J. R. (2011). Does student sorting invalidate value-added models of teacher
       effectiveness? An extended analysis of the Rothstein critique. Education Finance and
       Policy, 6(1), 18-42.
McCaffrey, D. F., Lockwood, J., Koretz, D., Louis, T. A., & Hamilton, L. (2004). Models for
       value-added modeling of teacher effects. Journal of Educational and Behavioral
       Statistics, 29(1), 67.
McCaffrey, D. F., Sass, T. R., Lockwood, J., & Mihaly, K. (2009). The intertemporal variability
       of teacher effect estimates. Education Finance and Policy, 4(4), 572-606.
Milanowski, A. (2004). The relationship between teacher performance evaluation scores and
       student achievement: Evidence from Cincinnati. Peabody Journal of Education, 79(4),
       33-53.
Murnane, R., & Phillips, B. (1981). What do effective teachers of inner-city children have in
       common?* 1. Social Science Research, 10(1), 83-100.
Nye, B., Konstantopoulos, S., & Hedges, L. V. (2004). How large are teacher effects?
       Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 26(3), 237-257.
Ost, B. (2009). How Do Teachers Improve? The Relative Importance of Specific and General
       Human Capital.
Papay, J. P., & Kraft, M. A. (2011). Do Teachers Continue to Improve with Experience?
       Evidence of Long-Term Career Growth in the Teacher Labor Market. Working Paper.
Rivkin, S., Hanushek, E. A., & Kain, J. (2005). Teachers, schools, and academic achievement.
       Econometrica, 73(2), 417-458.
Rockoff, J. E. (2004). The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence from
       panel data. American Economic Review, 94(2), 247-252.
Rothstein, J. (2010). Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and Student
       Achievement*. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1), 175-214.



                                                                                                52
Taylor, E. S., & Tyler, J. H. (2011). The effect of evaluation on performance: Evidence from
       longitudinal student achievement data of mid-career teachers: National Bureau of
       Economic Research.
Weisberg, D., Sexton, S., Mulhern, J., & Keeling, D. (2009). The widget effect. Brooklyn, NY:
       The New Teacher Project.
Yoon, K. S. (2007). Reviewing the evidence on how teacher professional development affects
       student achievement: National Center for Educational Evaluation and Regional
       Assistance, Institute of Education Sciences, US Dept. of Education.




                                                                                          53
