                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              WALL STREET VS. MAIN STREET:
                             AN EVALUATION OF PROBABILITIES

                                         Robin L. Lumsdaine
                                      Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon

                                         Working Paper 19103
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19103


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




The authors are grateful to the RAND Corporation for assistance with the American Life Panel and
for supplying the sampling weights used in this analysis and to Yacine Aït-Sahlia, Ron Anderson,
Hector Calvo-Pardo, Maik Dierkes, Amos Golan, Anthony Hall, Nikolaus Hautsch, Peter Hudomiet,
Miles Kimball, Olivia Mitchell, Anders Rahbek, Matthew Shapiro, Neil Shephard, Timo Teräsvirta,
Martijn van den Assem, Peter Wakker, and Bob Willis, as well as seminar participants at American
University, the University of Exeter, the University of Michigan, the University of Portsmouth, the
ZEW Conference on “The Role of Expectations in Financial Markets”, the 2012 Society for Financial
Econometrics (SoFiE) annual meeting, and the 3rd Humboldt-Copenhagen Conference for comments
on an earlier draft. All errors remain our own. Financial support from the Netherlands Organisation
for Scientific Research (NWO) for the second author is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Robin L. Lumsdaine and Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Wall Street vs. Main Street: An Evaluation of Probabilities
Robin L. Lumsdaine and Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon
NBER Working Paper No. 19103
June 2013
JEL No. C58,D84,G02,G13

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper challenges recent conventional wisdom of a divide between Main Street (the average American
consumer) and Wall Street (financial market participants). The views of survey respondents regarding
the likelihood of stock index returns exceeding specific thresholds are compared to market views indicated
by index options with strikes at analogous thresholds. The econometric specification explicitly addresses
some important impediments to using elicited probabilities from survey data. We confirm that Main
Street views track Wall Street views, although the association is not one-for one. We find a closer
association for those demonstrating a better understanding of the laws of probability.


Robin L. Lumsdaine
Kogod School of Business
American University
4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20016
and NBER
robin.lumsdaine@american.edu

Rogier J.D. Potter van Loon
Erasmus School of Economics
Erasmus University Rotterdam
Burgemeester Oudlaan 50
PO Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, The Netherlands
pottervanloon@ese.eur.nl
1.     Introduction

       The phrase “Wall Street versus Main Street” became commonplace during the recent
financial crisis as a shorthand means of describing opposing sides in a variety of contexts, from
blame attribution to beneficiaries of government intervention to investor protection. In the
aftermath of the crisis, this characterization has become synonymous with the divide between the
“haves” and “have-nots”, manifested for example in the sentiment apparent in the Occupy Wall
Street movement. It regularly appears in speeches of policymakers and politicians eager to
address perceptions related to the faltering economy. In short, “Wall Street versus Main Street”
distinguishes the views of financial insiders from those of the general population.

       Yet beyond the rhetoric, is there really a divide between what Wall Street and Main
Street think? Those that would argue against a divide might appeal either to early theories of
information flow to argue that financial market transactions are merely the aggregate result of
individual investor decisions or to standard finance theories that indicate management decisions
of publicly-traded firms are a direct result of the desire to maximize shareholder value and that,
therefore, investment decisions are a reflection of the views of Main Street citizens. In addition,
both feedback and herding models in behavioral finance would suggest that Main Street
decisions are influenced by what happens on Wall Street (e.g., Shiller 2003).

       On the other side of the debate, those arguing that a divide does indeed exist might
counter the above arguments by noting the low proportion of active investors in the Main Street
population, citing evidence of low financial literacy rates (Lusardi and Mitchell, 2011), the fact
that few Americans hold stocks outside of a retirement portfolio (Poterba and Samwick, 1995),
and growing income inequality (Heathcote, Perri, and Violante, 2009). Even among the subset
of the population that is active in financial markets, there is evidence that not all participants are
informed (e.g., De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann 1990) and that for a variety of
reasons, returns of the two groups often differ (e.g., Barber and Odean 2002).

       This paper attempts to measure the magnitude of the Wall Street/Main Street divide. We
find a link between beliefs about future stock market returns elicited from surveys of a
representative sample of the U.S. population and market beliefs as calculated through option
prices using the Black-Scholes model. We also explore whether this link depends upon


                                                   1
observable characteristics and find that evidence of greater probabilistic understanding is
associated with a stronger Wall Street/Main Street link.

         The approach taken in this paper draws on literature from finance, behavioral economics,
econometrics, and survey methodology, specifically the following areas: (1) the formation of
equity return expectations, (2) the information content of option prices, (3) the information
content of subjective expectations, and (4) the tendency of survey respondents to report focal
points (clustering around rounded numbers) when asked probabilistic questions.

         Researchers using survey data find substantial heterogeneity across individuals with
regards to their expectations about future equity returns (Brennan, Cao, Strong, and Xu, 2005;
Dominitz and Manski, 2011; Hudomiet, Kézdi and Willis, 2011). Some of the interpersonal
heterogeneity is attributable to differences in optimism among population subgroups: for
example, women, African Americans and those in the lower education categories have less
optimistic expectations relative to the overall population. This heterogeneity in expectations has
in turn been used to explain heterogeneous equity investment decisions (Kézdi and Willis, 2003,
2011).

         A separate literature gleans expectations of market participants from option price
information, following the results from an early paper by Breeden and Litzenberger (1978)
which shows that the price density of a state-contingent security can be derived from the prices
of European options. A variety of functions for the price of an option are admissible in this
context; the most often used one is the option pricing model described by Black and Scholes
(1973) and Merton (1973) and we follow that convention in this paper.

         A number of researchers consider the inclusion of survey expectations in models of
economic behavior [see Manski (2004) for a survey of this literature] and demonstrate that
including probabilistic expectations can improve inference about economic behavior relative to
models using only data on economic choices (revealed preference models). Yet others show
that survey responses do not exactly align with true expectations – for example, due to large
clusters of responses occurring at focal points of the response distribution (e.g., Dominitz and
Manski, 1997; Hurd, McFadden, and Gan, 1998; Kleinjans and Van Soest, 2010) – and argue
that adjustments to survey data to account for such aspects are necessary to improve inference


                                                  2
(Bassett and Lumsdaine, 2000; Lillard and Willis, 2001). While early literature comparing
expectations to economic behavior was in the context of analyzing consumer intentions (e.g.,
buying a new car, see Juster, 1966), more recent research considers expectations about equity
markets and investors’ behavior (e.g., Hurd and Rohwedder, 2012).

        The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data construction and descriptive
statistics of the main variables. Section 3 describes the model used to examine the link between
Wall Street and Main Street. Section 4 analyzes the regression results and discusses their
implications. Section 5 examines whether the Wall Street/Main Street link varies by subgroup
and specifically considers the information content of survey responses that are at odds with the
laws of probability. The final section concludes. Supplemental material containing information
on the sample construction, detailed descriptive statistics, the derivation of the likelihood
function and additional analyses is available in the Appendix.

2.      Data

     The American Life Panel (ALP) provides a novel dataset for our analysis. An internet
panel with about 3000 active panel members, the ALP contains more than 200 survey modules
(and associated survey weights designed to ensure a nationally representative population)
administered by the RAND Corporation. A more detailed description of the ALP sampling
frame, survey population, interview length, response rate and participation incentives is in
Appendix A1. Throughout the paper, sampling weights are used when reporting descriptive
statistics and regression results.

     While some of the survey modules are stand-alone, others belong to periodically-repeated
series (waves) on the same topic. This paper uses responses obtained from modules designed by
Michael Hurd and Susann Rohwedder to investigate the effects of the financial crisis on
American households, gathered from November 5, 2008 until March 10, 2011, corresponding to
25 waves of information. Hurd and Rohwedder (2010) provide a detailed description of this
series of modules; they are briefly summarized here. The first wave asks respondents about a
wide range of topics such as labor force status, stock ownership, mortgage payments and
expectations about the future. The second wave was conducted in February 2009 and subsequent
waves have been conducted monthly from May 2009 onwards. Each module also contains


                                                  3
demographic control variables such as age, race, gender, marital status, and education. The final
sample (after adjustments for, e.g., missing observations) consists of 47,488 surveys from 2,652
respondents (94.9% of the total number of surveys and 98.3% of the total number of
respondents) gathered over 364 survey days. The sample construction is further detailed in
Appendix A1.

2.1 What Main Street thinks: survey expectations about stock market returns

     As a proxy for the views of “Main Street”, the ALP elicits expectations about the stock
market from survey participants via a series of questions, the first of which is the following
(hereafter referred to as the “PositiveReturn” question):

     “We are interested in how well you think the economy will do in the future. On a scale
     from 0 percent to 100 percent where "0" means that you think there is absolutely no
     chance, and "100" means that you think the event is absolutely sure to happen, what are
     the chances that by next year at this time mutual fund shares invested in blue chip
     stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will be worth more than they are
     today?”

     Respondents can give an answer ranging from zero to one hundred (the answer need not be
an integer) to indicate the percentage chance of the event happening, or they can leave the
response blank. If a numerical response is not recorded to this question, the question is asked a
second time, preceded by the additional instruction “You did not answer. Your answers are
important to us. Please give us your best guess.” To this second question, either (a) a response
ranging from zero to one hundred, or (b) “don’t know” is recorded.

     The same structure is repeated for two additional questions, asking respondents to assess the
chances of a greater than 20% return and a greater than -20% return.1 For expositional ease, the
questions referring to the probability of a positive return, a more than 20% return, and a more
than -20% return will be referred to as PositiveReturn, >Plus20, and >Minus20, respectively.



1
  The exact wording of these questions is: “By next year at this time, what are the chances that mutual fund shares
invested in blue-chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones Industrial Average will have increased (fallen) in value by
more than 20 percent compared to what they are worth today?” Because the probability of a >20% decrease in
value is equal to one minus the probability of a more than -20% return, the response is subtracted from one hundred
percent to correspond to a greater than -20% return. This naming convention will be useful in the analysis when
comparing the subjective response values to expectations inferred from option prices.


                                                         4
Using all three questions (when available) from the 47,488 surveys yields a total sample size for
studying Main Street probabilities of 139,327 observations.

        The phrasing of these questions may lead to differences in respondents’ interpretation and
hence the answers they give, since there is an implicit subjectivity associated with respondents’
understanding of “mutual funds shares” or “blue chip stocks like those in the Dow Jones
Industrial Average (DJIA)”. For the purposes of this paper, however, it is necessary to assume
that the responses given represent respondents’ subjective probability that the nominal (not
inflation-adjusted) level of the DJIA in one year will be greater (similarly, more than 20%
greater, more than -20% greater) than the current level of the DJIA. For each respondent, the
current level of the index is assumed to be the closing level on the most recent business date
prior to the date of interview, so that the response is assured to chronologically follow the
information on which the Wall Street probabilities are based.

                                            FIGURE 1 HERE


        Figure 1 shows a histogram of the frequency of specific responses to each of the three
probabilistic questions individually, as well as of the responses combined (“Aggregate”). Most
of the responses are integers -- only 41 out of 139,327 responses are non-integer. Further,
responses appear to be clustered around certain focal points, a common occurrence in survey
data that contains probabilistic subjective response questions such as these.2 For the three
questions in this paper, 93.8% of person-wave responses are a multiple of five and 68.0% of
responses are a multiple of ten. A response of 50 occurs 19.9% of the time; 3.5% of the
responses are zero and 3.1% are one hundred. In addition, 63.0% of the 8,701 responses that are
not multiples of five are between zero and five or between 95 and one hundred. Due to the
pileup of responses at 50 and the extreme nature of the values zero and one hundred, in the
model section, the likelihood of these three responses is modeled explicitly. All subsequent
references to “focal responses” in this paper will mean responses of these three values (zero, 50,
and one hundred) only, following Lillard and Willis (2001) and Kézdi and Willis (2003). In


2
 See, for example, Hurd, McFadden, and Gan (1998), Bassett and Lumsdaine (2000), Lillard and Willis (2001),
Hurd and McGarry (2002), Kézdi and Willis (2003), Manski (2004), Huynh and Jung (2010), Kleinjans and Van
Soest (2010), and Dominitz and Manski (2011).


                                                      5
addition, a number of articles (e.g., Fischhoff and Bruine de Bruin, 1999) note that a response of
“50” should be considered as distinct from other focal responses as it likely indicates uncertainty
on the side of the respondent rather than a true subjective probability of 50%; this is also
accounted for in the model. The mean response to each of the three questions, as well as the
proportion of responses that are focal, varies by respondent characteristics (see Appendices A2 &
A3 for more details), consistent with past studies that show heterogeneity across individuals with
respect to their expectations about future equity returns.3 This observation, also noted in Manski
and Molinari (2010), motivates the decision to explicitly model the probability of giving a focal
response as a function of observable covariates in the model, in addition to including
demographic controls.

2.2 What Wall Street thinks: calculating option-implied probabilities

         The three return thresholds given in the ALP questions (-20%, 0%, 20%) correspond
precisely to strike price levels of a European call option, namely the 20% in-the-money, at-the-
money, and 20% out-of-the-money thresholds. We therefore turn to the option-pricing literature
to derive analogous Wall Street probabilities for comparison to those reported by Main Street
respondents in the ALP. While we recognize that there are numerous ways to derive such
probabilities, in this paper we adopt a fairly basic approach so as not to obscure the main
question of interest (whether there is a relationship between Wall Street and Main Street beliefs).

         In a risk neutral setting the probability that the price of a security will be above a strike
price K at a future time T when the security trades at price St at time t < T is given by (Hull,
1989, p. 251):

(1)                            |
                                                                     √


with Φ the standard normal cumulative distribution function, r the (continuous) risk-free rate
over the period [t,T], q the (continuous) dividend rate over the same period and σ the volatility of
the return on the security. To account for risk aversion, for computation of “Wall Street”
probabilities we adjust the risk neutral setting by including an equity risk premium, ρ:


3
 An earlier version of the paper contained these results; in the interest of space they are omitted here but are
available from the authors on request.

                                                           6
(2)                         |
                                                                √


        Although the price of the underlying security, interest rate and dividend yield (or
estimates thereof) are available, the volatility cannot be directly observed. Since option prices
are observable for the DJIA, however, the Black-Scholes equation can be used to solve for the
volatility. A set of implied volatilities (with elements that vary according to day of interview and
strike level) then can be used to derive the set of option-implied probabilities.

        The Wall Street probability computation proceeds as follows, using the explicit formula
for the price of an option as described in Black and Scholes (1973) and Merton (1973), adjusted
for an equity risk premium ρ that is fixed at 6%, corresponding to the average annual risk
premium over the period 1961-2011.4 For each day that a survey was answered (364 days in
total), the values of the parameters are extracted from Bloomberg® for the specific case of one-
year options on the DJIA (a detailed description of how the parameters were obtained using
Bloomberg® can be found in Appendix B). The interest rate (r) is the (continuous) U.S. dollar
swap rate over the period [t,T], the dividend rate (q) is initially set to zero since the DJIA is
dividend-adjusted (sensitivity to these assumptions, as well as the choice of equity risk premium,
is explored in the first section of Appendix E). The volatility (σ) for each specified strike price is
the volatility implied by the option prices. In particular, implied volatilities for a time to
expiration (T-t) of one year and strike prices (K) of 80%, 100%, and 120% of the level of the
index at time t were constructed, consistent with the time horizon and return categories
articulated in the ALP survey questions and corresponding to the questions >Minus20,
PositiveReturn, and >Plus20, respectively.

2.3 Comparing Main Street to Wall Street

        To compare Main Street probabilities to Wall Street, each of the 139,327 Main Street
observations is first assigned a corresponding option-implied probability associated with the date
before the day the interview was conducted (sensitivity to the choice of return date is examined
in Appendix E3). Specifically, all individuals that were interviewed on a given day are assigned
the same Wall Street probability, and the number of Wall Street probabilities assigned to a

4
 This is computed from the Fama-French “excess return on the market” factor, downloaded from Kenneth French’s
website http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.

                                                      7
specific person corresponds to the number of waves in which the person provided a Main Street
probability. Table 1 contains summary statistics for the three Main Street and Wall Street
probabilities, aggregated across all observations. Not surprisingly, the average probability
associated with >Plus20 is lower than the probability associated with PositiveReturn, which in
turn is lower than the probability associated with >Minus20.

                                                TABLE 1 HERE

          There is a relatively close correspondence between the means of respondents’ answers
to the probabilistic questions and the mean of the option-implied probabilities associated with
those same questions. This is especially the case with respect to the upper return threshold on
the DJIA (the row labeled ”>20%”); on average there is little difference between Wall Street
(24.0%) and Main Street (27.1%) regarding the expectation that the one-year return on the DJIA
will exceed 20%. There is more of a difference when considering the probability that the DJIA
will increase (the row labeled “>0%”), with an average 40.4% Main Street probability of a
positive return versus a Wall Street average of 57.1% from the corresponding option-implied
probabilities. There is also a divide between the two measures when it comes to the probability
of a more than 20% return in the DJIA (the row labeled “>-20%”), with the survey responses
markedly more pessimistic (the mean of >Minus20 is 75.8%) than the average option-implied
probability (83.0%).5

         Looking solely at the means across all three strike levels is of course not sufficient to
draw conclusions as to whether survey respondents’ and the market’s beliefs coincide, despite
similar patterns that show respondents assigning relatively higher probabilities to large changes
in the level of the index. Comparing standard deviations, Main Street probabilities inherently
have greater variation than can be explained by Wall Street probabilities alone, further
motivating the need for a formal model that incorporates additional covariates. Standard
deviations for Main Street (20.0%, 26.8%, and 21.6% for >Minus20, PositiveReturn, and
>Plus20, respectively) are very large both as a proportion of the bounded range of 0-100% and
in comparison to those for Wall Street (4.9%, 2.9%, and 4.3%, respectively). This is partly a

5
 This pattern (of a greater difference between probabilities of a return larger than -20% than between probabilities
of a return larger than 20%) could be related to the volatility smirk that is often observed in index option data,
namely that the Wall Street probability reflects higher demand for in-the-money call options (e.g., the “>-20%”
option) than deep out-of-the-money call options (e.g., the “>20%” option).

                                                          8
result of the analytical design, since all participants on the same day are assigned the same Wall
Street probability.

3.     Model

       We use a generalized linear model [see McCullagh and Nelder (1989) for an extensive
description] to jointly model all three Main Street probabilities. Let X represent the matrix of
data (covariates) available to the econometrician. Respondents’ unobserved true belief p* is
assumed to be related to a linear combination of a subset of covariates X1∈ X, through a ‘link
function’     such that

                                             ∗
(3)

where more generally for any i, a matrix Xi denotes a subset of the covariate matrix X and βi is a
vector of parameters corresponding to the columns of Xi.

       There is evidence to suggest that respondents report their belief with error, however. As
noted earlier, a substantial fraction of respondents give a focal response of zero, 50, or one
hundred. Such a focal response might be the result of a lesser ability to express oneself in
probabilistic terms. Similar to Hurd, McFadden and Gan (1998), these responses are modeled
via a latent variable w*:
                                  ∗
(4)

with η an error term. A non-focal answer is given if and only if w* > 0. Respondents report
their true belief p* with error. In the absence of a focal tendency (w* > 0), their response is a
                                         ∗
random variable, , for which                 holds. When the latent variable w* ≤ 0, respondents
instead give a focal response of zero, 50, or one hundred.

       A further distinction is made between the focal response of 50 and a focal response of
zero or one hundred. This distinction is motivated both by previous literature that suggests
responses of 50 often indicate uncertainty on the part of the respondent (Fischhoff and Bruine de
Bruin, 1999) and by the prevalence of responses of 50 in the sample (19.9% of all responses




                                                   9
compared to 6.6% for zero and 100 combined).6 To account for this possible uncertainty the
model includes a third equation that describes an additional latent variable v*:

                                        ∗
(5)

with ξ an error term. Conditional on a focal response being given (w* ≤ 0), a response of 50
represents uncertainty and is given if and only if v* > 0. When v* ≤ 0, respondents with a
tendency to rely on focal responses feel certain and give a response of zero or one hundred
percent (represented in the model as a probability of zero or one). In this case, the error with
which the respondent reports his/her true belief is governed by an endogenously-determined
cutoff value (ψ) that pushes the response to either of the two extreme endpoints, depending on
where their belief lies relative to this constant threshold:

                                                 0    if
(6)
                                                 1    if
The error terms η and ξ are assumed to be independently normally distributed with mean 0 and
variance 1, as they are identified only up to scale.

        The link function f (.), that describes the relationship between X1β1 and the true beliefs
p*, must be chosen from the set of functions with range equal to the admissible values of X1β1
(i.e., the real line) and domain [0,1]. We use the inverse of the logistic function (the logit) in our
model since it is the most commonly used function for binary data (see, e.g., Albert and Chib,
1993). With this link function, the true beliefs are given by:

                               ∗
(7)


        Besides the linear part (X1β1) and the link function f (.), the third part of any generalized
linear model is a stochastic component. In the context of this paper, the stochastic component
enters through the subjective responses        (true belief p* with error) that are assumed to come
from a beta-distribution. The beta function is well suited for describing probabilities or
proportions because it is defined on the unit interval, and has a flexible functional form that
allows for a wide variety of shapes (e.g., Law and Kelton, 1982, pp.165-167). It has been used
6
 Large proportions of focal responses at 50 also have been documented in other surveys by Hurd, McFadden, and
Gan (1998), Bruine de Bruin, Fischbek, Stiber and Fischhoff (2002), and Manski and Molinari (2010).

                                                      10
to model probabilistic responses in Bruine de Bruin et al. (2002) and earlier, by Winkler (1967).
The probability density function is given by Mendenhall, Scheaffer and Wackerly (1981, p.632):

(8)                             |   ,
                                                        ,


for values 0 ≤ p ≤ 1 and shape parameters α1, α2 > 0. B(α1,α2) (the beta function) normalizes the
above density so that the cumulative density is equal to 1 at p = 1:

(9)                       ,                   1

with Γ the gamma function.

       The mean and variance of the distribution are given by μ and , respectively:

(10)


Similar to the Bernoulli distribution, the variance is equal to the mean times one minus the mean,
except it is additionally divided by (1 + α1 + α2). For ease of interpretation of the results,
following Paolino (2001), the estimation considers a reparameterization of α1 and α2 in relation to
the mean μ and a dispersion factor φ, defined as α1 + α2. The relationship between the
parameters μ and φ and the underlying beta parameters α1 and α2, is the following:

(11)                                                 1


As described earlier, the expected value of       is equal to p*, hence

                                              ∗
(12)


The complete model therefore consists of a system of three equations; we estimate it via
maximum likelihood (details of the likelihood calculation are contained in Appendix D).
Sensitivity to the v* equation is examined in Appendix E2.




                                                   11
4.      Results

        The results from the estimation of all three equations are combined in Table 2. Because
the model is highly nonlinear, the discussion of the results focuses on the marginal effects,
reported in the third column of each group of estimates. In addition, unless otherwise noted,
inferences are drawn with reference to statistical significance at the 5% level of significance
(indicated in bold in the table). The first three columns of the table pertain to the subjective
probability (“Main Street”) assessment (equation (3)). The next three columns describe the
likelihood that a respondent gives a focal response (equation (4)) and the final three columns
describe the likelihood that a respondent gives a response of 50, conditional on giving a focal
response (equation (5)). For the most part, the three equations include many of the same
variables: demographic controls (i.e., gender, age, race, education, and marital status), dummy
variables for whether the respondent owns a home, owns stocks, or has a retirement account (as a
proxy for wealth and general financial wellbeing), measures of historical stock returns (i.e., over
the past 30 days and over the past year) to capture possible adaptive expectations, proxies for
stock market knowledge (i.e., a self-assessment of how closely the respondent follows the stock
market and their understanding of it), dummy variables to distinguish responses across the three
thresholds (>Minus20 is the omitted category), as well as interactions between these and
historical stock returns (to allow for the possibility that historical returns influence the different
subjective probabilities differently) and wave dummy variables (not shown).

4.1. The subjective probability

        In the subjective probability equation, the option-implied probability is the main variable
of interest. The coefficient on this variable measures the extent to which Wall Street
expectations (as measured by these probabilities) influence Main Street expectations (as proxied
by the dependent variable, the subjective probabilities). The additional parameter ψ indicates the
threshold value below which respondents are estimated to choose a response of zero rather than
one hundred (when they respond with a focal answer and do not give a response of 50). The
dispersion factor φ is inversely related to the variance of the fitted beta distribution describing
people’s responses.



                                                  12
        As expected, the coefficients on the two dummy variables are negative, with marginal
effects -0.366 for PositiveReturn (compared to >Minus20) and -0.450 for >Plus20. These
differences are close to those between the average responses given in Table 1 (-0.354 and -0.487,
respectively). Respondents who are female, older, Hispanic/Latino, are working, or are
homeowners provide lower subjective probabilities while those who have higher educational
attainment, own stocks or have a retirement account provide higher probabilities.

       There is some evidence that, contrary to the familiar adage, past performance is an
indicator of future expected returns; the 0.072 marginal effect of the past year’s return implies
that for each additional 10 percentage point return in the stock market over the past year,
respondents’ probabilities to the >Minus20 question are on average 0.72 percentage points
higher. Similarly, the marginal effect on the interaction of the past year’s return with the
PositiveReturn dummy suggests that respondents’ probabilities are on average 0.39 percentage
points higher (0.72 - 0.33) when the past year’s return is 10 percentage points higher. There is
no significant effect on the interaction of the past year’s return with the >Plus20 variable.
More recent stock returns (over the past 30 days) do not appear to have a significant effect on the
subjective probabilities.

                                         TABLE 2 HERE

       In addition, following or understanding the stock market appears to influence the
subjective responses. The estimated probabilities of those that profess to have a good
understanding of the stock market are on average 1.7 percentage points higher than for those who
report only some understanding of the stock market, while they are 1.2 percentage points lower
for those who admit to having a bad understanding. In addition, those that say they are not at all
following the stock market are more pessimistic, with estimated probabilities on average 2.6
percentage points lower than those who are only somewhat following the stock market.
Interestingly, those who claim to be closely following the stock market also are more pessimistic,
perhaps reflecting the sample time frame (i.e., the aftermath of the financial crisis).

       The coefficient on the option-implied probability is statistically significant, suggesting
that the views of Main Street are indeed influenced by the views of Wall Street. The marginal
effect of 0.114 implies that a ten percentage point increase in Wall Street’s probability on


                                                 13
average increases Main Street’s probability by just over one percentage point. The effects may
still vary substantially across individuals, for example, according to an individual’s level of
probabilistic understanding. We consider this possibility in Section 5.

4.2 The propensity to give a focal response

       The second equation models the probability of a non-focal response (i.e., a negative
coefficient indicates a higher probability of giving a focal response). It is assumed that any
association between the financial controls and the probability of a focal response occurs through
their correlation with the other controls, i.e., observed demographic factors such as gender, age,
race, and educational attainment or the self-assessment regarding following/understanding the
stock market. As a result, both the wealth/financial variables (e.g., homeownership, working for
pay, stock ownership, and having a retirement account) and historical stock market returns are
excluded from this equation.

       Consistent with Figure 1, the results indicate that respondents are 7.5 percentage points
more likely to give a focal response to the central PositiveReturn question than to the more
extreme questions. In addition, the propensity to provide a focal response is higher for women
and those with lower educational attainment and lower for those who are white, black, older or
married. Among the demographic controls, education is the strongest predictor of the probability
of a focal response; compared to those whose education did not go beyond the high school level,
those with a bachelor’s degree are 5.6 percentage points less likely, and those in the highest level
(education beyond a bachelor’s degree) are 9.7 percentage points less likely to give a focal
response.

       Consistent with intuition, those who admit to either not following the stock market or
having a bad understanding of the stock market are substantially more likely to give a focal
response than those in the omitted categories of somewhat following or having a moderate
understanding (3.9 percentage points and 5.0 percentage points, respectively), although the
marginal effects are lower than those associated with educational attainment.




                                                 14
4.3 Modeling uncertainty

        The third equation (for v*) models the probability that conditional on giving a focal
response, the response is 50 (rather than zero or one hundred). A positive coefficient indicates a
greater use of 50. Recall that a response of 50 could indicate extreme uncertainty (Bruine de
Bruin et al., 2002). The covariates included in this equation are the same as those in the
subjective probability equation, with one exception. Because implied volatility is more typically
associated with market uncertainty than option-implied probability, it replaces the option-implied
probability in the equation. Its coefficient then measures the extent to which Wall Street
uncertainty is related to the Main Street uncertainty level of 50 (similar to how the option-
implied probability corresponds to the Main Street probability in the first equation).7

        Disappointingly, there appears to be no evidence that the implied volatility influences the
propensity to use an uncertain focal response versus the extreme responses of zero or 100. This
may be for a number of reasons, including the possibility that the implied volatility is not an
appropriate proxy to use for measuring the kind of uncertainty that would manifest itself in a
focal response of 50, e.g., perhaps implied volatility is an instantaneous (daily) measure and
focal propensities are more static or the wording of the survey question leads to an interpretation
that goes beyond the DJIA (on which the implied volatility is based).

        Responses of 50 are 4.3 (4.4) percentage points more common in response to the
PositiveReturn (>Plus20) question than to the >Minus20 question, conditional on a focal
response. This suggests there is greater certainty (or stronger views) about the >Minus20
question. Women, those who are working, homeowners, stock owners and those with a
retirement account are more likely to use focal responses to demonstrate uncertainty rather than
certainty; in contrast, there is evidence of increasing certainty with age.

        Recent stock market performance (the historical return during the past 30 days) is
negatively associated with the propensity to rely on a focal response of 50 versus the extreme
responses. In particular, a one percentage point lower stock market return over the past 30 days
corresponds to an average 0.47 percentage point higher probability that a response of 50 is given

7
 Throughout this paper, we characterize the choice of 50 versus zero and one hundred as one of expressing
uncertainty versus absolute certainty. Other characterizations are also possible, for example: lack of confidence
versus complete confidence; indifference versus extreme optimism or pessimism; neutrality versus opinionated.

                                                        15
to the >Minus20 question, rather than zero or 100. This result is consistent with the intuition that
during the sample (post-financial crisis) period, stock market declines induced greater
uncertainty (i.e., a greater likelihood that the focal point was 50) than stock market gains. It also
corroborates findings of Hudomiet, Kézdi and Willis (2011), using data that mostly preceded our
sample (from February 2008 to February 2009), that uncertainty increased temporarily following
the 2008 stock market crash. In contrast, the probability of a response of 50 to the >Plus20
question increases on average by only 0.19 percentage points (= -0.466 + 0.278) following a one
percentage point lower stock market return.

       The results also indicate that those who admit to not following the stock market at all are
four percentage points less likely (than those who report somewhat following) to give a response
of 50 when providing a focal response than a response of either zero or one hundred. Curiously,
those who report having a good understanding of the stock market and those who report to
follow the stock market closely are also less likely to reveal uncertainty (2.9 and 4.2 percentage
points, respectively).

5.     Inconsistent Responses

       In addition to the challenge of focal responses, addressed via the model, a relatively large
proportion of person-wave responses are inconsistent with the laws of probability. This naturally
raises the question of the extent to which such responses represent a respondent’s true beliefs and
whether this affects the estimated Wall Street-Main Street connection. The following illustration
helps explain the concept of (in)consistency with the laws of probability:




                                                 16
     -100% to -20%                   -20% to 0%                     0% to 20%                        >20%



            A                              B                             C                              D




                                                                    >Minus20




                                                                                   PositiveReturn




                                                                                                     >Plus20



         This figure shows the complete range of possible returns, from -100% to +∞, divided
according to segments that correspond to the survey questions. When respondents answer
>Minus20, they are being asked to state their probability of the return being outside of section A
(i.e., in sections B, C, or D). Similarly, >Plus20 refers to section D and PositiveReturn refers to
the probability of the return being in the union of sections C and D. An individual’s set of
responses for a specific wave is inconsistent with the laws of probability if the answer to
>Plus20 is greater than that of PositiveReturn (since D is a subset of the union of C and D) or
when their response to PositiveReturn is greater than >Minus20. Under this definition,
inconsistent sets of responses were given in 17.6% of the surveys.8

         In addition to the inconsistent person-wave sets, in 40.0% of the surveys at least one of
the four line sections shown above was implicitly assigned a probability of zero (henceforth the
8
  This proportion is likely an underestimate of the true proportion of inconsistent responses since the survey design
precludes the respondent from assigning a positive probability to the region where a zero probability is implied by
their initial PositiveReturn response. Specifically, when the response to PositiveReturn was 0 or 100, only one of
the other two subjective response questions was asked.

                                                          17
responses in these surveys will be called “near-inconsistent” sets since an individual assigns a
probability of zero to a range with positive measure). For example, a respondent answered 60 to
PositiveReturn and 60 to >Plus20, implying a probability of zero that the return will be in
section C (0% to 20% return). Both the inconsistent and near-inconsistent sets appear to be
related to giving a focal response: in 36.9% of the surveys in which an inconsistent set of
responses was given, a focal answer was reported for at least one of the three questions; similarly
at least one focal response was given in 72.5% of the near-inconsistent sets. In contrast, at least
one focal response was given in only 26.7% of the consistent sets.

       The model is re-estimated with controls included to account for the large proportion of
inconsistent and near-inconsistent responses; the results are shown in Table 3. It is evident that
controlling for potential inconsistencies strengthens the findings. For most covariates in the
main (μ) equation, coefficients are more statistically significant and marginal effects are larger.
The effects of past stock returns are attenuated but not qualitatively different.

       Importantly, in the equation that specifies the subjective response, the effect of the
option-implied probability on the survey response is greatest for those that provide consistent
survey responses and almost double the effect estimated in the baseline model (i.e., without
controlling for inconsistency); a ten percentage point increase in option-implied probability
increases a consistent survey response by over two percentage points, compared to a one
percentage point increase in the baseline model.

       For those that give near-inconsistent responses, the effect is qualitatively similar to the
baseline model, with a ten percent increase in option-implied probability corresponding to a 1.08
percentage point increase in subjective expectations. In contrast, for those that give inconsistent
responses to the three questions, the effect of the option-implied probability is negative and
significant, with a ten percent increase in option-implied probability corresponding to a 2.19
percentage point decline in subjective probability, on average. Therefore, although the baseline
results indicate that across the whole sample, survey respondents’ beliefs coincide well with the
market’s, there are some respondents whose stated beliefs represent significant departures from
those of the market.




                                                 18
         There is also evidence that those who do not fully understand the laws of probability are
more likely to give a focal response (w* equation). Those that give inconsistent responses are
11.8 percentage points less likely to give a non-focal response while those that give near-
inconsistent responses are nearly 48 percentage points less likely, than those who provided
consistent responses.9 In only one case (the coefficient on bachelor’s degree in the w* equation)
does a significant coefficient change sign relative to the baseline (Table 2) regression. Notably,
nearly all of the race and education effects documented in the paper are attenuated once one
controls for response inconsistency, suggesting that much of the variation in the propensity to
give a focal response reflects lack of probabilistic understanding. In particular, once we control
for inconsistent responses, there are no longer any significant differences by race in the
propensity to respond focally. The attenuation is also evident in the variables that capture the
respondents’ self-assessment with respect to following or understanding the stock market.

         While much of the inference regarding the likelihood of providing a response of 50,
conditional on giving a focal response, is unchanged (v* equation), those that give inconsistent
responses are 26.5 percentage points more likely to give a response of 50, conditional on
answering focally, than the other survey respondents, suggesting greater uncertainty among those
that have a more limited probabilistic understanding. In addition, for those sets of responses that
were inconsistent, the effect of Wall Street uncertainty (the implied volatility) on Main Street
uncertainty is significantly less (nearly 6.9 percentage points for a 10% difference in the implied
volatility) than it is for sets of responses that were not inconsistent.

6.       Conclusion

         Are Wall Street and Main Street beliefs at odds? A novel approach, comparing survey
responses to probabilistic questions about future stock market performance with their
corresponding option-implied probabilities, investigates one aspect of this question: whether
Wall Street expectations have any influence on the views of Main Street. It would appear the
answer is yes. We find a significant relationship between the probabilities extracted from
option-prices and those elicited from longitudinal survey responses. The results further show


9
 This may be a result of the definitions of “inconsistent” and “near-inconsistent”, respectively; recall that anyone
who answers 0 or 100 to any of the three questions is automatically classified as “near-inconsistent” since then some
segment of the above chart contains zero mass.

                                                         19
that while option-implied probabilities are linked to survey respondents’ outlook, the association
is far from one-to-one. Specifically, on average a ten percentage point increase in Wall Street’s
beliefs that future DJIA returns will exceed a given threshold leads to a more than one
percentage point increase in Main Street’s beliefs. This effect nearly doubles when controls for
probabilistic consistency are included in the regression.

       We find evidence that in the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis, respondents who
purport to have a good understanding of the stock market or whose responses reflect a stronger
understanding of probability display greater optimism; both subgroups on average report higher
probabilities than others in the sample. In addition, there is evidence of adaptive expectations
via the (statistically significantly) positive relationship between the return on the stock market in
the past year and the subjective responses.

       Despite an association between Wall Street and Main Street probabilities, no significant
relationship is found between Wall Street uncertainty (as measured by implied volatility) and
Main Street uncertainty (as measured by the likelihood of giving a response of 50% rather than
of 0 or 100%, conditional on a focal response). In contrast, our results show that other stock
market-related variables (i.e., returns over the past 30 days, lack of understanding of the stock
market, and/or admitting to not following the stock market) do significantly influence the aspect
of Main Street uncertainty defined by our metric.

       The econometric model presented in this paper adjusts for a number of challenges often
present in elicitations from surveys, including the pile-up at key focal points and whether a
response of 50% should be interpreted as equal probabilities or complete uncertainty. The
analysis demonstrates that subjective response elicitations are useful reflections of sentiment
regarding the financial markets and are not necessarily at odds with the views of financial market
participants as seen through option prices.

       A further exploration considers the degree of probabilistic understanding in the set of
responses that participants give. Controlling for variation in probabilistic understanding
highlights the possibility that focal responses by survey participants reflect not just a greater
degree of uncertainty about the topic of the question being asked (i.e., future stock returns) but
also a lack of understanding about the concept of probability (i.e., uncertainty about the question


                                                  20
framing or interpretation). While Wall Street and Main Street are linked, the link is stronger
among those that exhibit probabilistic consistency. This suggests an avenue for future research
– the association between probabilistic understanding and financial understanding. The results
also demonstrate a possible way that observed inconsistencies in survey responses may provide
useful information for inference — suggesting caution be exercised before imposing such
consistency through the survey design.




                                                21
References

Albert, James H., and Siddhartha Chib (1993), "Bayesian Analysis of Binary and Polychotomous
     Response Data," Journal of the American Statistical Association 88, 669-679.
Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean (2000), "Trading is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The
     Common Stock Investment Performance of Individual Investors," Journal of Finance 55,
     773-806.
Bassett, William F., and Robin L. Lumsdaine (2000), "Probability Limits: Are Subjective
     Assessments Adequately Accurate?" Journal of Human Resources 36, 327-363.
Black, Fischer, and Myron S. Scholes (1973), "The Pricing of Options and Corporate
     Liabilities," Journal of Political Economy 81, 637-654.
Breeden, Douglas T., and Robert H. Litzenberger (1978), "Prices of State-Contingent Claims
     Implicit in Option Prices," The Journal of Business 51, 621-651.
Brennan, Michael J., Henry H. Cao, Norman Strong, and Xinzhong Xu (2005), "The Dynamics
     of International Equity Market Expectations," Journal of Financial Economics 77, 257-288.
Bruine de Bruin, Wändi, Paul S. Fischbeck, Neil A. Stiber, and Baruch Fischhoff (2002), "What
     Number is ‘fifty-Fifty’?: Redistributing Excessive 50% Responses in Elicited Probabilities,"
     Risk Analysis 22, 713-723.
Cui, Changrong, and David Frank (2011), "Equity Implied Volatility Surface Computation,"
     Bloomberg Document No. 2056700.
De Long, James Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann
     (1990), "Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets," Journal of Political Economy 98, 703-
     738.
Dickey, David A., and Wayne A. Fuller (1979), "Distribution of the Estimators for
     Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root," Journal of the American Statistical
     Association 74, 427-431.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski (1997), "Perceptions of Economic Insecurity," Public
     Opinion Quarterly 61, 261-287.
Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski (2011), "Measuring and Interpreting Expectations of
     Equity Returns," Journal of Applied Econometrics 26, 352-370.
Fischhoff, Baruch, and Wändi Bruine de Bruin (1999), "Fifty-Fifty = 50%," Journal of
     Behavioral Decision Making 12, 149-163.
Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante (2010), "Unequal we Stand: An
     Empirical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States, 1967–2006," Review of
     Economic Dynamics 13, 15-51.
Hudomiet, Peter, Gábor Kézdi, and Robert J. Willis (2011), "Stock Market Crash and
     Expectations of American Households," Journal of Applied Econometrics 26, 393-415.
Hull, John C. (1989), Options, Futures and Other Derivatives, 4th ed. Upper Saddle, NJ:
     Prentice Hall.
Hurd, Michael D., Daniel L. McFadden, and Li Gan (1998), "Subjective Survival Curves and
     Life-Cycle Behavior," in Inquiries in the Economics of Aging, David A. Wise, ed. Chicago,
     IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hurd, Michael D., and Kathleen McGarry (2002), "The Predictive Validity of Subjective
     Probabilities of Survival," The Economic Journal 112, 966-985.
Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder (2010), "Effects of the Financial Crisis and Great
     Recession on American Households," NBER Working Paper No. 16407.

                                               22
Hurd, Michael D., and Susann Rohwedder (2012), "Stock Price Expectations and Stock
     Trading," NBER Working Paper No. 17973.
Huynh, Kim P., and Juergen Jung (2010), "Correcting Focal Point Biases in Subjective Health
     Expectations: An Application to the RAND-HRS Data," unpublished manuscript.
Juster, Thomas F. (1966), "Consumer Buying Intentions and Purchase Probabilities: an
     Experiment in Survey Design," Journal of the American Statistical Association 61, 658-696.
Kézdi, Gábor, and Robert J. Willis (2003), "Who Becomes a Stockholder? Expectations,
     Subjective Uncertainty and Asset Allocation," Michigan Retirement Research Center
     Working Paper No. 2003-039.
Kézdi, Gábor, and Robert J. Willis (2011). "Household Stock Market Beliefs and Learning,"
     NBER Working Paper No. 17614.
Kleinjans, Kristin J., and Arthur van Soest (2010), "Nonresponse and Focal Point Answers to
     Subjective Probability Questions," Netspar Discussion Paper No. 10/2010-05.
Law, Averill, and David Kelton (1982), Simulation Modeling and Analysis. New York, NY:
     McGraw-Hill.
Lillard, Lee, and Robert J. Willis (2001), "Cognition and Wealth: The Importance of
     Probabilistic Thinking," Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper No. 2001-
     007.
Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell (2011), "Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning
     in the United States," Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 10, 509-525.
Manski, Charles F., and Francesca Molinari (2010), "Rounding Probabilistic Expectations in
     Surveys," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 28, 219-231.
Manski, Charles F. (2004), "Measuring Expectations," Econometrica 72, 1329-1376.
McCullagh, Peter, and John A. Nelder (1989), Generalized Linear Models, 2nd ed. New York:
     Chapman and Hall.
Mendenhall, William, Richard L. Scheaffer, and Dennis Wackerly (1981). Mathematical
     Statistics with Applications, 2nd ed. Boston: Duxbury Press, 1981.
Merton, Robert C. (1973), "Theory of Rational Option Pricing," Bell Journal of Economics and
     Management 4, 141-183.
Paolina, Philip (2001), "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Models with Beta-Distributed
     Dependent Variables," Political Analysis 9, 325-346.
Poterba, James M., and Andrew A. Samwick (1995), "Stock Ownership Patterns, Stock Market
     Fluctuations, and Consumption," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 26, 295-372.
Schwarz, Gideon E. (1978), "Estimating the Dimension of a Model," The Annals of Statistics 6,
     461-464.
Shiller, Robert J. (2003), "From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance," Journal of
     Economic Perspectives 17, 83-104.
Watts, Simon (2010), "OVME <GO> Userguide," Bloomberg Document No. 2052774.
Winkler, Robert L. (1967), "The Assessment of Prior Distribution in Bayesian Analysis,"
     Journal of the American Statistical Association 62, 776-800.




                                              23
                                                                Figure 1: Frequency of responses to probabilistic questions

                                                                       >-20%                                                                                                  >0%
                                      25                                                                                                            25



                                      20                                                                                                            20
       Proportion (% of sample)




                                                                                                                         Proportion (% of sample)
                                      15                                                                                                            15



                                      10                                                                                                            10



                                             5                                                                                                       5



                                             0                                                                                                       0
                                                  0   10   20    30     40    50      60      70    80   90   100                                        0   10   20   30     40     50     60      70   80   90   100
                                                                  Stated Subjective Probability                                                                         Stated Subjective Probability


                                                                       >20%                                                                                             Aggregate
                                             25                                                                                                     25



                                             20                                                                                                     20
                  Proportion (% of sample)




                                                                                                                         Proportion (% of sample)
                                             15                                                                                                     15


                                             10                                                                                                     10


                                              5                                                                                                      5


                                              0
                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                  0   10   20     30     40    50      60      70   80   90   100
                                                                                                                                                         0   10   20   30     40    50      60      70   80   90   100
                                                                   Stated Subjective Probability
                                                                                                                                                                        Stated Subjective Probability




Note: These figures contain histograms of the responses to the three questions that ask
respondents to consider the probability of a more than -20% return, a positive return, and a more
than 20% return, as well as for all three questions combined (“Aggregate”). The responses to
the three questions are called >Minus20, PositiveGain, and >Plus20, respectively, and together
comprise the dependent variable. The figures document the large pile-up of responses at focal
points, particularly around the response of “50”, motivating the econometric model.
Observations in these figures are unweighted.




                                                                                                                    24
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics of Stated and Option-Implied Probabilities.


Summary statistics for the aggregate sample, computed over all person-wave observations. The
rows show means and standard deviations of the three probabilities used: the probability of a
more than -20% return (“>-20%”), a positive return (“>0%”), and a greater than 20% return
(“>20%”). The second column shows the number of person-wave observations, the third and
fourth show the means and standard deviations of the Wall Street probabilities and the last two
columns show these statistics for the Main Street probabilities.



       Probability of                          Wall Street                Main Street
          Return      Observations           Mean Std. Dev.             Mean Std. Dev.

           >-20%          46,232             0.830      0.049           0.758     0.200

            >0%           47,438             0.571      0.029           0.404     0.268

           >20%           45,657             0.240      0.043           0.271     0.216




                                               25
Table 2: Baseline Regression Results

        Maximum likelihood estimates of the model are presented in the table. For each variable, the estimated regression coefficient,
corresponding standard error and the marginal effect evaluated at the variable means are reported. For dichotomous (binary) variables,
the marginal effect is the difference in probability when evaluated at the value of one versus zero, ceteris paribus. The first three
columns show the results of the equation pertaining to μ, the expected value of respondents’ stated subjective probabilities. The
second three columns refer to w*, where w*>0 corresponds to a non-focal response. The last three columns refer to v*, where v*>0
signifies that a respondent gives a response of 50, conditional on giving a focal response (of zero, 50 or one hundred). A complete set
of wave dummies (not shown) is included in each of the three equations. Coefficients in bold represent significance at the 5% level.
                               Observations 139,327             Log likelihood        -66,968           Average log likelihood -0.481

                                                  μ                                 w*                                    v*
                                                                                     Std.
                                      Coef.   Std. Err.   Marginal        Coef.           Marginal          Coef.    Std. Err.    Marginal
                                                                                     Err.
Dummy (PositiveReturn)               -1.594     0.029       -0.366        -0.220   0.009   -0.075           0.138      0.026            0.043
Dummy (>Plus20)                      -2.055     0.059       -0.450        -0.002   0.009   -0.001           0.142      0.042            0.044

Demographic Characteristics
Female                               -0.115     0.006       -0.029        -0.028   0.008    -0.009          0.250      0.015         0.079
Age                                  -0.002     0.000        0.000         0.001   0.000     0.000         -0.011      0.001        -0.003
Race
   Non-hispanic white                 0.095     0.013        0.024        0.067    0.017        0.023      -0.096      0.034        -0.030
   Non-hispanic black                 0.065     0.016        0.016        0.049    0.019        0.016      -0.148      0.039        -0.049
   Hispanic/Latino                   -0.042     0.016       -0.010        0.020    0.020        0.007      -0.171      0.039        -0.057
Education
   Some college, no Bachelor          0.085     0.007        0.021        -0.059   0.009    -0.020          0.078      0.017         0.024
   Bachelor's degree                  0.189     0.008        0.047         0.174   0.010     0.056          0.202      0.022         0.061
   >Bachelor's                        0.259     0.010        0.065         0.315   0.014     0.097          0.024      0.029         0.007
Married                              -0.005     0.006       -0.001         0.077   0.008     0.026         -0.014      0.016        -0.005
Working                              -0.046     0.006       -0.011                                          0.061      0.015         0.019
Home owner                           -0.023     0.008       -0.006                                          0.094      0.018         0.030
Stock owner                           0.088     0.007        0.022                                          0.164      0.019         0.050
Have Retirement Account               0.099     0.007        0.025                                          0.126      0.017         0.040



                                                                     26
Table 2: Baseline Regression Results (cont’d)

Financial Market Characteristics
Return past 30 days                         -0.050        0.189        -0.012                                                -1.476         0.407          -0.466
Return past year                             0.288        0.110         0.072                                                 0.323         0.278           0.102
Return past 30 days * PositiveReturn         0.043        0.134         0.011                                                 0.515         0.294           0.163
Return past year * PositiveReturn           -0.132        0.033        -0.033                                                -0.054         0.066          -0.017
Return past 30 days * >Plus20                0.266        0.147         0.066                                                 0.880         0.318           0.278
Return past year * >Plus20                  -0.320        0.047        -0.080                                                -0.022         0.070          -0.007
Following the stock market
   Closely following                        -0.045        0.014        -0.011         -0.128       0.018       -0.044        -0.130         0.036          -0.042
   Not following                            -0.106        0.007        -0.026         -0.115       0.009       -0.039        -0.127         0.018          -0.040
Understanding of stock market
   Good understanding                        0.070        0.012         0.017          0.087       0.016        0.028        -0.089         0.034          -0.029
   Bad understanding                        -0.050        0.008        -0.012         -0.149       0.009       -0.050        -0.016         0.018          -0.005

Option-implied probability                   0.115        0.022         0.114
Implied volatility                                                                                                            0.521         0.579           0.165

Constant                                     0.998        0.044         0.248          0.726       0.030        0.242         0.823         0.159           0.260

Additional parameters
ψ                                            0.463        0.004
φ                                            3.909        0.016

Notes to table: The option-implied probability is transformed using the inverse of the logistic function (logit) analogous to how the Main Street probabilities
(dependent variable) are transformed, For ease of interpretation, however, the reported marginal effect corresponding to the option-implied probability is that of
the untransformed Wall Street probability on the untransformed Main Street probability. Therefore, a 10 percentage point increase in the Wall Street probability
results in a 1.14 percentage point increase in the Main Street probability, ceteris paribus. For the variables related to following the stock market and
understanding of the stock market, the omitted category is “somewhat following” and “some understanding”, respectively. Good understanding is a dummy
variable equal to one if an individual rated their understanding as “very good” or “excellent” and zero otherwise while bad understanding is analogously
constructed for responses of “poor” or “extremely poor”. The parameter ψ determines the threshold at which a focal respondent selects either zero (if their
perceived probability is below ψ) or 100 (if their perceived probability is above ψ). The parameter φ measures the dispersion in the beta distribution. A higher φ
means a lower variance of the beta distribution.




                                                                                27
Table 3: Regression Results Controlling for Inconsistent Responses

        Maximum likelihood estimates of the model are presented in the table. For each variable, the estimated regression coefficient,
corresponding standard error and the marginal effect evaluated at the variable means are reported. For dichotomous (binary) variables,
the marginal effect is the difference in probability when evaluated at the value of one versus zero, ceteris paribus. The first three
columns show the results of the equation pertaining to μ, the expected value of respondents’ stated subjective probabilities. The
second three columns refer to w*, where w*>0 corresponds to a non-focal response. The last three columns refer to v*, where v*>0
signifies that a respondent gives a response of 50, conditional on giving a focal response (of zero, 50 or one hundred). A complete set
of wave dummies (not shown) is included in each of the three equations. Coefficients in bold represent significance at the 5% level.
                               Observations 139,327             Log likelihood         -49,111         Average log likelihood -0.352

                                                   μ                                  w*                                v*
                                      Coef.   Std. Err.   Marginal          Coef. Std. Err. Marginal       Coef.     Std. Err.   Marginal
Dummy (PositiveReturn)               -1.625      0.029     -0.373          -0.285    0.010   -0.090        0.186      0.027        0.055
Dummy (>Plus20)                      -2.096      0.059     -0.457         -0.034     0.010   -0.010        0.139      0.042        0.041

Demographic Characteristics
Female                               -0.114     0.006       -0.028        -0.040    0.008     -0.012       0.259      0.015         0.078
Age                                  -0.002     0.000        0.000         0.002    0.000      0.001      -0.011      0.001        -0.003
Race
   Non-hispanic white                 0.095     0.013        0.024        -0.034    0.018     -0.010      -0.090      0.034        -0.027
   Non-hispanic black                 0.069     0.015        0.017        -0.034    0.021     -0.011      -0.148      0.039        -0.046
   Hispanic/Latino                   -0.039     0.016       -0.010         0.018    0.022      0.005      -0.171      0.040        -0.054
Education
   Some college, no Bachelor          0.086     0.007        0.021        -0.086    0.010     -0.027       0.086      0.017         0.025
   Bachelor's degree                  0.188     0.008        0.047        -0.037    0.012     -0.012       0.202      0.022         0.058
   >Bachelor's                        0.261     0.010        0.065         0.056    0.015      0.017       0.014      0.030         0.004
Married                              -0.005     0.006       -0.001         0.032    0.008      0.010      -0.023      0.016        -0.007
Working                              -0.051     0.006       -0.013                                         0.071      0.015         0.021
Home owner                           -0.026     0.008       -0.006                                         0.103      0.019         0.031
Stock owner                           0.087     0.007        0.022                                         0.158      0.020         0.046
Have Retirement Account               0.099     0.007        0.025                                         0.115      0.018         0.035




                                                                     28
Table 3: Regression Results Controlling for Inconsistent Responses (cont’d)

Financial Market Characteristics
Return past 30 days                           0.035        0.186          0.009                                                -1.516         0.410           -0.456
Return past year                              0.245        0.108          0.061                                                 0.431         0.281            0.130
Return past 30 days * PositiveReturn         -0.006        0.133         -0.001                                                 0.655         0.295            0.197
Return past year * PositiveReturn            -0.114        0.032         -0.028                                                -0.035         0.066           -0.011
Return past 30 days * >Plus20                 0.167        0.145          0.042                                                 0.891         0.321            0.268
Return past year * >Plus20                   -0.283        0.046         -0.070                                                 0.007         0.071            0.002
Following the stock market
   Closely following                         -0.044        0.014         -0.011         -0.110       0.020       -0.035        -0.147         0.037           -0.046
   Not following                             -0.106        0.007         -0.026         -0.027       0.010       -0.008        -0.113         0.019           -0.034
Understanding of stock market
   Good understanding                         0.073        0.012          0.018          0.045       0.018        0.014        -0.087         0.034           -0.027
   Bad understanding                         -0.054        0.008         -0.013         -0.045       0.010       -0.014        -0.003         0.018           -0.001

Consistent *OIP                               0.212        0.022          0.211
Near-inconsistent * OIP                       0.109        0.022          0.108
Inconsistent *OIP                            -0.220        0.022         -0.219

Implied volatility                                                                                                              0.834         0.584            0.251
Inconsistent * Implied volatility                                                                                              -2.287         0.401           -0.687

Constant                                      1.047        0.043          0.260          1.473       0.034        0.452         0.649         0.161            0.195
Inconsistent                                                                            -0.357       0.012       -0.118         1.280         0.109            0.265
Near-inconsistent                                                                       -1.483       0.009       -0.477

Additional parameters                   ψ    0.463       0.004                     φ     4.084       0.017

Notes to table: See notes to Table 2. In addition dummy variables for inconsistency (=1 if an individual’s set of survey responses is inconsistent with the laws
of probability and zero otherwise) and near-inconsistency (=1 if an individual’s set of survey responses implies zero probability over a measurable set of the
probability space and zero otherwise) are included in the regression, as well as interacted with the main variable of interest, the option-implied probability (OIP
in the table). An interaction between the inconsistency dummy and implied volatility is also included in the third equation of the model.




                                                                                  29
Appendix A: Construction and Description of Main Street Information
     We use publicly available data from the RAND American Life Panel (ALP)
(https://mmicdata.rand.org/alp). The Household information module10 contains a number of
demographic control variables such as age, gender, and race for the respondents to the two
repeated surveys that we use, the “Monthly Survey” and the “Effects of the Financial Crisis”.
The latter survey is conducted every three months, with the “Monthly Survey” (a shorter version
of the “Effects of the financial crisis” survey) conducted in the intervening two months. As of
the writing of the paper, data from November, 2008 to March, 2011 (25 waves of data) was
publicly available through the RAND website, with data through March, 2012 embargoed. Both
of the repeated modules used in the paper are ongoing; as a result, new modules are added each
month. After March, 2011 (wave 25), however, changes were made to the sample design that
were beyond our control (i.e., the sample size was reduced and a portion of the reduced sample
was not asked the subjective response questions that comprise our main variable of interest).
For this reason, we have not used subsequent waves of the sample in our analysis.
    The ALP website states the following about the duration of the interviews and incentives for
respondents:
        “Typically an interview will not take more than 30 minutes. Respondents are paid an
        incentive of about $20 per thirty minutes of interviewing (and proportionately less if an
        interview is shorter)”
Sampling weights were constructed by RAND so as to match the distribution of the US adult
population as reported in the Current Population Survey with regards to gender, age, race,
income and education. Unless stated otherwise, sampling weights are used when reporting
descriptive statistics and regression results.11
A1. Sample construction
       The sample construction is detailed in Table A1. A total of 50,029 surveys were initiated
by 2,699 respondents across 25 waves. For each wave, participants are given an approximately
two-week window during which to complete the survey. Therefore not every calendar day
during the sample period has survey responses associated with it. Of the 857 days between
November 5, 2008 and March 10, 2011, inclusive, surveys were taken by these 2,699
respondents on 364 of these days. Out of this total number, 784 surveys were not fully
completed and hence are omitted from our sample; an additional five surveys were omitted
because the sampling weight was missing.
        We also required surveys to contain responses to at least two of the three key variables of
interest. The requirement of at least two responses rather than three reflects the sampling
design: when respondents answer either zero or one hundred to the PositiveReturn question –
which accounts for 4.1% and 2.6% of the person-wave responses to this question, respectively,
only one of the two other questions is then asked, as a zero response to PositiveReturn implies a

10
     Accessible at: https://mmicdata.rand.org/alp/index.php?page=data&p=showsurvey&syid=90002
11
     The one exception is counts of observations – these are reported unweighted.
zero probability of a >20% increase and a 100 response implies a zero probability of a >20%
decrease. In 660 surveys there were no responses to these three variables while in 94 of the
surveys, only one of the three questions was answered.
Table A1: Sample Construction
                                                                            Dropped        Surveys    Persons
                                                               Persons      Surveys        Remaining Remaining
Start                                                             0            0             50029     2699
Survey Design
Haven't finished survey                                          519            784           49245           2689
Weights missing                                                   4              5            49240           2688

Dependent variable
Did not answer any key questions                                 138            660           48580           2685
Answered only 1 (of 3) key questions                             73             94            48486           2681

Covariates
Over 90 at first response                                         2             27            48459           2679
Gender, Ethnicity, Race, Birth year missing                       6              25           48434           2678
Inconsistent                                                     20             383           48051           2658
  Gender                                                          9             165
  Ethnicity                                                       5              99
  Race                                                            3              45
  Birth year                                                      3             74
Family income missing                                             9             100           47951           2656
"Holds stocks/stock mutual funds" missing                        110            145           47806           2655
"Bought or sold stocks since [timeframe]"
missing                                                           67            83            47723           2655
Exact amount bought/sold (follow-up) missing                      90            134           47589           2653
"Has retirement account" missing                                  97            101           47488           2652

Notes to the table: Surveys were dropped sequentially according to a series of filters, in the order that is indicated in
the first column. The second column indicates how many persons had at least one survey in which the mentioned
criterion is met. Note that since these individuals may have had admissible surveys in other waves, they may still
remain in the sample; therefore, the number of persons deleted as a result of each filter (reflected in the fifth
column) is generally lower than the number of persons listed in the second column. The third column indicates the
number of surveys that were omitted as a result of the filter. The fourth and fifth column indicate how many surveys
and persons, respectively, remained after applying the filter. An exception to this rule are the observations left out
when a person was initially over 90 or gave inconsistent responses with regards to demographic variables; in these
cases, all surveys answered by the person were dropped.

        A modest age screen is necessary to minimize the small sample bias that could enter into
the analysis by including individuals in the tail end of the age distribution. As a result twenty-
seven surveys were omitted as the respondent was over 90 when first answering a survey. 588
surveys were excluded because key covariates were missing. Finally, 383 surveys answered by

                                                          31
20 respondents were excluded because of inconsistencies with regards to race, ethnicity, birth
year or gender.12
        After all sampling screens, our final sample contains 2,652 respondents (98.3% of the
original respondents) over 364 days, for a total of 47,488 surveys (94.9% of the original
surveys). Because in some surveys not all of the three questions were answered, we have a total
of 47,438, 45,657, and 46,232 responses to the PositiveReturn,>Plus20, and >Minus20
questions, respectively, leading to 139,327 responses to the three questions combined.
        The questions “How would you rate your understanding of the stock market” and “How
closely do you follow the stock market” are not asked in every wave, but in four waves of the
“Effects of the Financial Crisis” module (including the first two waves). For the (subsequent)
waves where this variable is unobserved, we assume that the respondent’s answer remains the
same until the next observable response.




12
   A respondent is considered inconsistent if in more than one wave, the reported gender, ethnicity, race or birth year
is different from that most frequently given by that respondent – e.g., a person is reported to be male in 3 waves and
female in the other 10 waves answered. The decision to restrict the exclusion criterion to more than one wave is in
recognition of the possibility of an occasional error. Similarly, a difference of one year in reported birth years is not
counted as being so different that the observation should be excluded, nor is the reporting of an “other” race when
the most frequent response in that person’s other surveys is a specific race and vice versa.


                                                           32
A2: Average Main Street Responses, by Various Characteristics
The mean response to each of the three main questions of interest is given in Table A2, for the
overall sample and stratified by a variety of characteristics. Columns labeled “1” give the mean
for respondents that are a member of the given group; “0” is the mean over the rest of the
sample (i.e., those not in the group). Means for the characteristic are shown in bold when it is
statistically significantly different from the mean of the rest of the sample at a 5% level of
significance.
       There is evidence of heterogeneity in the Main Street probabilities, according to
observable characteristics. For example, those who own stocks, those with higher educational
attainment and those who report a good understanding or close following of the stock market on
average give more optimistic responses (higher mean responses) than the rest of the sample.

Table A2                                 >Minus20          PositiveReturn            >Plus20
Overall                                      0.758               0.404                0.271

Is in group (1=yes, 0 = no)              1           0       1           0       1             0

Female                                0.749      0.768    0.373      0.441    0.272       0.268
Married                               0.762      0.752    0.416      0.387    0.263       0.282
Homeowner                             0.768      0.742    0.418      0.382    0.259       0.289
Owns Stocks                           0.775      0.751    0.478      0.373    0.275       0.269
Have Retirement Account               0.771      0.741    0.446      0.351    0.264       0.280
Working for pay                       0.754      0.763    0.411      0.395    0.273       0.267
Ethnicity
   Hispanic/Latino                    0.755      0.758    0.336      0.411    0.270       0.271
   Non-Hispanic White                 0.762      0.746    0.417      0.367    0.266       0.286
   Non-Hispanic Black                 0.743      0.760    0.364      0.409    0.300       0.267
   Other                              0.738      0.759    0.427      0.403    0.283       0.270
Education
   High School                        0.756      0.759    0.334      0.450    0.260       0.277
   Some college, no degree            0.738      0.765    0.401      0.405    0.284       0.265
   Bachelor's degree                  0.771      0.754    0.485      0.382    0.273       0.270
   Further education                  0.788      0.754    0.510      0.391    0.268       0.271
Understanding stock market
   Extremely/Very good                0.769      0.758    0.531      0.402    0.298       0.270
   Somewhat good/poor                 0.760      0.758    0.431      0.400    0.276       0.270
   Extremely/Very poor                0.752      0.758    0.314      0.410    0.261       0.271
Follow stock market
   Very closely                       0.746      0.758    0.499      0.403    0.306       0.270
   Somewhat closely                   0.765      0.757    0.464      0.398    0.283       0.269
   Not at all                         0.753      0.758    0.336      0.412    0.260       0.272


                                                33
A3. Focal Response Proportions
        There are significant differences in the proportion of focal responses (responses of 0, 50,
or 100 to the >Minus20, PositiveReturn, and >Plus20 survey questions) by demographic
characteristics (e.g., gender, marital status, work status, educational status) and also according to
subjects’ self-rated understanding and following of the stock market, as shown in Table A3.
Those who report limited understanding/following of the stock market, have lower educational
attainment, and non-Hispanic blacks provide the highest proportion of focal responses. The
difference in focal proportions among population sub-groups (shown in bold when they are
significantly different from the other observations at a 5% level of significance) motivates the
decision to explicitly model the probability of giving a focal response as a function of observable
covariates.


Table A3: Proportion of Focal Responses per Subgroup

                Overall                                           0.281
                                                              Proportion focal
                Group                                    In group     Not in group
                Female                                     0.295          0.263
                Married                                    0.263          0.306
                Houseowner                                 0.265          0.305
                Owns stocks                                0.236          0.299
                Have Retirement Account                    0.242          0.329
                Working for pay                            0.276          0.286

                Ethnicity
                  Hispanic/Latino                          0.307          0.278
                  Non-hispanic White                       0.274          0.300
                  Non-hispanic Black                       0.312          0.277
                  Other                                    0.266          0.282
                Education
                  High School                              0.306          0.264
                  Some college, Bachelor's degree          0.322          0.264
                  Bachelor's degree                        0.228          0.295
                  Further education                        0.186          0.293
                Understanding stock market
                  Extremely/Very good                      0.241          0.282
                  Somewhat good/somewhat poor              0.280          0.281
                  Extremely/Very poor                      0.379          0.274
                Follow stock market
                  Very closely                             0.273          0.281
                  Somewhat closely                         0.266          0.282
                  Not at all                               0.350          0.273

                                                 34
Appendix B: Construction and Description of Wall Street Information
        The price at time t of a European call option with a strike price of K and an expiry date of
T > t is given by:



where


                                             √
                                                                               √



        The interest rate (r) is the (continuous) U.S. dollar swap rate over the period [t,T] (which
is the default rate for option price calculations in Bloomberg), the dividend rate (q) is the
Bloomberg forecast for the DJIA dividend rate during the same period, the volatility (σ) is the
implied volatility corresponding to each specified strike price (relative to the spot price St) and a
time to expiration T - t.
        The daily implied volatilities are determined by Bloomberg based on prices from out-of-
the-money options. For those strike prices and times to expiration for which options on a
particular asset are available (i.e., traded), corresponding implied volatilities can be derived.
From these, implied volatilities for other combinations of strike prices and times to expiration
can be estimated.13 In particular, implied volatilities for a time to expiration (T-t) of one year
and strike prices (K) of 80%, 100%, and 120% of the level of the index at time t were
constructed, consistent with the time horizon and return categories articulated in the ALP survey
questions and corresponding to the questions >Minus20, PositiveReturn, and >Plus20,
respectively. Note that although Bloomberg uses a specific interest rate and dividend rate to
calculate the implied volatility, its estimates for these values are based on market prices for
observed options. The Black-Scholes model treats the three parameters (r, q and σ) as
independently determined, namely a change in one of the three does not affect the other two.
Obtaining parameters from Bloomberg®
In order to obtain the interest rate and dividend rate for the DJIA corresponding to each day of
the sample, Bloomberg®’s option pricing screen (OVME DIVA – see below)14 was used: this
screen calculates the price of an option with characteristics specified by the user, and also allows
for the calculation of prices for days in the past (see example below). The user can put values in
the highlighted sections specifying exactly the terms of the option s/he wants to price and the
Bloomberg pricer then automatically inserts the market value of necessary parameters (such as
the implied volatility) and calculates the price of the option.

13
  For more information on the calculation of the implied volatility, see: Cui, C. and D. Frank 2011, ”Equity Implied
Volatility Surface Computation, version 3.6”, Bloomberg document, 2056700, 1-10. The document can be found by
typing DOCS 2056700 <GO> when logged in to a Bloomberg terminal.
14
  For more information on the option pricing screen (OVME), see the most recent user guide at the time of writing,
Watts (2010), ”OVME<GO> Userguide”, Bloomberg document 2052774, 1-21. The document can be found by
typing DOCS 2052774 <GO> when logged in to a Bloomberg® terminal.


                                                        35
Through the OVME screen, a user can also create a ‘deal’, whereby certain aspects of the options
remain fixed. For simplicity, one such deal was created for the first of every period of 30
calendar days in the period corresponding to the ALP sample. The underlying security was set to
DJIA and the expiration date (T) was set at 1 year from this first day. Once a deal is created, a
function in the Bloomberg® Excel add-in (BDP) can then be used to download the interest and
dividend rate for all 30 days in the interval. The OVME screen does not allow for keeping the
time to expiration constant, only the expiration date can be kept constant. As such, the interest
rate that is captured ranges from the (continuous) 1-year interest rate down to the 336-day (1 year
minus 29 days) rate. As the latter is not appreciably different from the former, and each survey
is available for less than 30 days (approximately 2 weeks), the effects of this simplification are
minimal.
The 12-month implied volatility was gathered using Bloomberg®’s historical price add-in
(BDH) for Microsoft Excel®, for DJIA options with a strike price of 80%, 100% and 120% of
the level at closing for each day that surveys were answered.15
Figure B1: Example of the Bloomberg® OVME DIVA screen
The boxes in the two top rows show the
underlying security and the price
thereof, along with the day at which the
price of the option is to be calculated.
The boxes in the next three rows show
the price of the option and other values
characteristic to an option. The boxes
below can be used to specify exactly the
characteristics of the option for which
the price is to be calculated. Bloomberg
automatically fills in the (historical)
market values for the implied volatility,
interest rate and dividend rate (manual
override of these values is possible but
is not done in this study). The boxes are linked so that changing the value in one box may cause
other values to change.
Two comments regarding the values of the interest rate and dividend series are in order:
(1) Although the choice of a 6% equity risk premium (ρ) reflects historical levels, it is admittedly
arbitrary. The sensitivity of the results with respect to this decision to include an equity
premium, as opposed to computing values under an assumption of risk neutrality, is considered
as a robustness check in Appendix E1.
(2) The DJIA is dividend-adjusted, i.e., when a company in the DJIA pays its shareholders a
dividend, the index is adjusted in such a way that the expected fall in share price as a result of the
dividend payment (the value of the company decreases as cash flows out in the form of
15
   On November 26, 2010, the Friday after Thanksgiving, a 120% moneyness volatility was registered of nearly
twice that of the trading days prior to and after that date. As such large movements are highly unusual, we have
treated this as a mistake and carry over the value from the previous trading day.

                                                        36
dividends) is nullified. The index can therefore be seen as a non-dividend paying security; hence
the value for the dividend yield q is set to zero when the probabilities are calculated. We
consider instead using the value of the actual dividend yield as a robustness check in Appendix
E1.
The time series of the interest rate and dividend yield are shown in Figure B2(a). For each of the
three strike prices (corresponding to 80%, 100%, or 120% of the current DJIA spot price), the
option-implied probability and implied volatility are shown in Figures B2(b) – B2(d). In each
graph, the correlation between the first differences of the two series is reported in the upper left
corner. The figures show an upward trend in the probability of a positive return and a greater
than -20% return and a pronounced downward trend in the option-implied probabilities of a
greater than 20% return.
                                                                                  Figure B2(b): Option-implied probability
Figure B2(a): 1-year interest rate & dividend
                                                                                  and volatility for a return of >-20% in one
yield used in pricing options on the DJIA
                                                                                  year for the DJIA
                     Correlation = -0.094    Dividend     Interest                            Correlation = -0.981        Probability         Volatility
               4.5                                                                    100
               4.0                                                                     90
               3.5                                                                     80
               3.0                                                                     70
     Percent




                                                                                  Percent



               2.5                                                                     60
               2.0                                                                     50
               1.5                                                                     40
                                                                                       30
               1.0
                                                                                       20
               0.5
                                                                                       10
               0.0
                                                                                        0
                     Feb-09
                     Mar-09
                     Apr-09
                     May-09

                      Jul-09


                     Oct-09



                     Feb-10
                     Mar-10
                     Apr-10
                     May-10

                      Jul-10


                     Oct-10



                     Feb-11
                     Mar-11
                     Nov-08
                     Dec-08
                     Jan-09




                     Jun-09

                     Aug-09
                     Sep-09

                     Nov-09
                     Dec-09
                     Jan-10




                     Jun-10

                     Aug-10
                     Sep-10

                     Nov-10
                     Dec-10
                     Jan-11




                                                                                             May-09




                                                                                             May-10
                                                                                             Feb-09




                                                                                             Feb-10




                                                                                             Feb-11
                                                                                             Oct-09




                                                                                             Oct-10
                                                                                             Nov-08
                                                                                             Dec-08


                                                                                             Mar-09



                                                                                              Jul-09



                                                                                             Nov-09
                                                                                             Dec-09


                                                                                             Mar-10



                                                                                              Jul-10



                                                                                             Nov-10
                                                                                             Dec-10
                                                                                             Apr-09




                                                                                             Apr-10




                                                                                             Mar 11
                                                                                             Jan-09




                                                                                             Jun-09

                                                                                             Aug-09
                                                                                             Sep-09



                                                                                             Jan-10




                                                                                             Jun-10

                                                                                             Aug-10
                                                                                             Sep-10



                                                                                             Jan-11
                                                                                  Figure B2(d): Option-implied probability
Figure B2(c): Option-implied probability and
                                                                                  and volatility for a return of >20% in one
volatility for a gain in one year for the DJIA
                                                                                  year for the DJIA
                 Correlation = -0.952       Probability   Volatility                        Correlation = 0.722      Probability        Volatility
   100                                                                      100
    90                                                                       90
    80                                                                       80
    70                                                                       70
                                                                        Percent




                                                                             60
Percent




    60
    50                                                                       50
    40                                                                       40
    30                                                                       30
    20                                                                       20
    10                                                                       10
     0                                                                        0
                                                                                             Jul-09


                                                                                            Oct-09
                                                                                            Feb-09
                                                                                            Mar-09




                                                                                             Jul-10
                                                                                            Apr-09




                                                                                            Oct-10
                                                                                            May-09




                                                                                            Feb-10
                                                                                            Mar-10
                                                                                            Apr-10
                                                                                            May-10




                                                                                            Feb-11
                                                                                            Mar-11
                                                                                            Jan-09




                                                                                            Jun-09




                                                                                            Jan-10




                                                                                            Jun-10




                                                                                            Jan-11
                                                                                            Aug-09
                                                                                            Sep-09
                                                                                            Nov-08
                                                                                            Dec-08




                                                                                            Aug-10
                                                                                            Sep-10
                                                                                            Nov-09
                                                                                            Dec-09




                                                                                            Nov-10
                                                                                            Dec-10
                Oct-09




                Oct-10



                Feb-11
                Feb-09

                Apr-09
                May-09




                Feb-10

                Apr-10
                May-10




                Mar-11
                Mar-09



                 Jul-09




                Mar-10



                 Jul-10
                Aug-10
                Sep-10

                Nov-10
                Dec-10
                Jan-11
                Nov-08
                Dec-08
                Jan-09




                Jun-09

                Aug-09
                Sep-09

                Nov-09
                Dec-09
                Jan-10




                Jun-10




Source: Bloomberg


Summary statistics and correlations for both the levels and the first differences of these time
series are provided in Table B. An augmented Dickey-Fuller test (Dickey and Fuller, 1979) was
                                                                       37
performed on all the option-implied probability and volatility time series in Figures B2(b)-(d) to
test for a unit root including a drift and trend, with the number of included lags chosen to
minimize the Schwarz (1978) Bayesian Information Criterion. Even at the 10% level of
significance, the null hypothesis of a unit root was not rejected for any of the series.
Overall, the market expectations as measured by the statistics in Table B can be interpreted as
somewhat negative (with the caveat that the assumption of risk neutrality implies that option-
implied expectations are downward-biased under standard utility conditions). The average
option-implied probability of a positive gain is below 50% and the average probability of a
>20% decline (= one minus the average probability of a >-20% increase) in the stock market
exceeds the average probability of a >20% increase by eight percentage points (26.1% versus
18.1%, respectively). This indication of negative sentiment is perhaps not surprising when
considered in the historical context of the unfolding financial crisis during the sample period to
which the data correspond.
The daily changes of the option-implied probabilities also display large fluctuations. As an
example, consider the mean probability of a greater than -20% return in the stock index over the
coming year (73.9%, row 1 column 1). The mean absolute daily change of 0.43 percentage
points (row 1 column 6) for >Minus20 means that each day the market’s belief fluctuates by an
average of 0.43 percentage points (e.g., increasing it from 73.9 to 74.33). The option-implied
probabilities of >Plus20 vary less on a daily basis (as seen by lower standard deviations, mean
and median absolute deviations) and those of PositiveReturn by half as much as >Plus20. For
all time series in the table, the large values of the minimum and maximum first difference
compared to the standard deviation suggest fatter tails than a normal distribution would indicate;
indeed, the kurtosis is between 7.58 and 10.21.
The Wall Street data exhibit evidence of volatility skew (implied volatility decreases with strike
price): the mean implied volatility is highest for >Minus20 (30.3%), lower for PositiveReturn
(26.8%) and lowest for >Plus20 (23.8%). With the exception of the standard deviation, the rest
of the implied volatility statistics in levels display a pattern similar to the means. The
comovement of these series is evident when considering the first differences of the implied
volatilities (right hand block of the table), where all moments shown are quite similar. However,
the magnitudes of the first differences of the implied volatilities suggest a remarkably large
variation on a day-to-day basis.




                                                38
Table B: Descriptive Statistics of the Time Series of Option-Implied Probabilities (computed over survey days only)
This table contains summary statistics of the daily time series of the Wall Street option-implied probabilities that are calculated using
the parameters extracted from Bloomberg. The rows show summary statistics of these probabilities for a >-20% return, a positive
(>0%) return, and a >20% return. Statistics are shown for both the levels and first differences (daily changes) of each time series.
Because there are gaps in the survey days, only consecutive pairs of days are used for computation of the summary statistics of the
first differences.



                                             Levels (n=364)                                                   First differences (n= 323)
                              (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)              (5)               (6)          (7)         (8)        (9)              (10)

                                                                                            Mean        Median
                            Mean       Median      St.dev       Min        Max                                        St.dev.        Min          Max
                                                                                             (abs)       (abs)
           Probability      79.9%      82.0%        7.1%      63.6%       91.2%             0.45%       0.23%         0.76%        -2.68%        3.99%
> -20%
           Volatility       30.3%      27.5%        7.5%      19.9%       50.3%             0.46%       0.22%         0.84%        -4.34%        3.24%

           Probability      55.5%      56.1%        3.9%      47.5%       63.3%             0.24%        0.13%        0.40%        -1.55%        1.66%
> 0%
           Volatility       26.8%      24.0%        7.8%      15.5%       46.3%             0.42%        0.19%        0.77%        -4.17%        3.25%

           Probability      25.7%      26.0%        4.9%      12.9%       32.5%             0.20%        0.11%        0.34%        -1.70%        1.87%
> 20%
           Volatility       23.8%      21.3%        8.0%      11.0%       42.8%             0.43%        0.20%        0.79%        -3.84%        3.38%




Note: For the first differences, we report the mean and median of the absolute value because both mean and median are (practically) zero for all six of
the first difference time series and these statistics would thus be uninformative. The mean and median of the absolute value provide additional
information about the variation of the time series.




                                                                               39
Appendix C: Who predicts better, Wall Street or Main Street?

A natural question to ask when comparing returns expectations of the two populations is which
group does a better job of predicting future returns. To answer this question, we next use the
probability thresholds corresponding to >Minus20, PositiveReturn, and >Plus20 to approximate
an empirical cumulative distribution function (cdf), assumed to be lognormal, corresponding to
the distribution of expected one-year future returns on the DJIA, for each interview day in the
sample. The option-implied probabilities are used to construct analogous Wall Street cdfs for
each day. We then compare these daily cdfs to the corresponding ex-post realized one-year
returns using a likelihood-based metric where we compute a corresponding probability density
function (pdf), evaluate it at the realized return for each day, and cumulate the log of the result
across all days. Hence outperformance corresponds to a higher likelihood. The results are in
Table C. Surprisingly, using subjective response data elicited from a random small, yet
representative sample of the US population results in only about a 30% greater likelihood than
using probabilities inferred from option prices that reflect the views of thousands of market
participants. Hence while Wall Street is better than Main Street at predicting subsequent future
one-year returns, our results demonstrate sizable informational content in expectations elicited
from survey response data.

Table C: Comparing Wall Street and Main Street accuracy of beliefs

A comparison of the accuracy of Wall Street and Main Street beliefs is shown, along with
comparisons across a variety of subgroups. We report the mean log likelihood in the second and
third columns, based on the (logarithm of the) probability density function (pdf) evaluated at the
realized 1-year ahead return. To avoid the Main Street result being driven by extreme
observations, we exclude days in which less than ten surveys were answered from the
calculations (for each pairwise comparison, the number of survey-days that remain is shown). In
addition to comparing Main Street to Wall Street, we similarly compare subsamples of the Main
Street data to draw inference about which subgroups are more prescient; these are shown in the
bottom half of the table. While men and those that are married outperform women and those that
are single, respectively, the magnitude of the outperformance is not qualitatively very large. In
contrast, the effects of education and being a homeowner or a stockowner double the
outperformance, although still less than half of the Wall Street/Main Street outperformance.
                    # Days Wall Street                    Main Street         Outperformance           p-value
     Overall sample   281    0.33                           0.06                  30.7%                 0.000

     Subgroup                           In Group         Not in Group
     Male                    258          0.13               0.06                   7.4%                0.010
     Married                 257          0.10               0.05                   5.3%                0.060
     Homeowner               231          0.14               0.01                   14.2%               0.000
     Stockowner              260          0.16               0.01                   16.7%               0.000
     >Bachelor’s             261          0.17               0.03                   15.7%               0.000
Notes to table: The group with more accurate beliefs is shown in bold. Outperformance is measured by the ratio of
the higher likelihood to the lower likelihood, where the likelihood is computed as the exponential of each mean log
likelihood. P-values were obtained through bootstrapping 100,000 random draws of the number of observations for
each group, with replacement.

                                                        40
Appendix D: Likelihood calculation
The derivation of the likelihood is provided below for the likelihood of an individual
observation. Individual subscripts have been omitted for notational simplicity. The covariate
matrices – which are row vectors in this case, as they refer to an individual observation – are
represented with lower case instead of capital letters. The likelihood of a non-focal response is
given by:

P(w*>0) =           2 2           0       1           2 2              0       1                                2 2


                                              1               2 2                  2 2

The likelihood of a focal response is then given by:

                                              1             2 2                2 2

Where Ф is the standard normal cumulative distribution function. When there is a non-focal
response p, the density, is given by the beta distribution with parameters α1 and α2 (Mendenhall,
Scheaffer and Wackerly, 1981):
                                                  1
                          |   ,                                                                         1

with Γ the gamma function and α1, α2, and μ given by:
                                                                           1



and φ a constant. When there is a focal response, the likelihood for a response of 50 (v*>0) is
given by     3 3 and that of zero or 100 by        3 3 .

Conditional on a response of zero or 100 (v*≤0), the likelihood of a response of zero is given by:

                                                              1        2                    1                    1
                                      |   ,                                         1           1           2

                                                              1        2       0

which is often referred to as the ‘regularized incomplete beta function’       ,    .16 The overall
likelihood of any response is then given by the product of the three separate likelihoods (i.e., the
likelihood of a response of zero or 100 given a focal response, the likelihood of a focal response,
and the likelihood of the response conditional on a non-focal response):
p=0
                              ∗               ∗                   ∗                         | ,     ∗                 ∗
                                  0|                  0| ,             0                                        0,        0

                                                      2 2                               ,

16
     Mendenhall, Scheaffer and Wackerly (1981), p. 147.

                                                                  41
p=1

                          2 2         1       ,

p = 0.5

                                2 2

p = other (non-focal)

                        2 2               1




                                42
Appendix E: Robustness checks
A number of robustness checks were conducted; the results are summarized in this section.17
E1. Sensitivity to risk neutrality assumption, equity premium and dividend yield assumption

     The baseline assumptions for the parameters r (the interest rate) and q (the dividend yield)
reflect an adjustment to the assumption of risk neutrality (i.e., we use r + ρ = the risk-free rate
plus a 6% equity risk premium, in other words, the required rate of return) and a recognition that
the DJIA is dividend-adjusted (i.e., q = 0), respectively. We consider in this section sensitivity
to the assumption about the equity premium and/or estimates of the dividend yield. To evaluate
the robustness of the results to the baseline assumptions, we therefore consider a number of
alternative values for the parameters used to computing the option-implied probability: (1) ρ =0,
i.e., preferences are risk neutral, (2) ρ =0 and q = the Bloomberg dividend forecast, and (3) ρ =
6% and q = the Bloomberg dividend forecast.

        As would be expected, the assumption of risk neutrality shifts the option-implied
probability distribution to the left, lowering the average, minimum, and maximum associated
with the three questions. Figure D shows the time series of the option-implied probability to
>Minus20, PositiveReturn and >Plus20 with values for r and q as specified in the alternatives
above, as well as the baseline values used in the paper. Not surprisingly, the pattern of the series
is similar for the different calculations of the option-implied probability, although the difference
between the series is not constant. The latter is a result of the non-linearity of the normal
distribution function and the fact that the dividend and interest rate are not constant.

    The inclusion of alternative shifted distributions of option-implied probabilities in the model
causes only the coefficient on the option-implied probability and the constant to change; all
other coefficients, standard errors, and marginal effects are practically unchanged. The
estimated marginal effects on the option implied probability change depending on the model
used: a ten percent increase in the option implied probability increases respondents’ beliefs by
1.09 / 1.01 / 1.17 percentage points for models (1) to (3), respectively, compared to an increase
of 1.14 percentage points for the baseline model (with r the required rate of return and q = 0).
The coefficient on the option-implied probability is significant at the 5% level for all four
models.

   Taken together, these analyses demonstrate that the regression results in the paper are hardly
sensitive to the assumptions about risk neutrality, the equity premium, and the dividend yield.

E2. Sensitivity to the meaning of 50% responses.

    An attractive feature of the ALP survey design was that an additional elicitation question was
included following a response of “50%” to the PositiveReturn question.18 The response to this



17
  For each robustness check, the model was re-estimated according to the modification described. In most cases,
due to space considerations, only a summary of the findings is included. A complete set of results is available from
the authors on request.

                                                         43
follow-up question (hereafter referred to as 50%Followup) enables the possibility of separately
distinguishing between (1) people for whom 50% conveys complete uncertainty, versus (2) those
who view the probabilities of an increase or a decrease in the stock market over the coming year
as being equal, and testing whether the two groups demonstrate different Wall Street/Main Street
linkages. Of the subjects that answered 50 to PositiveReturn, a slight majority (52%) noted (via
the follow-up elicitation question) that they were “just unsure”, rather than truly thinking there
was an equally likely chance that the DJIA would rise versus fall. That such a large proportion
of the respondents use this focal point to indicate their uncertainty motivated our decision to
model the choice of 50 as a separate behavior (following Hurd, McFadden, and Gan, 1998 and
Bruine de Bruin et al., 2002).
    As a starting point, the proportion of “unsure” responses is computed, stratified according to
how closely respondents are following the stock market, their self-assessed understanding of the
stock market, and their understanding of the laws of probability (as measured by our
“inconsistent” and “near-inconsistent” definitions); the results are in Table E1. Overall, about
42% of those responding to the two stock market questions reported that their focal response of
50% meant there was an equal probability of an increase or decrease and 58% reported that it
meant they were unsure what the probability was. Yet for both questions, the proportions vary
significantly according to how closely individuals follow and how well they understand the stock
market. The proportion of 50% responses that are reported to have meant “equal probability” is
highest among those claiming to follow the stock market very closely or to have an excellent or
very good understanding of the stock market (58% and 70%, respectively) and lowest for those
who claim to not follow the stock market at all or to have an extremely poor or very poor
understanding (33% and 25%, respectively).19

    There are also statistically significant differences in the proportions that use 50% to mean
equal probabilities according to how well respondents seem to understand the laws of
probability. Among consistent sets of responses, a response of 50% to the PositiveReturn
question means equal probability of an increase and decrease significantly more often as it means
the respondent is unsure about the exact probability (62% versus 38%). Among inconsistent sets
of responses, the proportion is nearly 11 percentage points lower than the proportion of
consistent responses. Near-inconsistent sets of responses are least likely to use the focal
response of 50% to indicate equal probabilities; not only is the proportion nearly 24 percentage
points lower in these sets than among the consistent sets, it is also significantly less than the
proportion of unsure responses (39% versus 61%).

As a result of these findings, the model was re-estimated to take these differences into account
(Table E2). A dummy variable equal to one if the respondent answered 50% to the
PositiveReturn question and subsequently reported that their response indicated they were
“unsure” and zero otherwise is included in both the µ and w* equations; an interaction between

18
  The exact wording of the question was, “Do you think it is equally likely the shares will be worth more in a year
as it is they will be worth less or are you just unsure about the chances?” The sample contains 11,810 person-wave
responses to this question.
19
  The proportions reporting “unsure” are 100% minus the proportions reporting “equal probability”. The
differences in these proportions are statistically significantly different at a 1% level of significance.


                                                        44
this “unsure” dummy variable and the option-implied probability variable is also included in the
first equation.20 The coefficient on the dummy variable in the µ equation is not statistically
significant, and the qualitative results are for the most part unchanged. In the w* equation that
models the likelihood of a focal response, the inclusion of the “unsure” dummy variable renders
the effect of being female and non-Hispanic white no longer statistically significant. The
coefficient for age changes sign from positive to negative; older people are now significantly
more likely to give a non-focal response.

Most importantly, the coefficient on the interaction term between the “unsure” dummy and the
option-implied probability variable is significantly negative, indicating that those who are unsure
report probabilities that bear less resemblance to the option-implied probability. When those that
are “unsure” and those that believe the probability is equal are included separately in the
estimation, the marginal effect of the option-implied probability for the “unsure” group is -0.044
(though with p-value 0.066), while the marginal effect for the other observations (those in the
“equal probability” group plus those that gave a non-50 response to PositiveReturn) is larger than
in the baseline regression, estimated to be 0.122. A possible explanation for this finding could
be that those who admit to being unsure have little understanding of the market and are thus less
likely to know the ‘true’ probabilities.

E3. Sensitivity to choice of return date
The decision to compute returns through the close of business of the day before the survey was
administered was made in order to keep the explanatory variables chronologically prior to the
dependent variable, thus facilitating an approximate causal interpretation (i.e., how do Wall
Street beliefs influence Main Street beliefs).21 An argument can be made, however, for including
returns computed through the close of business of the day of the interview, enabling a more
contemporaneous determination of views (i.e., how similar are Wall Street and Main Street
beliefs).
The model is re-estimated using returns, option-implied probabilities, and implied volatilities
computed as of the close of the day of interview, rather than as of the close of the day prior. The
results are qualitatively the same, indicating little sensitivity of the results to the causally-prior
modeling choice. Including the contemporaneous day’s information, the return in the past 30
days is no longer statistically significant at the 5% level in the third (v*) equation, while the
return in the past year is. In addition, the implied volatility is statistically significant at the 10%
level.




20
   It is not possible to include the dummy in the third (v*) equation since the follow-up elicitation is only asked
following a response of 50%, where the latter corresponds to v*>0 in all cases. In the interest of space only a
summary of the key findings is provided here; the full set of results is available from the authors on request.
21
   A Granger-causality test was performed as a robustness check to consider the possibility that causality instead
goes from Main Street beliefs to Wall Street beliefs. Wall Street beliefs were found to Granger-cause Main Street
beliefs, but not vice versa.

                                                         45
Table E1: Contingency table of responses to the follow-up question after a response of 50
to PositiveReturn.

Numbers represent the (weighted) proportion of “Equal probability” and “Unsure” responses to
the follow-up question for different subgroups. T-values corresponding to a test for a difference
in proportions are reported and shown in bold when significant at a 5% level. Note that the
numbers shown in the rows “Number of Obs.” are not weighted, as these are count data. The
number of observations in panels (a) and (b) is less than in panel (c) as a result of the question
not being asked in every survey. The number of observations in panel (c) is less than the overall
sample because the 50%Followup question was only asked of those who gave a response of 50 to
PositiveReturn.

                                         (a) Following stock market

                             Very Close                Somewhat            Not at All      Total
  Equal probability             0.58                     0.51                0.33          0.42
      Unsure                    0.42                     0.49                0.67          0.58

  Number of Obs.                 166                     1,111              1,086          2,363
 t-value difference              1.83                    0.81               -11.79         -7.58

                                        (b) Understanding stock market

                                                                        Extremely/Very
                        Extremely/Very Good           Somewhat               Poor          Total
  Equal probability             0.70                     0.49                 0.25         0.42
      Unsure                    0.30                    0.51                  0.75         0.58

  Number of obs.                 234                     1,451               681           2,366
 t-value difference              5.29                    -0.88              -14.21         -7.55

                                              (c) Consistency

                             Inconsistent           Near-inconsistent     Consistent       Total
  Equal probability              0.51                     0.39              0.62           0.48
      Unsure                     0.49                     0.61              0.38           0.52

  Number of obs.                 735                     6,229               4,776        11,810
 t-value difference              0.74                    -19.08              15.65         -5.10




                                               46
Table E2: Regression Results Accounting for the Interpretation of a Response of 50

        Maximum likelihood estimates of the model are presented in the table. For each variable, the estimated regression coefficient,
corresponding standard error and the marginal effect evaluated at the variable means are reported. For dichotomous (binary) variables,
the marginal effect is the difference in probability when evaluated at the value of one versus zero, ceteris paribus. The first three
columns show the results of the equation pertaining to μ, the expected value of respondents’ stated subjective probabilities. The
second three columns refer to w*, where w*>0 corresponds to a non-focal response. The last three columns refer to v*, where v*>0
signifies that a respondent gives a response of 50, conditional on giving a focal response (of zero, 50 or one hundred). A complete set
of wave dummies (not shown) is included in each of the three equations. Coefficients in bold represent significance at the 5% level.
                               Observations 139,327             Log likelihood        -57,075           Average log likelihood -0.410

                                                   μ                                w*                                    v*
                                      Coef.   Std. Err.   Marginal         Coef.     Std. Marginal          Coef.    Std. Err.    Marginal
Dummy (PositiveReturn)               -1.600      0.029     -0.367         -0.256   0.009   -0.086           0.138       0.026       0.043
Dummy (>Plus20)                      -2.065      0.059     -0.452          0.012   0.009    0.004           0.142       0.042       0.044

Demographic Characteristics
Female                               -0.115     0.006       -0.029         0.004   0.008        0.001       0.250      0.015         0.079
Age                                  -0.002     0.000        0.000        -0.001   0.000        0.000      -0.011      0.001        -0.003
Race
   Non-hispanic white                 0.096     0.013        0.024        0.033    0.018        0.011      -0.096      0.034        -0.030
   Non-hispanic black                 0.067     0.016        0.017        0.090    0.021        0.029      -0.148      0.039        -0.049
   Hispanic/Latino                   -0.041     0.016       -0.010        0.006    0.021        0.002      -0.171      0.039        -0.057
Education
   Some college, no Bachelor          0.085     0.007        0.021        -0.055   0.009    -0.018          0.078      0.017         0.024
   Bachelor's degree                  0.189     0.008        0.047         0.164   0.011     0.052          0.202      0.022         0.061
   >Bachelor's                        0.259     0.010        0.065         0.275   0.014     0.084          0.024      0.029         0.007
Married                              -0.005     0.006       -0.001         0.041   0.008     0.013         -0.014      0.016        -0.005
Working                              -0.046     0.006       -0.011                                          0.061      0.015         0.019
Home owner                           -0.024     0.008       -0.006                                          0.094      0.018         0.030
Stock owner                           0.088     0.007        0.022                                          0.164      0.019         0.050
Have Retirement Account               0.099     0.007        0.024                                          0.126      0.017         0.040




                                                                     47
Financial Market Characteristics
Return past 30 days                         -0.051        0.189        -0.013                                               -1.476         0.407          -0.466
Return past year                             0.287        0.110         0.071                                                0.323         0.278           0.102
Return past 30 days * PositiveReturn         0.035        0.134         0.009                                                0.515         0.294           0.163
Return past year * PositiveReturn           -0.130        0.033        -0.032                                               -0.054         0.066          -0.017
Return past 30 days * >Plus20                0.270        0.147         0.067                                                0.880         0.318           0.278
Return past year * >Plus20                  -0.308        0.047        -0.077                                               -0.022         0.070          -0.007
Following the stock market
   Closely following                        -0.046        0.014        -0.011         -0.087      0.019       -0.029        -0.130         0.036          -0.042
   Not following                            -0.106        0.007        -0.026         -0.096      0.010       -0.032        -0.127         0.018          -0.040
Understanding of stock market
   Good understanding                        0.071        0.012         0.018          0.015      0.017        0.005        -0.089         0.034          -0.029
   Bad understanding                        -0.050        0.008        -0.012         -0.063      0.010       -0.021        -0.016         0.018          -0.005

Option-implied probability                   0.122        0.022         0.122
Unsure * OIP                                -0.167        0.010        -0.166
Implied volatility                                                                                                           0.521         0.579           0.165
Unsure                                       0.026        0.014         0.006        -1.479       0.011       -0.539
Constant                                     1.001        0.044         0.248          0.992      0.032        0.326         0.823         0.159           0.260

Additional parameters
ψ                                            0.463        0.004
φ                                            3.918        0.016

Notes to table: See notes to Table 2. In addition a dummy variables for Unsure (=1 if an individual answered 50 to PositiveReturn and then indicated he was
unsure about the probability) is added to the μ and w* equation, and an interaction between this dummy and the the option-implied probability (OIP in the table)
is added to the μ equation.




                                                                                48
