                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             LONG-RUN PRICE ELASTICITIES OF DEMAND FOR CREDIT:
         EVIDENCE FROM A COUNTRYWIDE FIELD EXPERIMENT IN MEXICO

                                              Dean Karlan
                                            Jonathan Zinman

                                         Working Paper 19106
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19106


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




Thanks to Kerry Brennan, Angela Garcia Vargas, Matt Grant, Kareem Haggag and Rachel Strohm
for excellent project management and research assistance, and to Alissa Fishbane, Braulio Torres and
Anna York from Innovations for Poverty Action for leadership of IPA-Mexico. Thanks to Abhijit
Banerjee, Esther Duflo, Jake Kendall, Melanie Morten, David Roodman Chris Snyder and participants
in seminars at M.I.T./Harvard and NYU for comments. Thanks to CGAP, in particular Richard Rosenberg,
and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for funding support. Thanks to the management and staff
of Compartamos Banco for their cooperation. Authors retained complete intellectual freedom to report
and interpret the results. Any opinions, errors or omissions are those of the authors. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Dean Karlan and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Long-Run Price Elasticities of Demand for Credit: Evidence from a Countrywide Field Experiment
in Mexico
Dean Karlan and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 19106
June 2013
JEL No. E43,G21,O11,O12

                                             ABSTRACT

The long-run price elasticity of demand for credit is a key parameter for intertemporal modeling, policy
levers, and lending practice. We use randomized interest rates, offered across 80 regions by Mexico’s
largest microlender, to identify a 29-month dollars-borrowed elasticity of -1.9. This elasticity increases
from -1.1 in year one to -2.9 in year three. The number of borrowers is also elastic. Credit bureau data
does not show evidence of crowd-out. Competitors do not respond by reducing rates, perhaps because
Compartamos’ profits are unchanged. The results are consistent with multiple equilibria in loan pricing.


Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu

Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
314 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jzinman@dartmouth.edu
    Price elasticities of demand for credit are key parameters for intertemporal
modeling, policy levers, and lending practice. On the modeling side, credit
elasticities can shed light on liquidity constraints, returns to capital, and other
elements of choice sets that drive elasticities of intertemporal substitution
(Attanasio and Weber 2010). Such elasticities are key inputs for monetary and
fiscal policies, as well as for micro-development policies. For example,
policymakers and donors promoting financial development have variously
encouraged microfinance financial institutions (MFIs) to cut rates to expand
access under the assumption of elastic demand, or to raise rates to decrease
reliance on subsidies under the assumption of inelastic demand (Rosenberg (2002)).

    Yet evidence on credit price elasticities is limited, particularly over longer
time horizons. Long-run elasticities can differ from short-run elasticities for
several reasons. On the borrower side, consumers may take time to learn about
new rates, to adjust their choice sets (e.g., credit constraints may be less binding
when borrowers have more time to search or plan), or to adjust their production
functions (fixed costs become variable in the long-run). On the lender side,
competitors may respond to a single lender’s price change, but not immediately
(due, e.g., to menu costs, agency costs, and/or uncertainty about whether the first
mover’s price change is temporary or permanent).

    We worked with Compartamos Banco, a for-profit, publicly-traded bank and
the largest microlender2 in Mexico, to estimate price general-equilibrium, long-
run (as well as short-run) price elasticities by randomizing the interest rate offered




2
  Microlending is typically defined as the provision of small-dollar loans to (aspiring)
entrepreneurs, although there is some policy and practitioner debate over the definition,
see Karlan and Morduch (2009) and Armendariz de Aghion and Morduch (2010) for
reviews.




                                           2
on its core group lending product, Credito Mujer3 Compartamos randomized at
the level of 80 distinct geographic regions throughout Mexico, covering 130 field
offices, thousands of borrowing groups, and tens of thousands of borrowers.
“Treatment” branches implemented permanent 20 percentage point (pp)
reductions in the annual interest rate (on a base of roughly 100% APR), while
control branches implemented permanent 10pp reductions. We then estimate
elasticities (and other treatment effects) using administrative data from
Compartamos and credit bureaus over various horizons, for up to 29 months post-
treatment. These elasticities are identified under the assumption that the treatment
did not induce differential supply-side changes; e.g., we assume that screening,
monitoring, and marketing did not differ across treatment and control groups. The
screening and monitoring assumptions are supported by the finding that the lower
rate does not affect delinquency rates. The marketing assumption seems plausible
given study protocols and the fact that both treatment and control regions
experienced rate cuts (20pp vs. 10pp) relative to Compartamos’ prior rate.

    The research design here has some advantages compared to the most closely
related prior studies. It allows more time for consumer learning and competitor
response than the randomized direct mail studies used in Ausubel (1999) and
Karlan and Zinman (2008). It uses non-subsidized and permanent price changes
(see Bengtsson and Pettersson (2012) for evidence based on a transitory and
subsidized zero interest rate). And our design uses randomized variation, over




3
  For annual and other reports from 2010 onward, see
http://www.compartamos.com/wps/portal/Grupo/InvestorsRelations/FinancialInformation
.




                                         3
many more geographic areas, than the quasi-experimental, 3-cluster design of
Dehejia et al (2012).4

    We start by examining the extensive margin of demand, and find average
elasticities (over the entire 29-month experiment) of loans taken out with respect
to interest rates of around -1.4 in various specifications. We find some evidence
that the lower interest rate attract new borrowers, irrespective of education and
income, suggesting that lower prices may be effective at expanding access and not
just for higher-income or -education individuals. This is an important result from
a policy perspective, as depth of outreach to disadvantaged populations is an
important consideration for regulators, donors and socially-motivated investors.

    We also find very elastic demand with respect to the amount borrowed (which
combines extensive and intensive margins). The average price elasticity is around
-1.9 in various specifications. Elasticities increase sharply in absolute value over
time, from -1.1 for the first year post-price change to -2.9 for the third year.

We address general equilibrium dynamics of the average elasticities in three
ways. First, using credit bureau data, we examine how much of the increase in
borrowing with Compartamos represents net new borrowing (vs. business-stealing
from competitors) and find no evidence of crowd-out. (If anything, the point
estimates suggest crowd-in.) Second, randomizing at the level of large geographic
units (our 80 regions) internalizes any within-region feedback effects of price
changes on supplier pricing, wages, etc. (However, we do not have any way of
identifying whether and to what extent such feedback matters.) Third, we directly
examine competitor offerings over a 20-month horizon and find no evidence that
competitors responded differentially in Compartamos’ lower-rate areas.

4
  Other quasi-experimental studies include Gross and Souleles (2002) on credit cards in
the United States, Alessie et al (2005) on consumer loans in Italy, and Attanasio et al
(2008) on auto loans in the United States.




                                           4
    Why don’t competitors respond if demand is elastic? A null effect on
Compartamos’ profits provides a piece of the puzzle. Delinquency does not fall
significantly at lower rates, although our confidence intervals do not rule out
economically significant reductions that would be consistent with lower rates
(further) mitigating information asymmetries.           5
                                                            The bank’s other costs for
treatment areas—namely, operating costs-- rose significantly and offset any
increase in gross interest income.6 In all, the results suggest that multiple pricing
equilibria are possible and sustainable.7

    Summarizing our key results, we find that long-run demand is price elastic,
with elasticities growing over time and no evidence of crowd-out. Lower prices
bring in substantial numbers of new borrowers, and not differentially with respect
to income or education. But the lower rates do not increase profits, as the costs of
servicing additional clients offset any increase in revenues. Competitors do not
respond to Compartamos’ lower prices. Overall, we find that Compartamos has
sustainably served more clients by cutting rates, at no cost to shareholders.




5
  See also Karlan and Zinman (2009), which finds evidence of substantial information
asymmetries in individual liability consumer lending in South Africa.
6
  It is possible that the increased number of clients has led to increased profits from cross-
sells, but we lack data to estimate that effect.
7
   To be clear, we cannot test precisely for multiple equilibria: there may be one
equilibrium in between the two points we test where our two points are simply equivalent
in terms of profit but not actually equilibria; there may be a continuum of equilibria that
contain both of the two points we test; there may be truly two (or more) unique equilibria,
at the two points we tested (or more); or, it may simply be that despite the large shift in
revenue between our two points, the empirical precision on profits is too noisy to isolate
the precise equilibrium.




                                              5
I. The Market Setting

A. Compartamos and its Target Market

    The lender, Compartamos Banco, is the largest microlender in Mexico with
2.3 million borrowers. 8 Compartamos was founded in 1990 as a nonprofit
organization, converted to a commercial bank in 2006, went public in 2007, and
has a market capitalization of US$2.2 billion as of November 16th, 2012. As of
2012, 71% of Compartamos clients borrow through Crédito Mujer, the group
microloan product studied in this paper.

    Crédito Mujer nominally targets women that have a business or self-
employment activity or intend to start one. Empirically, 100% of borrowers are
women, but a companion paper uses survey data to estimate that only about 52%
are “microentrepreneurs” (Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman 2013). Borrowers tend
to lack the income and/or collateral required to qualify for loans from banks and
other “upmarket” lenders. Below we provide additional information on marketing,
group formation, and screening.




B. Loan Terms

    Crédito Mujer loan amounts range from M$900-M$24,000 pesos (13 pesos,
denoted M$, = $1US), with larger amounts subsequently available to members of
groups that have successfully repaid prior loans.9 Loan repayments are due over
16 equal weekly installments, and are guaranteed by the group (i.e., joint


8
  According to Mix Market, http://www.mixmarket.org/mfi/country/Mexico, accessed
August 22nd, 2012.
9
  Also, beginning in weeks 3 to 9 of the second loan cycle, clients in good standing can
take out an additional, individual liability loan, in an amount up to 30% of their joint
liability loan.




                                           6
liability). Aside from these personal guarantees there is no collateral. Interest rates
are marketed as monthly, “add-on” rates of 3.0-4.5%, excluding value-added tax
and forced simultaneous savings.10 This pricing sits roughly in the middle of the
market, both with respect to nonprofit and for-profit lenders.11




C. Targeting, Marketing, Group Formation, and Screening12

     Crédito Mujer groups range in size from 10 to 50 members. When
Compartamos enters a new market loan officers typically target self-reported
female entrepreneurs and promote the Credito Mujer product through diverse
channels, including door-to-door promotion, distribution of fliers in public places,
radio, promotional events, etc. As loan officers gain more clients in new areas,
they promote less frequently and rely more on clients to recruit other members.

     When a group of about five women – half of the minimum required group size
– expresses interest, a loan officer visits the partial group at one of their homes or
businesses to explain loan terms and process. These initial women are responsible


10
    An add-on rate is calculated over the original loan amount and does not adjust for
declining balances as an Annual Percentage Rate (APR) does. Borrowers must make an
upfront deposit totaling 10% of their loan amount into a personal savings account, and
contribute at least 10 pesos weekly for the remainder of the loan cycle. This “forced
savings” component at either zero or low interest is not claimed as collateral, but rather
meant to instill a “culture of regular deposits” and generate a signal of the client’s ability
to generate and manage cash flow that can be used to evaluate creditworthiness for future
loans. The forced savings is not necessarily held by Compartamos; i.e., the effective APR
paid by the borrower may be higher than the effective APR earned by Compartamos.
Mexican law does not require advertisements or disclosures to include the forced savings
or value-added tax in APR calculations.
11
    See http://blogs.cgdev.org/open_book/2011/02/compartamos-in-context.php for more
details on microloan pricing in Mexico. Among other things, there does not seem to be
clear relationship between lender ownership status (for-profit vs. Non-profit) and
effective APRs.
   12
      This sub-section also appears in Angelucci et al (2013).




                                              7
for finding the rest of the group members. The loan officer returns for a second
visit to explain loan terms in greater detail and complete loan applications for
each individual. All potential members must be older than 18 years and also
present a proof of address and valid identification to qualify for a loan. Business
activities (or plans to start one) are not verified; rather, Compartamos relies on
group members to screen out any uncreditworthy applicants. In equilibrium,
potential members who apply are rarely screened out by their fellow members,
since individuals who would not get approved are not recruited and do not to tend
to seek out membership.

  Compartamos reserves the right to reject any applicant put forth by the group
but relies heavily on the group’s endorsement. Compartamos does pull a credit
report for each individual and automatically rejects anyone with a history of
fraud. Beyond that, loan officers do not use the credit bureau information to reject
clients, as the group has responsibility for deciding who is allowed to join.
  Applicants who pass Compartamos’ screens are invited to a loan authorization
meeting. Each applicant must be guaranteed by every other member of the group
to get a loan. Loan amounts must also be agreed upon unanimously. Loan officers
moderate the group’s discussion, and sometimes provide information on credit
history and assessments of individuals’ creditworthiness. Proceeds from
authorized loans are disbursed as checks to each client.




D. Group Administration, Loan Repayment, and Collection Actions

   Each group elects a treasurer who collects payments, from each group
member, at each weekly meeting. The loan officer is present to facilitate and
monitor but does not touch the money. If a group member does not make her
weekly payment, the President (and loan officer) will typically solicit and




                                          8
encourage “solidarity” pooling to cover the payment and keep the group in good
standing. All payments are placed in a plastic bag that Compartamos provides,
and the Treasurer then deposits the group’s payment at either a nearby bank
branch or convenience store.13

     Beyond the group liability, borrowers have several other incentives to repay.
Members of groups with arrears are not eligible for another loan until the arrears
are cured. Members of groups that remain in good standing qualify for larger
subsequent loan amounts and lower interest rates. Compartamos also reports
individual repayment history for each borrower to the Mexican Official Credit
Bureau. Loans that are more than 90 days in arrears after the end of the loan term
are sent to collection agencies.

     Late payments are common, but default is rare: in our data, we find a 90-day
group delinquency rate of 9.8%, but the ultimate default rate is only about 1%.




II. Study Design

     The research team (IPA) worked with Compartamos to identify 80 distinct
geographic areas (“regions” for the purpose of the study), throughout Mexico, for
the purpose of randomly assigning interest rates (Figure 1). The Compartamos
operating unit within a region is a “branch” (actually more like a regional or sub-
regional office); the mean number of branches per region is 1.65. IPA then
assigned each of the 80 regions (and all branches within each region) to either
“low rate” or “high rate”. The interest rates applied only to Compartamos’ core


13
  Compartamos has partnerships with six banks (and their convenience stores) and two
separate convenience stores. The banks include Banamex (Banamexi Aquí), Bancomer
(Pitico), Banorte (Telecomm and Seven Eleven), HSBC, Scotiabank, and Santander. The
two separate convenience stores are Oxxo and Chedraui.




                                         9
group lending product. Compartamos did not bundle any additional operational or
strategic changes across high- vs. low-rate regions, so any responses we observe
are demand-driven, pure price effects.

                   Figure 1. Randomized Pricing by Study Region




                                                                             “high” rate
                                                                             “low” rate




   The motivation for randomizing at the region level, as opposed to a more
granular level like branches or groups, is twofold. The first is to allow for any
consumer learning and competitive response to take place at the level of a
geographic market; i.e., we allow for within-market spillovers. Second, region-
level assignment facilitates compliance with the randomization in a group lending
setting, by ensuring that contiguous groups or contiguous branches (which would




                                         10
normally draw some borrowers from overlapping geographic areas) are assigned
the same rate.

     Table 1 summarizes various baseline (April 2007) averages for low-rate and
high-rate regions, and checks for balance on these observables. Panel A covers
borrower characteristics: education, age, number of children, number of
dependents, and marital status. Panel B covers loan volume, both to all borrowers
and to groups targeted by some policymakers, MFIs, and donors (new borrowers
and those with low education; we also consider relatively poor borrowers below
but lack pre-treatment data on income or wealth). Panel C covers loan
characteristics: APR, loan amount, group size, and number of groups.
Delinquency data is absent here because we lack the requisite data pre-treatment.
Panel D covers region characteristics, focusing on Compartamos' market share as
measured using credit bureau data. Overall, Table 1 suggests that the
randomization is valid: we find no more significant differences across low-rate
and higher-rate regions than one would expect to find by chance.

     The experiment engineered prices that were about 10 percentage points lower
(in APR units) in “low rate” regions (Table 2 Panel A). Starting May 15, 2007,
Compartamos implemented this variation by offering differential cuts from pre-
treatment prices. Low-rate regions got 20 percentage point cuts from pre-
treatment rates (which averaged about 100% APR, as shown in Table 1 Panel C).
High-rate regions got 10 percentage point cuts.14 Compartamos presented these
prices to (prospective) borrowers as “permanent” in the sense of the “new



14
  Compartamos advertises and administers interest rates in add-on, monthly terms, and
prices each group into one of three tiers based on past performance. So the randomization
assigned low-rate regions to tiered pricing of 3.0%/3.5%/4.0% monthly, and high-rate
regions to 3.5%/4.0%/4.5% monthly. We convert these monthly rates to balance-
weighted APRs.




                                           11
normal”: these were not promotional rates. The bank has kept these rates in place
permanently in all study branches.

   We measure price sensitivities by comparing various outcome measures in
low- vs. high-rate regions for up to 29-months post-“treatment” (i.e, post-
differential rate cuts). In some cases we can use pre-treatment data as well. The
next section details our specifications and results.




III. Empirical Specifications and Results

A. Simple Means Comparisons Preview Many of the Key Results

   Table 2, Panels B-D shows simple means comparisons for key first-order (i.e.,
Compartamos) outcomes. Each column reports an estimated difference (and its
standard error) between the mean region in the treatment (low-rate) group and the
mean region in the control (higher-rate) group. Columns 1-5 report differences at
six-month increments post-treatment, and Column 6 covers the entire post-
treatment period. Since stocks change more slowly than flows, we focus on flows.
So, e.g., Panel B Column 1 counts loans disbursed during the sixth post-treatment
month. We report only differences due to space constraints, but Table 1 shows
many of the pre-treatment levels.

   Table 2's findings preview many of our regression results, and differ from our
regressions only in that the simple means comparisons use less information: fewer
post-treatment months, and no pre-treatment months.

   Panel B, which counts loans disbursed, shows several key patterns. First, we
see almost uniformly positive point estimates, suggesting that the lower rate does
produce more borrowers. Second, we see almost uniformly elastic point




                                          12
elasticities. Third, the point estimates and elasticities get larger over time (reading
from Column 1 to Column 5). Fourth, they are more likely to be significantly
different from zero in the later periods (Columns 4 and 5). Fifth, the low rate
produces new borrowers— those had never borrowed from Compartamos
before— strongly and significantly in both the later periods and over the full post-
treatment period. The point estimates are consistent with elastic responses by
other commonly targeted groups— low-education and poorer borrowers—but
results for these groups are imprecise, and not statistically different from high
education and wealthier borrowers.15

     Panel C shows similar patterns for loan amounts disbursed.

     Panel D shows results for delinquencies. We would expect the lower rate to
reduce delinquencies if there are information asymmetries (see Karlan and
Zinman (2009) for a discussion and experiment to identify such effects). This
might be particularly true for new groups or groups comprised of primarily new
members, if screening is more difficult without a prior transaction history. Note
that base level of delinquency is in fact high enough for interest rates to have a
potentially meaningful effect on the margin: the post-treatment period control
group averages are 14% for any lateness, and for 10% more than 90 days late. We
do not find robust evidence of a delinquency elasticity with respect to interest
rates, although most of the point estimates are negative.

     Panel E shows positive but imprecisely estimated increases in interest income.
Costs increase by about the same amount in point terms, but are more precisely


15
   In a given month, we define a loan to a new borrower as one disbursed to someone who
had not borrowed from Compartamos in any previous month. We measure educational
attainment for each borrower using Compartamos application data. We measure poverty
likelihood (Schreiner 2006) for each borrower using application data that Compartamos
starting collecting in June 2007.




                                          13
estimated and hence significantly different from zero. The effects on profits are
imprecisely estimated zeros. Are accounting definitions of income, costs, and
profits are standard, and detailed in the table notes.




B. Regression Specifications, and Results on Elasticities of Loans Disbursed

    We use our analysis of loans disbursed—i.e., of loans taken out, the extensive
margin of loan demand—to introduce our main empirical specifications. These
regressions augment the simple means comparisons presented in Table 2 by
controlling for pre-treatment data and secular time effects to improve the
precision of the estimates. We do this using three different OLS specifications:

(1) Yrt =  + 1(LowRater*Postt) + R + T + 

Y is an outcome (here the flow of loans disbursed), measured for region r in
month-year t.  is the constant. The variable of interest here is the interaction
term—which equals one if and only if the observation is from a low-rate region in
the post-treatment period—and 1 identifies price sensitivity. R is a vector of
dummies—fixed effects—for each region, and  is the vector of coefficients on
these fixed effects. R absorbs the LowRate main effect: treatment status does not
change within-region once the experiment starts. T is a vector of month-year
dummies (e.g., separate dummies for June 2007 and June 2009), and these absorb
the Post main effect.  is the error term. Throughout the paper we cluster standard
errors at the unit of randomization, i.e., the region.

    For most outcomes we lack more than two months of pre-treatment data, so
the region fixed effects are not necessarily well-identified. Hence we also
estimate:




                                           14
(2) Yrt =  + 2(LowRater*Postt) + LowRater + T + 

The only change from (1) is that we replace the region fixed effects with the
LowRate dummy.

   Our third specification uses only post-treatment observations, but controls
flexibly for pre-treatment outcomes:

(3) Yrt =  + 3(LowRater) + Yrp + T + 

Here 3 is the coefficient of interest, and Yp is a vector of variables, one for each
pre-treatment observation. E.g., for loans disbursed, we have two months of pre-
treatment data for each region. So for each post-treatment observation (i.e, for
each Yrt), Yp is comprised of the same two variables and values for that region r:
loans disbursed in March 2007, and loans disbursed in April 2007.

   The price elasticity of demand is defined as the percentage change in quantity
demanded divided by the percentage change in price. We calculate the former, for
each specification, by dividing the coefficient of interest by the mean of Yrt across
all high-rate (control-group) regions, over the entire post-treatment period. We
calculate the latter, again over the entire post-treatment period, by dividing the
average, balance-weighted APR difference between high- and low-rate regions,
and then dividing that difference by the average, balance-weighted APR in high-
rate regions.

   As noted at the outset, we are able to identify price elasticities of demand
under the assumption of no impact on supply-side decisions as a result of
treatment. For example, it must be the case that the 20pp interest rate cut does not
induce differential screening or monitoring than the 10pp rate cut. Our finding
that delinquencies are not affected by the interest rate (see below) supports this
assumption. It must also be the case that treatment and control regions did not




                                         15
receive different marketing (if marketing affects demand); this assumption seems
reasonable given the study protocols (no operational changes other than price),
and the fact that both treatment and control regions experienced rate cuts relative
to Compartamos’ prior rates.16

     Table 3 presents results on the price sensitivity of loans taken out for each of
specifications (1), (2), and (3). In each case the variable of interest shows a
statistically significant increase of 190 to 200 loans disbursed per month in the
low-rate regions, compared to the high rate regions. The implied elasticities
(shown near the bottom of the table) are -1.3 or -1.4.

     Table 3 Columns 4-6 show that interest rate sensitivity increases over time,
parameterized categorically (year-to-year). For this analysis we replace the
variable estimating a single treatment effect with three interaction terms, one each
for months 1-12, 13-24, and 25-29 post-treatment (with no omitted category, so
each interaction identifies the price response for its time window). We see
treatment effects rising from one year to the next (and cannot reject linearity) in
level terms. The table also reports p-values showing that these effects are
significantly different from year-to-year. The elasticities increase as well: from
about -0.8 in year one to -1.5 in year two to -2.2 in year three. The finding that
elasticities increase over time is consistent with borrower learning and/or
adjustment costs. Appendix table 1 finds lower point elasticities using log of
quantity of loans disbursed instead of the levels used in Table 3; e.g., -1.2 in the
full sample, and -1.75 in year three. The results using logs are also less precise.




16
   For example, suppose that any substantial price change triggers informative
advertising. In that case both our treatment and control regions would get the additional
advertising, because both sets of regions got price cuts relative to Compartamos’ prior
rates.




                                           16
C. Do Lower Rates Improve “Outreach”?

     Next we explore whether the lower interest rate increased take-up by groups
that are often the focus of “outreach” intended to expand access to microcredit:
new borrowers (Table 4a), those with less education (Table 4b), and the
(relatively) poor (Table 4c).17 We re-estimate the specifications used in Table 3,
with loans disbursed to one of the three groups as the dependent variable.

     The results for new borrowers over the full study period (Table 4a Columns 1-
3) show positive point estimates on the interest rate variables of interest that
imply point elasticities in the -0.9 to -1.3 range. But the results are a bit imprecise,
with p-values ranging from 0.13 to 0.27. Further down the table we report p-
values for tests of whether interest rate sensitivity is significantly different for
new versus retained clients: it is not, although two of the p-values are 0.13 and
0.15. Columns 4-6 show some evidence that new-client elasticities increase over
time, as in the full sample (Table 3). These columns suggest new borrowers
become increasingly responsive to the lower rate over time: the year 3 treatment
effect is significant with 90% confidence in each specification, and significantly
different than the other years’ treatment effects. The Year 3 treatment effect
implies an elasticity of new borrowers with respect to price of between -1.7 and -
2.0 depending on specification. These columns also show that, by Year 3, interest
rate sensitivity is significantly different for new versus retained clients. New
clients are less sensitive (although only slightly so in elasticity units); we do not
actually show the magnitude of the difference in the table to conserve space, but


17
  Recapping our definitions from Section III-A and Tables 1 and 2: in a given month, we
define a loan to a new borrower as one disbursed to someone who had not borrowed from
Compartamos in any previous month. We measure educational attainment for each
borrower using Compartamos application data. We measure poverty likelihood for each
borrower using application data that Compartamos starting collecting in June 2007. The
poverty score formula is from Schreiner (2006).




                                           17
show the comparable results for retained clients in Appendix table 2 for
comparison.

   Table 4b shows a similar pattern of results, with slightly lower but still elastic
point elasticities, for lower-education borrowers. Columns 1-3 suggest unit
elasticity on average for this group. Columns 4-6 show statistically significant
year 3 elasticities of about -1.7. We do not find significantly different price
sensitivities for lower-education versus higher-education borrowers, although
Appendix table 3 shows that the point elasticities are much larger in absolute
value for the higher-education group.

   Table 4c shows a limited set of results for loans disbursed to relatively poor
borrowers: those with poverty likelihood >= 50%. We lack pre-treatment data on
poverty likelihood, so we can only estimate a version of equation (3) that does not
control for pre-treatment outcomes. Column 1 shows an imprecisely estimated
unit elasticity. Column 2 shows higher but imprecisely estimated point elasticities
in years 2 and 3 than in year 1. We do not find significant differences in price
sensitivity between low- and high-income borrowers, although Appendix table 4
shows that the point elasticities are much larger in absolute value for the higher-
income group.




D. Full Sample Results on Elasticities of Amount Borrowed from Compartamos

   Table 5 presents estimates of price sensitivities of the amount lent by
(borrowed from) Compartamos, again measured as region-month flows. This
measure of demand combines the extensive and intensive margins.

   Columns 1-3 show a similar overall response to what we found for loans
disbursed in Table 3. Each specification shows a statistically significant increase




                                         18
of about two million pesos per month in lower-rate compared to higher-rate
regions. Point elasticities are in the -1.85 to -1.91 range. Columns 4-6 estimate
separate treatment effects and elasticities for each year post-treatment, and again
show that price sensitivity increases over time: each of the yearly treatment
effects are significantly different from each other. Each of the nine yearly
elasticities is also significantly different from zero with at least 95% confidence.
The Year 1 elasticities range from -1.09 to -1.18. The Year 2 elasticities range
from -1.93 to -1.99. The Year 3 elasticities range from -2.86 to -2.91.

     Appendix table 5 estimates the same specifications with log(loan amount)
instead of level. The point elasticities are somewhat lower (about -1.7 in the full
sample, and -2.4 in year three), and less precisely estimated.




E. Rate Cuts in Equilibrium: Evidence on Net Elasticities from Credit Bureaus
     Credit bureau data enable us to examine another important aspect of general
equilibrium responses to interest rate changes (besides the time-varying
elasticities estimated in Tables 3-5): net elasticities that take into account any
crowd-out or crowd-in of credit from other lenders. We have data from two
bureaus: the Mexican Official Credit Bureau and the Circulo. Both bureaus allow
us to focus only on loans that are comparable to Compartamos’ loans. 18 The
Official Bureau has more comprehensive coverage (compare the means in
Column 1 and 2 in Table 6), but has the disadvantage of including Compartamos
loans in the region-level data we were able to obtain.19 The Circulo Bureau has the

18
   We include the following lending institution types: Bank, Bank loan PFAE, Credit line
from bank, Non bank loan for PFAE, Financial non-bank loan for PFAE, Personal
finance company, Medium market commerice, Medium market NF service, and Credit
Union.
19
   The credit bureaus would only provide us with data at the level of the
municipality*lending institution type. So we cannot identify individual lenders or




                                          19
advantages of including Azteca, a main competitor of Compartamos, and of
excluding Compartamos loans.20

    The bureau data (Table 6) has three main differences from the Compartamos
data used to estimate our main results on elasticities of demand for Compartamos
debt (Tables 3-5). First, we were only able to obtain two snapshots from the
bureaus: April 2007 (one month before the start of the pricing experiment), and
December 2008. In all we have data from 79 regions at both points in time, for a
total of 158 region-month observations. As such, Table 6 reports estimates from
equation (2) only. Second, the Official Bureau data lacks loan amounts and the
number of borrowers, so our main measure of aggregate demand is the number of
loans. Third, the credit bureau captures stocks, not flows. Given these differences,
Table 6 Column 3 also reports a comparable estimate for the stock of
Compartamos loans measured from Compartamos’ data, using the same two
months (April 2007 and December 2008), and the same specification. There is a
marginally significant treatment effect of about 800 loans in the Compartamos
data, with an implied elasticity of -1.6.

    The main inference we can make from the credit bureau data is a lack of
strong evidence for crowd-out. Focusing on the Circulo (column 1), because this
excludes    Compartamos      loans,   we     see   a   positive   point   estimate   on
Post*InterestRate, with a p-value of 0.16, suggesting that crowd-in is more likely
than crowd-out (Angelucci et al 2013 also finds some evidence that Compartamos
lending increases generate crowd-in). Column 2 (from the Official Bureau) also

borrowers. To aggregate to regions we exclude the 3% of municipalities that straddle our
regional boundaries, and the 16.5% of municipalities with <20 Compartamos clients. The
latter exclusion improves power by focusing on the parts of regions where Compartamos
actually has a presence (regions are large enough that Compartamos does not necessarily
operate throughout the entire region).
20
   Another difference between the two credit bureaus is that the Circulo enables us to
filter on loan type rather than lender type: we count only “Personal Loans”.




                                            20
shows a large, positive point estimate that is much larger than the direct effect on
Compartamos borrowing (compare to Column 3), but this point estimate is
imprecisely estimated as well (p-value 0.2).




F. Does Delinquency Fall with Price?

   We now turn to an analysis of whether the lower interest rate was profitable
for Compartamos, starting with an examination of whether the lower rate affected
loan delinquency (Table 7). As widely theorized, and tested experimentally in
Karlan and Zinman (2009), interest rates can have a causal effect on loan
repayments through multiple channels: asymmetric information (adverse selection
and/or moral hazard), and/or an income effect under liquidity constraints. We also
examine whether interest rates have delinquency effects that vary with measures
of the prevalence of new borrowers in a region-month, under the hypothesis that
any asymmetric information problem may be relatively severe for borrowers who
have not contracted with Compartamos before. Our outcome of interest here is the
proportion of groups, in a region-month, that are behind on their repayments.
(Appendix table 6 reports estimates where the unit of observation is the group-
month instead of the region-month. We find similar results.)

   Our empirical models and sample are the same as for demand estimation, with
three exceptions. First, Compartamos did not track delinquency systematically
prior to the experiment, so we lack pre-treatment data and the ability to estimate
equations (1) and (2). Instead, our estimator here is equation (3) sans the controls
for pre-treatment outcomes. Second, we count only groups that could possibly be
late in the denominator; i.e., we exclude groups that are too new to be delinquent.
For the serious delinquency measure this excludes 163 region-months that are




                                         21
comprised entirely of groups with loans disbursed in the previous four months.
Third, we omit specifications that allow for time-varying effects.21

      Table 7 Columns 1-3 examine moderate delinquency--any lateness—and
show little evidence of price response. The point estimates are all negative,
however (consistent with lower rates mitigating asymmetric information), and the
confidence intervals do not rule out economically meaningful effect sizes relative
to the base rates at the region-month level, which are 0.14 for all groups, 0.15 for
groups with >75% new members, and 0.19 for new groups. Columns 4-6 show a
similar pattern of results for severe delinquency: >90 days. Again the point
estimates are all negative, with confidence intervals that contain large effects
relative to the base rates of 0.10 to 0.16.




G. Rate Cuts in Equilibrium: Are They Profitable/Sustainable for Compartamos?

      Another key question for equilibrium is whether the lower interest rate was
profitable, or at least sustainable, for Compartamos. Table 8 reports estimates,
using equation (3), of how the lower interest rates affected Compartamos’ interest
income, costs, and profits. Appendix table 7 shows that we find similar results
from our other two specifications.

      Table 8 Column 1 shows an imprecisely estimated increase in interest income
over the entire post-treatment period (note that any effect on delinquencies is
nested here). The point estimates in Column 2 suggest that the effect on income
increases over time.




21
     Results available upon request; we find no evidence of time-varying effects.




                                              22
   Columns 3 and 4 of Table 8 show a similar but more precisely estimated
pattern for total operating costs (note that any effect on chargeoffs is nested here).
The point estimates are all positive— the lower interest rate increases costs as
well as revenues—and a bit smaller than the point estimates for revenues.
Appendix table 8 suggests that about half of the cost increase is due to personnel.
Appendix table 9 shows that costs fall in the average number of members per
group, and increase with the number of groups. Appendix table 10 shows some
evidence that lower rate regions increase groups and group size (Column 1-4), but
that loan officers do not handle significantly more groups or clients. In all, we
find little evidence of economies of scale given current operations and firm
structure. Innovations with respect to lending technology, such as mobile devices
with customized software for credit officers (that are being implemented by many
lenders, including Compartamos), may help lower marginal costs and capture
economies of scale in the future.

   Table 8 Columns 5 and 6 show null effects on profits (unsurprising given the
previous columns, and note that the treatment effects do not add up perfectly due
to the inclusion of control variables). The year-three point estimates hint the lower
rate might be profitable in the (very) long-run, as the elasticity increases over
time. But the confidence intervals also include large negative effects on profits:
the results are imprecise.

   So why had not Compartamos cut interest rates earlier? After all, given profit-
neutrality, elastic demand, and a “double bottom line” of helping clients to
“generate social and economic value”, as well as the possibility of increased
cross-sells, the lower rate interest has turned out to be beneficial for Compartamos
ex-post. We speculate that costly experimentation may discourage some lenders
from deriving their demand curves. In addition to direct costs, there may be a risk
to cutting rates if demand curves develop kinks at current market rates that make




                                          23
subsequent increases quite costly. 22 We discuss some implications of costly
experimentation for market equilibria and future research in the Conclusion.




H. Rate Cuts in Equilibrium: Evidence on Competitors’ (Non-)Responses

     Our last bit of evidence on the general equilibrium effects of Compartamos’
pricing changes comes from some standard market research on competitors’
offerings. We worked with Compartamos’ senior management to lay out some
simple protocols for the bank’s field staff to gather data on interest rates and loan
terms: 1) collect data for at least the three top competitors in each region; 2)
collect data by having someone pose as a prospective client seeking a 4,000 peso
loan (a typical loan size for a new microcredit client); 3) collect data at two points
in time, first in May 2007 (just prior to the start of the study), and then one at least
one year after the start of the experiment (although some branch managers
reported back as early as April 2008); 4) collect data on the same competitors in
the pre- and post-periods, and also on new competitors in the post-period as
merited by any changes in the competitive environment. 19 of 73 regions
reporting in both periods reported a constant set of competitors. 23 The number of
competitors ranged from 1 to 10, with a mean of 3.12.

     Table 9 presents estimates of whether and how competitors respond to
Compartamos’ lower interest rate. Given only two observations per region, we

22
  Karlan and Zinman (2008) finds extremely elastic demand to rates increases but not
decreases, an asymmetry the lender there had anticipated.
23
  Two regions did not provide post-treatment competitor rates, three regions did not
provide pre-treatment competitor rates, and two regions did not have any branches
operating in the pre-treatment period.




                                           24
estimate equation (2), in some cases adding controls for maturity (a cubic, in
weeks). In Columns 1-8 the dependent variable is equal to the average or lowest
competitor APR in the region. We vary whether we use the full sample of 152
competitor pricing observations, restrict the sample to competitors captured in
both the baseline and follow-up (this drops 10 of the 152 observations), or further
restrict to competitors with the same loan maturity in both baseline and follow-up
(this drops 54 of the 152 observations).

   The results paint the same picture regardless of specification: all eight
estimates for the effect of Post*LowRate on competitor APRs are positive,
suggesting that if anything competitors respond to Compartamos’ lower rate by
raising prices. We also test the hypothesis that competitors match Compartamos’
lower rate (i.e., that Post*LowRate = -10), and we reject that hypothesis with 90%
confidence in five out of the eight specifications (p-values reported in the bottom
row of the table). We do not find any effects on competitor counts either
(Columns 9 and 10).

Why don’t competitors follow Compartamos’ rate cut if demand is elastic? The
simplest answer is that it would not change profits (it did not for Compartamos:
recall Table 8). And if our inference from the credit bureau data is correct—no
crowd-out of borrowing from competitors (crowd-in if anything)—then
competitors did not feel the consequences of Compartamos’ lower rates on their
own revenues, either.

   Why don’t borrowers substitute away from competitors (again recall the lack
of crowd-out in Table 6) if Compartamos offers lower prices and the competitors
do not? One possibility is product differentiation. Another is search and/or switch
costs. Yet another is liquidity constraints: if borrowers had excess demand at pre-
treatment market rates, they might borrow more on the margin, from




                                           25
Compartamos, without reducing their inframarginal borrowing. Crowd-in can
result if there are both liquidity constraints and non-convexities in investment
Banerjee and Newman (1993).




IV. Conclusion

   We study the long-run (up to 29-month) effects of a 10% interest rate
reduction by the largest microlender in Mexico, using a field experiment
implemented at the level of 80 distinct geographic regions. Demand for
Compartamos loans is quite elastic, and gets more so over time. For example, the
average elasticity of amount borrowed over the 29 months is about -1.9, with a
year one elasticity of about -1.1, and a year three (month 25-29) elasticity of about
-2.9. There is no strong evidence of crowd-out in credit bureau data. The lower
rate is profit-neutral for Compartamos, and the bank has maintained the lower rate
post-experiment, confirming that the lower rate has been sustainable for
Compartamos. We find no evidence that competitors responded by cutting rates.

   These findings suggest several avenues for future research. First,
understanding why elasticities grow over time—e.g., the relative importance of
learning versus adjustment costs—is important for modeling and policy analysis.
A closely related line of inquiry would unpack relationships between elasticities
of demand for credit and for saving. Estimates of the elasticities of demand for
savings range as low as zero (Hall 1988; Karlan and Zinman 2012), and most are
strictly below the elasticities we find here.
   There is also much to learn about microlending production functions as well.
Our results suggest an absence of commonly-assumed economies of scale, and it
would be useful to know what prevents Compartamos (and, presumably, other
microlenders) from capturing scale economies. Is it something inherent to the




                                          26
group lending model? Labor market frictions? A longer transition path to scale
economies than our study window; i.e., perhaps it takes time to re-optimize fixed
costs to handle the increased loan volume?
    Obtaining more precise estimates of aggregate credit demand and net
elasticities is also important. Our finding of no crowd-out even though
competitors do not price-match raises possibilities that switch costs have big
effects on market outcomes, and/or that liquidity constraints work in surprising
ways: the standard story is that liquidity constraints make agents price-inelastic,
but perhaps this is true only of responses to price increases.
    The possibility of asymmetric responses to price increases and decreases
raises another possibility that fits with our results: multiple equilibria borne of
costly experimentation along the profit-maximizing frontier. Holding profits
constant (as turned out to the case in our experiment), a lower interest rate would
seem to be at least weakly better for a lender like Compartamos, since the lower
rate delivers social benefits from the largely beneficial average impacts of
increased access to microcredit (Angelucci, Karlan, and Zinman 2013), in
addition to public relations benefits and increased opportunities for cross-sells. So
a natural follow-on question is why firms (including Compartamos) do not charge
lower rates to begin with. One possibility worth exploring is that experimenting
with lower rates is risky: a lower rate may reset customer expectations of a
fair/market rate, and create a kink in the demand curve. Karlan and Zinman
(2008) find evidence along these lines in South Africa. If this dynamic holds, then
cutting rates may reduce or eliminate the option to increase rates in the future
(e.g., if it turns out that the lower rate was not as profitable as the initial rate). In
this case policymakers might consider interventions to spur learning about
pricing.




                                           27
                                  References

Alessie, R., S. Hochguertel, and G. Weber. 2005. “Consumer Credit: Evidence
       from Italian Micro Data.” Journal of the European Economic Association
       3 (1): 144–78.
Angelucci, Manuela, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. 2013. “Win Some Lose
       Some? Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement
       Experiment by Compartamos Banco.” Working Paper.
Armendariz de Aghion, Beatriz, and Jonathan Morduch. 2010. The Economics of
       Microfinance. 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Attanasio, Orazio, Pinelope Goldberg, and Ekaterini Kyriazidou. 2008. “Credit
       Constraints In The Market For Consumer Durables: Evidence From Micro
       Data On Car Loans.” International Economic Review 49 (2). International
       Economic Review: 401–436.
Attanasio, Orazio, and Guglielmo Weber. 2010. “Consumption and Saving:
       Models of Intertemporal Allocation and Their Implications for Public
       Policy.” Journal of Economic Literature 48 (3): 693–751.
Ausubel, Lawrence M. 1999. “Adverse Selection in the Credit Card Market.”
       Mimeo, University of Maryland.
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Andrew Newman. 1993. “Occupational Choice and the
       Process of Development.” Journal of Political Economy 101: 274–298.
Bengtsson, Niklas, and Jan Pettersson. 2012. “The Outreach and Sustainability of
       Microfnance: Is There a Tradeoff?” Working Paper.
Dehejia, Rajeev, Heather Montgomery, and Jonathan Morduch. 2012. “Do
       Interest Rates Matter? Credit Demand in the Dhaka Slums.” Journal of
       Development Economics 97 (2): 437–449.
Gross, David B, and Nicholas S Souleles. 2002. “Do Liquidity Constraints and
       Interest Rates Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card
       Data.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1): 149–85.
Hall, Robert E. 1988. “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption.” Journal of
       Political Economy 96: 339–57.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Morduch. 2009. “Access to Finance.” In Handbook of
       Development Economics. Vol. 5. Edited by Dani Rodrik Mark
       Rosenzweig. Elsevier.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2008. “Credit Elasticities in Less Developed
       Economies: Implications for Microfinance.” American Economic Review
       98 (3).
———. 2009. “Observing Unobservables: Identifying Information Asymmetries
       with a Consumer Credit Field Experiment.” Econometrica 77 (6): 1993–
       2008.




                                       28
———. 2013. “Price and Control Elasticities of Demand for Savings.” Working
       Paper.
Rosenberg, Richard. 2002. “Microcredit Interest Rates.” Consultative Group to
       Assist the Poor Occasional Paper (1) (November).
Schreiner, Mark. 2006. “Seven Simple Poverty Scorecards.”




                                      29
                                             Table 1. Baseline Summary Statistics and Orthogonality
                                                           Means and Standard Errors
                                                                                                                  Difference in Means
                                                                             Low rate                 High Rate         (1) - (2)
                                                                               (1)                       (2)               (3)
Panel A: Borrower characteristics
   Proportion of clients with high school or more                              0.503                    0.457             0.046
                                                                              (0.025)                  (0.023)          (0.034)
   Age                                                                        40.222                   40.191             0.031
                                                                              (0.226)                  (0.235)          (0.326)
   Number of children                                                          3.072                    3.183            -0.111
                                                                              (0.063)                  (0.064)          (0.089)
   Number of dependents                                                        1.986                    1.970             0.015
                                                                              (0.037)                  (0.052)          (0.064)
   Number of married clients                                                 510.718                  518.179            -7.462
                                                                             (63.465)                 (47.453)         (79.244)
Panel B: Loan volume
   Number of clients borrowing this month                                     858.179                  821.385           36.795
                                                                              (99.863)                 (69.634)        (121.744)
   Number of loans                                                            858.179                  821.385           36.795
                                                                              (99.863)                 (69.634)        (121.744)
   Number of outstanding loans                                               2,925.333                2,826.564          98.769
                                                                             (359.782)                (249.812)        (438.006)
   Number of new clients borrowing this month                                 192.231                  155.744           36.487
                                                                              (19.161)                 (10.935)         (22.062)
   Number of retained clients borrowing this month                            665.949                  665.641            0.308
                                                                              (87.198)                 (62.002)        (106.994)
   Number of outstanding loans of retained clients                           2,337.769                2,341.615          -3.846
                                                                             (324.065)                (228.227)        (396.366)
   Number of clients with high school or more                                 395.179                  353.077           42.103
                                                                              (47.786)                 (31.846)         (57.425)
   Number of clients without high school                                      462.051                  467.923           -5.872
                                                                              (61.725)                 (45.506)         (76.686)
   Loan amount for all loans disbursed (M$ thousands)                        6,064.544                5,924.230         140.314
                                                                             (840.700)                (638.784)       (1055.851)

   N                                                                            39                       39               78
   Continued on next page




                                                                        30
                                       Table 1(continued). Baseline Summary Statistics and Orthogonality
                                                           Means and Standard Errors
                                                                                                                      Difference in Means
                                                                             Low rate              High Rate                (1) - (2)
                                                                               (1)                    (2)                      (3)
Panel C: Loan characteristics
   Loan amount (M$ thousands)                                                   6.464                 6.468                   -0.004
                                                                               (0.250)               (0.277)                 (0.373)
   Loan amount for loans disbursed to new clients                             716.133               566.186                149.947*
                                                                              (75.249)              (47.316)                (88.889)
   Loan amount for loans disbursed to retained clients                       5,348.411             5,358.044                  -9.633
                                                                             (793.515)             (604.132)               (997.317)
   APR (including VAT, not including forced savings)                           97.956                99.673                   -1.717
                                                                               (1.709)               (1.967)                 (2.606)
   Number of of members in a group                                             16.771                16.774                   -0.003
                                                                               (0.282)               (0.281)                 (0.398)
   Number of of groups                                                         49.051                48.000                    1.051
                                                                               (5.345)               (3.966)                 (6.655)
Panel D: Market Share Characteristics
   Population Density in 2005                                                 288.128               121.176                 166.952
                                                                             (271.248)             (113.140)               (293.899)
   Borrowers Per Capita: (Number of Compartamos Clients in April
                                                                              0.029                  0.029                   -0.000
   2007) / (Population as of 2005 Mexico Census)
                                                                              (0.002)               (0.002)                 (0.003)
   Market Proportion 1: (Number of Compartamos Clients in April
   2007) / (Number of Borrowers with Comparable Loans in Official             0.154                  0.157                   -0.003
   Credit Bureau Data in April 2007)
                                                                              (0.030)               (0.026)                 (0.040)
   Market Proportion 2: (Number of Compartamos Clients in April
   2007) / (Number of Borrowers with Comparable Loans Recorded in             0.985                  1.193                   -0.208
   Circulo Credit Bureau Data in April 2007)
                                                                              (0.144)               (0.173)                 (0.225)

   Market Proportion 3: (Number of Compartamos Clients in April
                                                                              0.126                  0.137                   -0.011
   2007) / (Number of Borrowers with Comparable Loans Recorded in
   Merged Credit Bureau Data in April 2007)
                                                                              (0.022)               (0.023)                 (0.031)
   Market Proportion 4: (Compartamos Loan Balance in $1,000s in
   April 2007) / (Comparable Loan Balance in Circulo Credit Bureau           339.511                423.418                 -83.907
   Data in M$ millions in April 2007)
                                                                             (54.178)               (69.709)                (88.287)

   N                                                                            39                    39                       78
Unit of observation is the region for the time period of April, 2007. Regions are the unit of randomization and comprised of 1-4 bank
branches. Of the eighty regions in our study, two were not open before the start of the treatment period, yielding a total of 78 regions
included in the table. Standard errors in parentheses. Each client only have one loan at the time. New clients are defined as those who get
their first loan ever in that month. Retained clients are defined as those who had already had a loan in previous months. Poverty likelihood
variables and delinquency data is not available at baseline. Population estimates are derived from the 2005 Mexican Census. We define
"comparable loans" in the Mexican Credit Bureau as loans from a Bank, Bank loan PFAE, Credit line from bank, Non bank loan for PFAE,
Financial non-bank loan for PFAE, Personal finance company, Medium market commerice, Medium market NF service, or Credit Union. In
the Circulo data, "comparable" loans are those which institutions choose to report as "personal loans". Compartamos loans are captured in
the Mexican credit bureau, but not in the Circulo credit bureau. For credit bureau data, we only count loans from comparable lenders: Bank,
Bank loan PFAE, Credit line from bank, Non bank loan for (PFAE), Financial non-bank loan for PFAE, Personal finance company, Medium
market commerice, Medium market NF service, or Credit Union. All municipalities included in the credit bureau data have 20 or more
Compartamos clients. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                        31
                                                             Table 2. Simple Means Comparisons (Treatment – Control)
                                                                          Differences and Standard Errors
                                                                  In                 In               In                  In              In         Complete post
                                                             November 2007        May 2008       November 2008         May 2009      October 2009   treatment period
                                                                  (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)              (5)             (6)
Panel A: Interest Rate, per region
   APR on loans disbursed (balance-weighted)                     -8.906***         -9.488***        -10.371***         -10.346***     -10.718***       -9.832***
                                                                  (0.648)           (0.662)           (0.647)            (0.661)        (0.624)         (0.535)
Panel B: Loans Disbursed, per region
   # of loans disbursed                                           91.250           175.625           137.750           338.250*       547.825**         236.843
                                                                (162.048)         (150.950)         (182.210)          (189.925)      (268.420)        (177.563)
                                          Point elasticity        -0.768            -1.594            -0.941             -2.423         -2.748           -1.672
    # of loans disbursed to new clients                           52.050            59.475            42.175           114.100**      137.625**         81.361**
                                                                 (35.154)          (40.495)          (46.678)           (45.468)       (64.154)         (40.492)
                                         Point elasticity         -1.929            -2.119            -1.110             -3.264         -2.857           -2.373
    # of loans disbursed to clients with poverty
                                                                  73.725            77.575            54.175             96.700        158.675          78.325
    likelihood <50%
                                                                (114.468)         (107.871)         (124.477)          (125.783)      (162.128)        (122.653)
                                          Point elasticity        -1.775            -1.349            -0.768             -1.446         -1.658           -1.121
    # of loans disbursed to clients that have not
                                                                  43.500            74.450            30.925            125.675        200.575          84.124
    completed high school
                                                                 (99.627)          (89.731)         (100.580)          (106.095)      (137.185)        (103.082)
                                       Point elasticity           -0.673            -1.234            -0.398             -1.702         -1.978           -1.108
Panel C: Loan Amount (1,000s, Pesos), per region
   Loan amount for all loans disbursed                          1,025.022         1,570.144         1,313.610          2,894.304*    5,206.458**       2,148.340
                                                               (1,510.926)       (1,414.327)       (1,710.615)         (1,708.442)   (2,413.994)      (1,641.733)
                                          Point elasticity        -1.148            -1.937            -1.204             -2.873         -3.600          -2.073

                                                                 267.426*          344.698*          208.117           519.000**      653.706**        396.197**
    Loan amount for loans disbursed to new clients
                                                                (160.622)         (185.945)         (214.453)          (205.120)      (289.629)        (185.806)
                                       Point elasticity           -2.519            -3.177            -1.340             -3.647         -3.250          -2.875
    Loan amount for loans disbursed to clients with
                                                                 993.061           942.817           907.769           1,175.228      2,064.349        1,061.817
    poverty likelihood <50%
                                                                (982.579)         (944.380)        (1,054.986)         (1,034.073)   (1,365.948)      (1,039.296)
                                       Point elasticity           -2.217            -2.352            -1.745             -2.578         -3.328          -2.177
    Loan amount for loans disbursed to clients that
                                                                 588.268           760.733           399.053           1,218.071      2,086.077*        898.381
    have not completed high school
                                                                (889.024)         (827.799)         (902.403)          (924.954)     (1,218.710)       (923.958)
                                          Point elasticity        -1.244            -1.742            -0.707             -2.338         -2.914          -1.657


    N                                                               80                80                80                 80            80               80

    Continued on next page




                                                                                       32
                                                    Table 2(continued): Simple Means Comparisons (Treatment – Control)
                                                                      Differences and Standard Errors
                                                               In                    In                  In                   In                  In             Complete post
                                                        November 2007             May 2008          November 2008          May 2009          October 2009       treatment period
                                                               (1)                  (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                 (6)
Panel D: Proportion of Groups Delinquent, per region, as of end of month
   Delinquency [>=1 day]                                     -0.009                  0.000              -0.004               -0.020              -0.022              -0.010
                                                                (0.021)             (0.021)             (0.025)              (0.019)             (0.019)             (0.018)
    Delinquency [>=1 days] (new groups)                         -0.027               0.011               0.002               -0.032              -0.024              -0.015
                                                                (0.026)             (0.029)             (0.029)              (0.026)             (0.024)             (0.022)
    Delinquency [>=1 days] (groups >75% new
                                                                -0.012               0.001               0.007               -0.015              -0.021              -0.012
    members)
                                                                (0.025)             (0.025)             (0.027)              (0.021)             (0.019)             (0.019)
    Delinquency [>=91 days]                                     -0.001               -0.020             -0.037*              -0.022              -0.011              -0.021
                                                                (0.010)             (0.025)             (0.021)              (0.025)             (0.019)             (0.017)
    Delinquency [>=91 days] (new groups)                        -0.010              -0.093*              -0.030               0.008              -0.031              -0.016
                                                                (0.020)             (0.052)             (0.032)              (0.039)             (0.030)             (0.023)
    Delinquency [>=91 days] (groups >75% new
                                                                 0.005               0.008               -0.029              -0.019               0.009              -0.016
    members)
                                                                (0.035)             (0.035)             (0.024)              (0.028)             (0.021)             (0.019)
    Irrecuperable loans (M$1,000s)                              -9.187               0.115              -5.686               -7.512              -0.297              -2.746
                                                                (7.371)             (3.771)             (6.177)              (7.990)            (15.855)             (2.921)
Panel E: Costs, Income, and Profit, per region
   Interest Income (M$1,000s)                                   17.758               48.469              82.182             134.231             279.401               83.521
                                                              (182.049)            (183.752)           (213.238)           (233.947)           (264.322)            (202.008)
    Total Costs (M$1,000s)                                      85.001             137.782*            160.505*            159.082*            277.534***           143.852**
                                                               (61.386)             (72.432)            (81.707)            (90.679)           (100.866)             (71.377)
    Profit (M$1,000s)                                           -67.226              -90.340             -78.509             -23.713             1.682                -60.355
                                                              (135.851)            (130.106)           (151.960)           (164.550)           (184.271)            (146.047)
    Total Costs (M$1,000s) per # outstanding loans               0.041               0.013               0.014               0.014               0.023*               0.013
                                                                (0.035)             (0.019)             (0.016)              (0.013)             (0.013)             (0.018)
    Total Costs per M$1000 of outstanding loan
                                                                 7.201              -1.633               1.549               -0.524               2.477              -0.030
    balance
                                                               (12.608)             (8.014)             (5.877)              (4.711)             (3.889)             (7.023)


    N                                                             80                   80                  80                  80                  80                   80
Regions are the unit of randomization and are comprised of 1-4 bank branches. All loans have a 16 week (112 day) term. The experiment began in the middle of May, 2007.
The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. The complete post-treatment period corresponds to June 1, 2007 to October
31, 2009. APR includes VAT but does not include forced savings (see Appendix Table 1 for more details). New clients are defined as those who get their first loan ever in
that month. Low education clients are those who did not complete high school. Poverty likelihood is calculated using household information about the type of floors, water
source, cooking fuel, phone ownership and whether children go to school or not. Total costs is the sum of all itemized operating costs reported per branch office (salaries,
benefits, bonuses, internal training, external training, and administrative expenses) plus charge-offs and 9.58% (2007,2008) or 6.31% (2009) of the outstanding balance as
approximated cost of funds, accumulated over a month and summed by region. Interest Income is the total income realized from the group lending product per branch office
accumulated over a month and summed by region. Profit is calculated as: profit = (interest income) - (total costs) + (changes in the amount due of irrecuperable accounts).
The latter term is basically recoveries on charged-off loans. The results for profits and total costs are robust to changes in their definitions, such as definitions excluding the
changes in the amount due after an account becomes irrecuperable. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                        33
                                         Table 3. Number of Loans Disbursed (full sample)
                                                                 (1)        (2)         (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                               199.6**     199.6**     190.2**
                                                                 (90.21)     (93.12)     (82.59)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                          91.15*      95.63*      81.79
                                                                                                    (52.89)     (55.85)     (51.05)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                         221.8**     218.1**     211.7**
                                                                                                    (106.2)     (109.3)     (97.03)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                         406.7**     403.0**     396.6**
                                                                                                    (165.9)     (167.1)     (155.3)
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                       0.063       0.080       0.058
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                       0.010       0.009       0.009
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                       0.020       0.022       0.018

                                                                                                   Low*Post Low*Post
Treatment effect estimated by:                                   Low*Post Low*Post       Low        *Year        *Year Low*Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                 n          y          n           n           y            n
Fixed effects for month-year                                         y          y          y           y           y            y
Fixed effects for region                                             y          n          n           y           n            n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                                n          n          y           n           n            y
Includes pre-treatment observations                                  y          y          n           y           y            n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                            885.81
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                       1246.21
Point elasticity                                                   -1.41     -1.41       -1.34
Point elasticity year 1                                                                              -0.79       -0.83        -0.71
Point elasticity year 2                                                                              -1.47       -1.45        -1.40
Point elasticity year 3                                                                              -2.22       -2.20        -2.16
N                                                                  2,469     2,469       2,313       2,469       2,469       2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of
observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level.
Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of
the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and April 2007. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                  34
                Table 4a. Pricing as Targeting: Do Lower Rates Improve Outreach? Loans Disbursed to New Clients
                                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)                (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                                44.73       45.02       31.74
                                                                 (30.05)     (29.44)     (28.29)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                           18.67       19.67      5.443
                                                                                                     (19.78)     (19.29)    (19.95)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                           51.34       51.01      38.39
                                                                                                     (35.80)     (35.10)    (33.71)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                          91.38*      91.05*     78.43*
                                                                                                     (50.45)     (49.43)    (47.07)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                       0.167       0.177       0.154
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                       0.061       0.057       0.057
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                       0.058       0.059       0.053
P-value: Treatment (new clients=old clients)                      0.134      0.151       0.664
P-value: Treatment*1year (new clients=old clients)                                                   0.230       0.237       0.123
P-value: Treatment*2year (new clients=old clients)                                                   0.185       0.211       0.109
P-value: Treatment*3year (new clients=old clients)                                                   0.097       0.105       0.056

                                                                                                   Low*Post Low*Post
Treatment effect estimated by:                                 Low*Post Low*Post          Low        *Year       *Year Low*Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                n           y          n            n          y            n
Fixed effects for month-year                                        y           y          y            y          y            y
Fixed effects for region                                            y           n          n            y          n            n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                               n           n          y            n          n            y
Includes pre-treatment observations                                 y           y          n            y          y            n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                            184.89
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                        301.44
Point elasticity                                                  -1.30       -1.31      -0.92
Point elasticity year 1                                                                              -0.71       -0.75        -0.21
Point elasticity year 2                                                                              -1.36       -1.35        -1.01
Point elasticity year 3                                                                              -2.03       -2.02        -1.74
N                                                                 2,469       2,469      2,313       2,469       2,469       2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans for new clients on the variables shown or summarized in the
rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the
region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in
the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and
April 2007. New clients are defined as those who get their first loan ever in that month. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.




                                                                 35
        Table 4b. Pricing as Targeting: Do Lower Rates Improve Outreach? Loans Disbursed to Clients with Low Education
                                                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)       (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                              75.07       75.42     81.68*
                                                               (46.19)     (47.84)    (44.70)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                        40.46      43.10      47.20
                                                                                                  (30.53)    (31.96)    (30.70)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                        78.75      77.32      85.08
                                                                                                  (54.21)    (56.13)    (52.25)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                       149.3*     147.9*     155.6**
                                                                                                  (77.76)    (78.49)    (74.73)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                     0.262      0.317      0.256
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                     0.021      0.019      0.019
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                     0.068      0.077      0.064
P-value: Treatment (high educ= low educ)                        0.473      0.488       0.731
P-value: Treatment*1year (high educ=low educ)                                                     0.797       0.820      0.672
P-value: Treatment*2year (high educ=low educ)                                                     0.432       0.454      0.627
P-value: Treatment*3year (high educ=low educ)                                                     0.394       0.398      0.494

                                                                                                Low*Post Low*Post
Treatment effect estimated by:                                Low*Post Low*Post         Low      *Year    *Year Low*Year
Control for low interest rate branch                             n        y              n         n        y      n
Fixed effects for month-year                                     y        y              y         y        y      y
Fixed effects for region                                         y        n              n         y        n      n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                             n           n         y            n           n          y
Includes pre-treatment observations                               y           y         n            y           y          n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                        494.57
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                    667.87
Point elasticity                                                -0.99       -0.99     -1.08
Point elasticity year 1                                                                            -0.79       -0.84      -0.92
Point elasticity year 2                                                                            -1.12       -1.10      -1.21
Point elasticity year 3                                                                            -1.67       -1.66      -1.74
N                                                               2,469      2,469      2,313        2,469       2,469      2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans for clients with low education on the variables shown or
summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow
for clustering at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the
experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment
months are March and April 2007. Clients with low education are defined as those who did not complete high school. * significant
at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                 36
 Table 4c. Pricing as Targeting: Do Lower Rates Improve Outreach? Loans Disbursd to Clients with High Poverty Likelihood
                                                         (>=50%)
                                                                                        (1)                   (2)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                                                    79.63
                                                                                     (122.7)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                                  58.16
                                                                                                            (107.9)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                                  84.43
                                                                                                            (130.0)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                                  119.3
                                                                                                            (146.3)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                                   0.416
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                                   0.200
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                                   0.260
P-value: Treatment (high povlik= low povlik)                                              0.624
P-value: Treatment*1year (high povlik=low povlik)                                                               0.924
P-value: Treatment*2year (high povlik=low povlik)                                                               0.605
P-value: Treatment*3year (high povlik=low povlik)                                                               0.358

Treatment effect estimated by:                                                             Low                 Low*Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                                         n                      n
Fixed effects for month-year                                                                 y                      y
Fixed effects for region                                                                     n                      n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-treatment months (March
& April 2007)                                                                                n                      n
Includes pre-treatment observations                                                          n                      n
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment period)                                  614.486
Point elasticity                                                                           -1.14
Point elasticity year 1                                                                                           -0.97
Point elasticity year 2                                                                                           -1.14
Point elasticity year 3                                                                                           -1.42
N                                                                                                     2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans for clients with high poverty likelihood on the variables
shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard
errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is
excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31,
2009. Pre-treatment months are March and April 2007. Poverty likelihood is calculated using household information about the
type of floors, water source, cooking fuel, phone ownership and whether children go to school or not. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              37
                                              Table 5. Loan Amount Disbursed (in M$1,000s)
                                                                 (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)         (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                              1,979**     1,960**     1,920***
                                                                (759.4)     (777.3)      (640.4)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                          984.0**      1,006**     930.3**
                                                                                                      (453.8)      (469.8)     (433.5)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                          2,187**      2,135**     2,120***
                                                                                                      (897.8)      (916.7)     (754.2)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                          3,865***     3,813***    3,798***
                                                                                                      (1,370)      (1,378)     (1,216)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                         0.040       0.054        0.038
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                         0.004       0.003        0.003
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                         0.010       0.012        0.009

                                                                                                   Low*Post* Low*Post*
Treatment effect estimated by:                                    Low*Post Low*Post        Low        Year         Year      Low*Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                   n        y           n           n            y            n
Fixed effects for month-year                                           y        y           y           y            y            y
Fixed effects for region                                               y        n           n           y            n            n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                                  n        n           y           n            n            y
Includes pre-treatment observations                                    y        y           n           y            y            n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                            6450.85
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                        9115.72
Point elasticity                                                    -1.91     -1.89       -1.85
Point elasticity year 1                                                                               -1.15        -1.18        -1.09
Point elasticity year 2                                                                               -1.99        -1.94        -1.93
Point elasticity year 3                                                                               -2.91        -2.87        -2.86
N                                                                   2,469     2,469       2,313       2,469        2,469        2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of loan amount on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is
the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was
implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for
the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and April 2007. Loan amounts are in Mexican pesos
($1,000s). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                   38
                          Table 6. Does the Compartamos Demand Increase Crowd-out Other Borrowing?
                                Dependent Variable:   Number of Loans          Number of Loans                      Number of Loans
                                       Data source:     Circulo Bureau          Official Bureau                      Compartamos
                       Data includes Compartamos?:            No                      Yes
                                                              (1)                     (2)                                   (3)
Post                                                      12,232***               70,837***                              1,992***
                                                            (1,801)                 (8,862)                               (280.5)
Low Interest Rate                                            1,708                  28,787                                 148.3
                                                            (1,180)                (35,077)                               (520.3)
Post*Low Interest Rate                                       4,440                  18,889                                788.3*
                                                            (3,101)                (15,096)                               (427.0)

Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (pre
and post treatment period)                                      10,694.52                   136,778.24                     4,382.48
Point Elasticity                                                   -3.65                       -1.21                         -1.58
N                                                                   158                         158                           158
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of
observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. All
municipalities included in this analysis have 20 or more Compartamos clients. Pre-treatment data is taken from April 2007 report. Post-
treatment data is taken from December 2008 report. We only count loans from comparable lenders: Bank, Bank loan PFAE, Credit line
from bank, Non bank loan for (PFAE), Financial non-bank loan for PFAE, Personal finance company, Medium market commerice,
Medium market NF service, or Credit Union. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                    39
                                           Table 7. Delinquency: Proportion of Lending Groups Delinquent
                                                   Delinquency proportion (Loan payment late >0          Delinquency proportion (Loan payment late
                                                                       day)                                             >90 days)
                                                                                 Groups >75%                                          Groups >75%
                                                    All groups     New groups                            All groups    New groups
                                                                                  new members                                         new members
                                                        (1)             (2)           (3)                    (4)            (5)           (6)

Low interest rate                                     -0.00935         -0.0171        -0.00815             -0.0159         -0.0163         -0.0115

                                                      (0.0172)        (0.0202)        (0.0176)             (0.0150)        (0.0211)        (0.0172)

Fixed effects for month-year                              y               y               y                   y               y               y
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions
(treatment period)                                     0.142            0.190            0.151                0.098            0.157           0.097
N                                                      2,313            2,312            2,311                2,150            2,066           2,102
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of Proportion of Lending Groups Delinquent on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit
of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was
implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time
period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. No pre-treatment data available. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                          40
                                      Table 8. Income, Costs, and Profits (M$ 1,000s)
                                                        Income                      Costs                        Profits
                                                    (1)          (2)            (3)        (4)               (5)          (6)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                 64.56                     80.26**                       -44.56
                                                  (81.41)                    (35.96)                      (54.57)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                    -3.495                     29.33                         -62.45
                                                              (53.45)                   (27.41)                        (41.95)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                    77.54                    96.29**                         -47.06
                                                              (96.29)                   (43.26)                        (63.39)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                    195.5                   163.1***                         4.065
                                                              (147.3)                   (57.42)                        (95.77)

                                                                  Low*                        Low*                     Low*
Treatment effect estimated by:                         Low        Year             Low        Year          Low        Year
Control for low interest rate branch                    n           n               n           n             n          n
Fixed effects for month-year                            y           y               y           y             y          y
Fixed effects for region                                n           n               n           n             n          n
Includes controls for values of dependent
variable in pre-treatment months                        y           y               y           y             y          y
Includes pre-treatment observations                     n           n               n           n             n          n
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions
(treatment period)                                         1278.66                     566.47                   714.00
N                                                           2,313                       2,313                    2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of Income, Costs and Profits on the variables shown or summarized in the
rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering
at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment
started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are
March and April 2007. Total costs is the sum of all itemized operating costs reported per branch office (summed by region)
plus charge-offs and 9.58%(2007,2008) or 6.31% (2009) of the outstanding balance as approximated cost of funds,
accumulated over a month and summed by region. Interest Income is the total income realized from the group lending product
per branch office accumulated over a month and summed by region. Profit is calculated as: profit = (interest income) - (total
costs) + (changes in the amount due of irrecuperable accounts). The latter term is basically recoveries on charged-off loans.
All amounts are in Mexican pesos ($1,000s). The results for profits and total costs are robust to changes in their definitions,
such as definitions excluding the changes in the amount due after an account becomes irrecuperable. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              41
                                                                      Table 9. Competitor (Non-)Response
                                            (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)               (9)             (10)
                 Dependent Variable:          Mean APR                 Lowest APR                             Mean APR                                  Competitor Counts

                                                                                                                                                      More
                                                                                          Only Competitors
                                                                                                              Only Competitors with                competitors      Number of
                                                        All Competitors                    Present in Both
                                                                                                              Same Loan Term and                   compared to      competitors
                                                                                      Baseline and Followup
                                                                                                                   Present in Both                   baseline
                              Sample:                                                                         Baseline and Followup
Post                                       -7.093       -5.746   -15.713*** -12.658**    -1.822        -0.113    8.295         9.415                                 2.048***
                                          (5.804)      (5.988)     (5.382)   (5.698)    (6.397)       (6.555)   (5.179)       (6.915)                                 (0.363)
Low Interest Rate                          -5.079       -2.795      -7.639    -7.571     -1.444        0.739     -4.666        -3.224                 -0.0513          0.297
                                          (8.137)      (8.225)     (7.904)   (7.987)   (10.023)      (10.089)  (10.470)      (12.206)                 (0.100)         (0.212)
Post * Low Interest Rate                  13.945       10.350       9.671     7.801     12.067         8.822    20.227        18.258                                   0.241
                                         (10.328)     (10.453)     (7.166)   (7.496)   (12.341)      (12.411)  (27.945)      (26.968)                                 (0.624)
Term                                                    0.754                 -1.236                   0.235                   0.584
                                                       (0.783)               (0.752)                  (0.992)                 (2.452)
Term_squared                                            -0.014                0.013                    -0.009                  -0.012
                                                       (0.010)               (0.010)                  (0.012)                 (0.029)
Term_cubed                                              0.000                 -0.000                   0.000                   0.000
                                                       (0.000)               (0.000)                  (0.000)                 (0.000)

Mean of dependent variable for pre-
treatment period                                 118.577                  87.188                   119.002                    109.182                   0.769           2.716
N                                                             152                                    142                         98                      78              152
F-test: post*low interest rate equals
negative 10                                 5.375       3.790       7.535         5.640       3.197        2.300         1.170        1.098
p-value                                     0.023       0.055       0.007         0.020       0.078        0.134         0.285        0.300
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of Average Annualized Interest Rate or number of competitors on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of
observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Pre-treatment was collected in May 2007
(one pre-treatment observation per competitor). Post-treatment data was collected between April 2008 - January 2009 (one post-treatment observation per competitor). For
the pre-treatment data, branch managers were instructed to list the branch's top three competitors and collect the annualized interest rate and loan term for a 4,000 Peso loan.
For the post-treatment data, branch managers were instructed to collect data on the branch's current top three competitors, as well as the original competitors identified in the
pre-treatment data (if these are different). Branch managers reported between 0 - 10 competitors in each period. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at
1%.




                                                                                        42
                                 Appendix Table 1. Log(Loans Disbursed) : Compare to Table 3
                                                              (1)          (2)       (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                              0.138      0.150     0.134**
                                                               (0.117)    (0.127)     -0.067
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                        0.093     0.109       0.087
                                                                                                  -0.088    (0.101)     -0.065
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                        0.157     0.167     0.155**
                                                                                                 (0.135)    (0.144)     -0.077
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                        0.199     0.208      0.196*
                                                                                                 (0.161)    (0.164)    (0.100)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                    0.314      0.352       0.288
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                    0.316      0.308       0.308
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                    0.263      0.277       0.243

                                                                                                  Low*Post Low*Post Low*
Treatment effect estimated by:                                  Low*Post Low*Post       Low         *Year    *Year        Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                 n           y        n           n        y           n
Fixed effects for month-year                                         y           y        y           y        y           y
Fixed effects for region                                             y           n        n           y        n           n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                                n           n        y           n        n           y
Includes pre-treatment observations                                  y           y        n           y        y           n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                            6.46
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                        6.92
Point elasticity                                                   -1.21       -1.32    -1.18
Point elasticity year 1                                                                             -0.82    -0.96       -0.76
Point elasticity year 2                                                                             -1.38    -1.47       -1.36
Point elasticity year 3                                                                             -1.75    -1.83       -1.72
N                                                                  2,469       2,469    2,313       2,469    2,469       2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of the log of number of loans on the variables shown or summarized in the rows.
Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the
region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in
the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and
April 2007. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                               43
        Appendix Table 2. Pricing as Targeting: Do Lower Rates Improve Outreach? Retained clients (Compare to Table 4a)
                                                                (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                               154.9**     154.6**    153.3**
                                                                 (67.15)     (70.47)    (61.86)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                          72.48*      75.96*     71.21*
                                                                                                    (40.26)     (43.54)     (38.93)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                         170.5**     167.1**    168.2**
                                                                                                    (79.75)     (83.17)     (73.56)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                         315.3**     312.0**    313.1***
                                                                                                    (124.9)     (126.8)     (117.3)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                       0.074       0.095       0.070
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                       0.010       0.009       0.009
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                       0.021       0.024       0.019

                                                                                                   Low*Post Low*Post         Low*
Treatment effect estimated by:                                  Low*Post Low*Post        Low         *Year       *Year        Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                n          y           n           n            y           n
Fixed effects for month-year                                        y          y           y           y            y           y
Fixed effects for region                                            y          n           n           y            n           n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                               n          n           y           n            n           y
Includes pre-treatment observations                                 y          y           n           y            y           n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                            700.92
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                        944.77
Point elasticity                                                  -1.44      -1.44       -1.43
Point elasticity year 1                                                                              -0.81        -0.85      -0.80
Point elasticity year 2                                                                              -1.51        -1.48      -1.49
Point elasticity year 3                                                                              -2.28        -2.25      -2.26
N                                                                 2,469      2,469       2,313       2,469        2,469      2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans for retained clients on the variables shown or summarized in
the rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at
the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started
in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and
April 2007. Retained clients are defined as those who get a loan in that month but had received loans previously. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                 44
 Appendix Table 3: Pricing as Targeting. Do Lower Rates Improve Outreach? Clients with high education (Compare to Table 4b)
                                                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                             124.5**    124.2**     103.6**
                                                               (51.09)    (51.55)     (45.21)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                       50.76*      52.61*     29.78
                                                                                                 (25.94)     (26.83)    (27.44)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                      142.6**     140.4**    121.3**
                                                                                                 (60.65)     (60.90)    (53.24)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                      258.0**     255.8**    236.7**
                                                                                                 (101.1)     (100.6)    (92.19)

                                                                                                Low*Post Low*Post        Low*
Treatment effect estimated by:                                Low*Post Low*Post         Low      *Year    *Year          Year
Control for low interest rate branch                             n        y              n         n        y              n
Fixed effects for month-year                                     y        y              y         y        y              y
Fixed effects for region                                         y        n              n         y        n              n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                             n           n         y            n           n          y
Includes pre-treatment observations                               y           y         n            y           y          n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                        390.67
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment
period)                                                                                    578.09
Point elasticity                                                -1.89       -1.64     -1.37
Point elasticity year 1                                                                            -0.79       -0.82      -0.47
Point elasticity year 2                                                                            -1.77       -1.74      -1.51
Point elasticity year 3                                                                            -2.74       -2.71      -2.51
N                                                               2,469      2,469      2,313        2,469       2,469      2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans for clients with high education on the variables shown or
summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow
for clustering at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the
experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment
months are March and April 2007. Clients with high education are defined as those who completed high school. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                 45
    Appendix Table 4. Pricing as Targeting: Do Lower Rates Improve Outreach? Clients with low poverty likelihood
                                            (>=50%) (Compare to Table 4c)
                                                                                  (1)                    (2)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                                               154.8
                                                                                (95.16)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                             70.07
                                                                                                      (63.01)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                             171.6
                                                                                                      (107.6)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                           316.3**
                                                                                                      (156.8)

Treatment effect estimated by:                                                       Low                Low* Year
Control for low interest rate branch                                                   n                     n
Fixed effects for month-year                                                           y                     y
Fixed effects for region                                                               n                     n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-treatment months
(March & April 2007)                                                                   n                     n
Includes pre-treatment observations                                                    n                     n
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions (treatment period)                           579.687
Point elasticity                                                                     -2.35
Point elasticity year 1                                                                                    -1.48
Point elasticity year 2                                                                                    -2.36
Point elasticity year 3                                                                                    -3.36
N                                                                                              2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of number of loans for clients with low poverty likelihood on the
variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the
region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The
month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of
June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and April 2007. New clients are defined as those who
get their first loan ever in that month. Poverty likelihood is calculated using household information about the type of
floors, water source, cooking fuel, phone ownership and whether children go to school or not. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                          46
                            Appendix Table 5. Log(Loan Amount Disbursed): Compare to Table 5
                                                         (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)                (5)         (6)

Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                          0.190      0.201     0.188**
                                                           (0.137)    (0.151)     -0.074
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                                                   0.126       0.144      0.123*
                                                                                             (0.103)     (0.121)      -0.072
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                                                   0.219       0.225      0.217**
                                                                                             (0.157)     (0.170)      -0.085
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                                                   0.276       0.283      0.275**
                                                                                             (0.189)     (0.195)     (0.112)

P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*2nd year                                                0.197       0.233       0.181
P-value: Treatment*2nd year=Treatment*3rd year                                                0.232       0.225       0.225
P-value: Treatment*1st year=Treatment*3rd year                                                0.176       0.191       0.163

                                                                                           Low*Post Low*Post
Treatment effect estimated by:                             Low*Post Low*Post      Low         *Year      * Year Low* Year
Control for low interest rate branch                           n         y          n           n           y            n
Fixed effects for month-year                                   y         y          y            y          y            y
Fixed effects for region                                       y         n          n            y          n            n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in pre-
treatment months (March & April 2007)                          n         n          y           n           n            y
Includes pre-treatment observations                            y         y          n            y          y            n
Mean of dependent variable for pre-treatment period                                      8.29
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions
(treatment period)                                                                       8.80
Point elasticity                                             -1.67     -1.77      -1.65
Point elasticity year 1                                                                       -1.11       -1.26        -1.08
Point elasticity year 2                                                                       -1.92       -1.98        -1.91
Point elasticity year 3                                                                       -2.42       -2.49        -2.42
N                                                            2,469     2,469      2,313       2,469       2,469        2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of Loan amount on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of
observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region
level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the
middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are March and
April 2007. Loan amounts are in Mexican pesos ($1,000s). * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              47
                    Appendix Table 6. Proportion of Lending Groups Delinquent, Group-Month Observations (Compare to Table 7)
                                               Delinquency proportion (Loan payment late >0        Delinquency proportion (Loan payment late >90
                                                                   day)                                                 day)
                                                                              Groups >75%                                         Groups >75%
                                                All groups     New groups                            All groups    New groups
                                                                              new members                                         new members
                                                    (1)             (2)           (3)                    (4)             (5)           (6)


Low interest rate                                 -0.0200          -0.0261         -0.0190             -0.0196         -0.0273         -0.0274

                                                  (0.0159)        (0.0205)        (0.0178)             (0.0145)        (0.0204)        (0.0215)

Fixed effects for month-year                          y               y               y                   y               y               y
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate
regions (treatment period)                          0.133           0.196             0.145                0.105            0.186            0.130
N                                                 662,275          138,724          237,287               152,595          36,675            54,198
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of Lending Groups Delinquent on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of
observation is group-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was
implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time
period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. No pre-treatment data available. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                          48
                 Appendix Table 7. Income, Costs, and Profits: Alternative Specifications (Compare to Table 8)
                                                       Income                         Costs                     Profits
                                                   (1)          (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)
Panel A: Equation (1)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate             71.50                       108.5**                     -36.87
                                                 (87.78)                      (44.44)                    (70.46)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                 3.432                       57.32*                      -54.46
                                                              (53.23)                      (29.27)                    (57.21)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                 84.86                       124.9**                     -39.49
                                                              (104.0)                      (53.58)                    (78.24)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                 202.8                      191.7***                      11.63
                                                              (158.0)                      (68.61)                    (110.9)
                                                           Low*Post*                     Low*Post*                  Low*Post*
   Treatment effect estimated by:              Low*Post        Year          Low*Post       Year        Low*Post        Year
   Control for low interest rate branch             n            n                n           n              n            n
   Fixed effects for month-year                     y            y                y           y              y            y
   Fixed effects for region                         y            y                y           y              y            y
   Includes controls for values of dependent
   variable in pre-treatment months                 n            n                n           n              n            n
   Includes pre-treatment observations              y            y                y           y              y            y
   Mean of dependent variable for high-rate
   regions (treatment period)                          1278.66                       566.47                     714.00
   N                                                    2,469                         2,469                      2,469
Panel B: Equation (2)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate             73.28                       106.5**                     -33.25
                                                 (92.99)                      (44.76)                    (73.34)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                 22.29                       95.99*                      -74.36
                                                              (177.8)                      (57.08)                    (132.9)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                 95.59                       159.6**                     -63.53
                                                              (213.6)                      (79.73)                    (152.3)
   Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                 213.6                       226.4**                     -12.41
                                                              (253.1)                      (92.72)                    (178.1)

                                                                Low*Post*                   Low*Post*                  Low*Post*
    Treatment effect estimated by:                  Low*Post       Year          Low*Post      Year         Low*Post      Year
    Control for low interest rate branch                y            y              y           y               y            y
    Fixed effects for month-year                        y            y              y           y               y            y
    Fixed effects for region                            n            n              n           n               n            n
    Includes controls for values of dependent
    variable in pre-treatment months (March &
    April 2007)                                         n            n              n           n               n            n
    Includes pre-treatment observations                 y            y              y           y               y            y
    Mean of dependent variable for high-rate
    regions (treatment period)                             1002.36                      549.13                     453.22
    N                                                        2,469                       2,469                      2,469
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of Income, Costs and Profits on the variables shown or summarized in the
rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at
the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment
started in the middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months are
March and April 2007. Total costs is the sum of all itemized operating costs reported per branch office (summed by region)
plus charge-offs and 9.58%(2007,2008) or 6.31% (2009) of the outstanding balance as approximate cost of funds, accumulated
over a month and summed by region. Interest Income is the total income realized from the group lending product per branch
office accumulated over a month and summed by region. Profit is calculated as: profit = interest income - total costs + changes
in the amount due of irrecuperable accounts. All amounts are in Mexican pesos ($1,000s). The results for profits and total costs
are robust to changes in their definitions, such as definitions excluding the changes in the amount due after an account becomes
irrecuperable. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.


                                                                   49
                                     Appendix Table 8. Personnel Costs
                                                                                      Number of Account
                                                           Personnel costs                  Officers
                                                           (1)         (2)              (3)          (4)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate                       43.18*                        1.400
                                                         (21.96)                      (1.027)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 1)                           11.35                         0.353
                                                                     (14.73)                       (0.649)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 2)                          53.62*                         1.843
                                                                     (27.27)                       (1.282)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate (Year 3)                         93.91***                       2.828*
                                                                     (34.98)                       (1.600)

Treatment effect estimated by:                             Low       Low* Year         Low       Low* Year
Control for low interest rate branch                         n           n               n            n
Fixed effects for month-year                                 y           y               y            y
Fixed effects for region                                     n           n               n            n
Includes controls for values of dependent variable in
pre-treatment months (March & April 2007)                    y           y               y            y
Includes pre-treatment observations                          n           n               n            n
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate regions
(treatment period)                                              253.175                      13.83
N                                                                2,313                       2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression Personnel Costs and the Total Number of Account Officers
on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of
randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was
implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the
middle of the month. Post = 1 for the time period of June 1, 2007 to October 31, 2009. Pre-treatment months
are March and April 2007. All amounts are in Mexican pesos ($1,000s). * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                     50
                                 Appendix Table 9. Costing (in M$1,000s)


                                                            Total Costs                Personnel Costs
                                                                (1)                           (2)
Average number of members per group                            2.542                       -6.172*
                                                              (5.865)                      (3.612)
Total number of lending groups                               4.146***                     1.975***
                                                              (0.605)                      (0.331)

Fixed effects for month-year                                     y                             y
Fixed effects for region                                         n                             n

Includes controls for values of dependent variable
in pre-treatment months (March & April 2007)                        y                             y
Includes pre-treatment observations                                 n                             n
Mean of dependent variable                                      639.041                       296.485
Mean of average number of members per group                      16.894                        16.894
Mean of total number of lending groups                           79.028                        79.028
N                                                                 2,313                         2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of costs on the variables shown or summarized in the
rows. Unit of observation is the region-month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors
allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16, 2007. The month of May
2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Average number of members
per group and total number of lending groups are flow variables. Total costs is the sum of all itemized
operating costs reported per branch office (salaries, benefits, bonuses, internal training, external training,
and administrative expenses) plus charge-offs and 9.58%(2007,2008) or 6.31% (2009) of the outstanding
balance as approximate cost of funds, accumulated over a month and summed by region. All amounts are in
Mexican pesos ($1,000s). The results for profits and total costs are robust to changes in their definitions,
such as definitions excluding the changes in the amount due after an account becomes irrecuperable. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                          51
                                         Appendix Table 10. Number of groups and members per group
                                                                                                 Average number of          Average number of
                                            Total number of           Average number of          groups per account         clients per account
                                             lending groups           members per group                officer                     officer
                                             (1)        (2)             (3)       (4)              (5)         (6)             (7)         (8)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate          8.217                     0.662*                      0.178                      17.28
                                           (5.022)                    (0.336)                    (0.644)                    (13.28)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate
(Year 1)                                                2.500                     0.587**                     0.491                      21.61
                                                       (2.847)                    (0.288)                    (0.808)                    (15.85)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate
(Year 2)                                                9.305                     0.680*                      -0.185                     11.43
                                                       (5.997)                    (0.393)                    (0.808)                    (16.04)
Treatment effect Low Interest Rate
(Year 3)                                              19.22**                     0.796*                      0.304                      21.01
                                                      (9.413)                     (0.441)                    (0.866)                    (16.81)

                                                       Low*                        Low*                       Low*                      Low*
Treatment effect estimated by:               Low       Year               Low      Year               Low     Year              Low     Year
Control for low interest rate branch           n         n                 n         n                  n       n                n        n
Fixed effects for month-year                   y         y                 y         y                  y       y                y        y
Fixed effects for region                       n         n                 n         n                  n       n                n        n
Includes controls for values of
dependent variable in pre-treatment
months                                         y           y               y            y               y          y             y         y
Includes pre-treatment observations            n           n               n            n               n          n             n         n
Mean of dependent variable for high-rate
regions (treatment period)                         74.27                       16.51                        20.84                   345.29
N                                                  2,313                       2,313                        2,313                    2,313
Each column reports results for an OLS regression of the number of lending groups, the average number of members per group, average number
of clients and average number of groups per account officer on the variables shown or summarized in the rows. Unit of observation is the region-
month, and unit of randomization is the region, so standard errors allow for clustering at the region level. Treatment was implemented on May 16,
2007. The month of May 2007 is excluded because the experiment started in the middle of the month. Average number of members per group and
total number of lending groups are flow variables. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.


                                                                            52
