                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 MIXED METHOD EVALUATION OF A PASSIVE MHEALTH SEXUAL INFORMATION
                   TEXTING SERVICE IN UGANDA

                                          Julian C. Jamison
                                            Dean Karlan
                                              Pia Raffler

                                        Working Paper 19107
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19107


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We thank Google.org and Google.com for funding. The Principal Investigators and Innovations for
Poverty Action retained full intellectual freedom throughout this study. We also thank MTN, Grameen
Technology Center and Google for participation and collaboration and adherence to experimental
protocols. IRB approval for human subjects protocols granted by Yale University 0901004653, Innovations
for Poverty Action 08Dec-002.No101 and the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology
#SS2176. Any views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
funders or collaborating institutions or firms. Thanks to Lynn Conell-Price, Rebecca Furst-Nichols,
Angela Garcia, Kareem Haggag, Priyanka Kanwar, Selvan Kumar, Jennifer Long, and Sara Lowes
for research and field assistance. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect those of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, any agency of the United States government,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Julian C. Jamison, Dean Karlan, and Pia Raffler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Mixed Method Evaluation of a Passive mHealth Sexual Information Texting Service in Uganda
Julian C. Jamison, Dean Karlan, and Pia Raffler
NBER Working Paper No. 19107
June 2013
JEL No. D13,O12,O31,O33

                                               ABSTRACT

We evaluate the impact of a health information intervention implemented through mobile phones,
using a clustered randomized control trial augmented by qualitative interviews. The intervention aimed
to improve sexual health knowledge and shift individuals towards safer sexual behavior by providing
reliable information about sexual health. The novel technology designed by Google and Grameen
Technology Center provided automated searches of an advice database on topics requested by users
via SMS. It was offered by MTN Uganda at no cost to users. Quantitative survey results allow us to
reject the hypothesis that improving access to information would increase knowledge and shift behavior
to less risky sexual activities. In fact, we find that the service led to an increase in promiscuity, and
no shift in perception of norms. Qualitative focus groups discussions support the findings of the quantitative
survey results. We conclude by discussing a potential mechanism explaining the counterintuitive findings.


Julian C. Jamison                                     Pia Raffler
Office of Research                                    Department of Political Science
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau                  Yale University
1700 G Street NW                                      New Haven, CT 06520
Washington, DC 20552                                  pia.raffler@yale.edu
julison@gmail.com

Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
1    Introduction
The rapid adoption of mobile phones in developing countries has created new
opportunities for dissemination of information to large populations at minimal
cost. Many technology interventions aim to address societal or economic prob-
lems by passively making improved information available to users - for example,
by disseminating price and market information in order to lower transaction
costs and allow trades to occur that otherwise would not (e.g. Jensen’s [2007]
study of market price information for fisherman in India). However, other tech-
nology interventions may require more active engagement by service providers
and end users in order to achieve their goals, as Toyama (2008) finds in a case
study of computer-based educational programs in India. Although the split
between passive and active is not always a clear dichotomy, one way to divide
interventions is between those where users make queries to get specific infor-
mation versus those where a central entity disseminates information widely and
without prompting to a large number of individuals.
    Many public health organizations have designed projects that use mobile
technology to support health services and health education - typically called
mHealth projects (Vital Wave 2009). MHealth technologies have been adopted
in many contexts in developed nations, as the internet has revolutionized peo-
ple’s access to health information (Lim et al. 2008). In less developed countries,
where access to mobile phones has become increasingly common even as pene-
tration of internet access and fixed phone lines remains low (Vital Wave 2009),
such interventions have been actively promoted. Reviews of mHealth projects
in developing countries (Kaplan 2006, Mechael 2009, Deglise et al. 2012, Gur-
man et al. 2012) have found some positive evidence on the success and cost-
effectiveness of using mobile technology. However this literature is young, and
mostly comprised of case studies reporting on operational outcomes and tech-
nology use rather than the more rigorous randomized trial methodology (Kahn
2010). The mHealth literature has also not explored how variations in the de-
sign of technological interventions may affect users’ outcomes. In particular, the
question remains: in such interventions, is merely passively improving access to
information sufficient to further specific social health goals?
    Here we use a mixed methods approach to examine a passive, user-initiated,
mobile phone-based health intervention in Uganda. The goal of the interven-
tion was to provide improved access to sexual health information, in order to
improve users’ knowledge of safe and unsafe sexual behaviors and ultimately
lead to reductions in risky behavior. The underlying assumption was that lack
of information leads individuals to underestimate specific risks that they face,
and to engage in risker behavior than they otherwise would have chosen. Thus
better information can make risks more salient and thus more likely to influence
behavior.
    Uganda has several features that make it a prime candidate for a technolog-
ical intervention focused on sexual health. HIV prevalence is high, estimated to
be 6.5% among adults aged 15-49 in 2009 (UNAIDS 2010). In addition, knowl-
edge regarding sexual health and HIV/AIDS is low, and risky sexual practices


                                        2
are prevalent (UNAIDS 2010). The rapid increase of teledensity, from under 3%
in 2002 to 33.5% in 2010 (UCC 2009, UCC 2011), combined with a total adult
literacy rate of 75% (2008) (UNAIDS 2010), allowed this mHealth intervention
to reach a large population.
    The sexual health intervention we study was implemented by Google, the
Grameen Technology Center, and MTN. The technology was developed primar-
ily by Google and Grameen Technology Center. It enabled individuals to send
free SMS messages with questions about sexual health, family planning, and
local health services. The SMS services were provided by MTN, which is the
largest mobile service provider in Uganda, with 60% of the market share in 2008
(Mulira 2010).
    Studies of SMS-based mHealth interventions in wealthier countries have
found evidence of signifi-cant improvements in preventive health behaviors, such
as smoking cessation (e.g. Free et al. 2011) and self-management of asthma and
diabetes (Galant & Maticka-Tyndale 2004, Istepanian et al. 2009, Quinn et al.
2011). An intervention in Australia with similar aims to the intervention stud-
ied here showed that receipt of SMS messages with information on safe sexual
practices over a one-year period was associated with improved sexual health
knowledge and higher self-reported rates of STI-testing among women (Lim et
al. 2012).1
    In the developing world, the existing literature on information interventions
has shown that providing individuals with information on new practices or tech-
nologies can (but does not always) significantly increase adoption of new agricul-
tural practices (UNESCO, Foster & Rosenzweig 1995, Duflo, Kremer & Robin-
son 2010), cleaner water sources or methods for water purification (Madajewicz
et al. 2007, Jalan & Somanathan 2008), and safer sexual practices (Adetunji &
Meekers 2001, Dupas 2011, Chong et al. 2013). SMS-based mHealth interven-
tions more similar to our study have been introduced in developing countries
(UNAIDS 2010) and there is suggestive evidence of positive impact on behav-
ior2 , although not generated through randomized trials. For example, mobile
phone-based health projects in Africa with aims such as supporting community
health workers (Mahmud, Rodriguez & Nesbit 2010) or improving adherence to
antiretroviral treatment (ART) for HIV-positive patients (Haberer et al. 2010,
Lester et al. 2010, Pop-Eleches et al. 2011) have found some evidence of signif-
icant impacts.
    A valuable aspect of mobile technology as a health tool is that it allows
two-way communication. Here, we examine one of the first technologies in the
   1 However,  it should be noted that the sexual health information which was presented to
users in the Australian case was chosen by a socially-minded organization, whereas in our
setting information was disseminated in response to questions asked by end users, and the
answers provided were factual in nature rather than overtly conveying a normative purpose
or aim.
    2 In 2008, the six-week pilot program of Text to Change in Uganda, later also run in

Kenya, which administered an incentivized SMS quiz on HIV/AIDS and encouraged STI
testing, was associated with a significant increase in the number of people who came to health
clinics for STI testing. See http://www.texttochange.org/content/we-created-sms-campaign-
increase-hivaids-awareness-uganda



                                              3
developing world that exploits that capability, enabling individuals to request
information on sexual health from a database of reliable information. To our
knowledge, this is the first evaluation of a project enabling individuals to receive
SMS responses to direct health questions3 and the first rigorous evaluation of
the impacts of any mobile phone based health information intervention in a
developing country. The closest projects that we are aware of involve user
queries followed by responses (either text or phone) from a trained counselor.4
    The paper is structured as follows. Section II provides an overview of the
intervention, while section III discusses the experimental design and the data.
Section IV presents counterintuitive empirical findings the intervention’s effects
on knowledge, behavior and outcomes related to sexual and reproductive health.
It also discusses potential mechanisms for these effects, informed by focus groups
with users. Section V concludes.


2     Intervention
Together with Google and Grameen Technology Center, MTN developed and
implemented a novel, interactive text-messaging platform in Uganda for mobile
telephones. The service, referred to as 6001 (the phone number to which to
send a text message), allows mobile phone users to text questions on sexual and
reproductive health to a server. Once the text message is received, an algorithm-
based trigger word search matches the query with a pre-prepared piece of ad-
vice from a database. The database of responses was jointly compiled by Marie
Stopes International Uganda, an international NGO working on reproductive
health issues, and Straight Talk Foundation, a Ugandan NGO specializing in
communication on adolescence and sexuality. The database content consists of
approximately 500 unique messages in categories including HIV/AIDS; other
STIs; maternal and neonatal health; body changes and sexuality; and family
planning. Messages are about 500 characters long, consist of factual informa-
tion presented in simple language, and often include an encouragement to use
condoms or get tested for HIV. Users can send queries in English or Luganda
and receive responses in the respective language. A sample of an SMS exchange
in English is as follows:
   3 A similar technology with an SMS-searchable database of information on prescription

medications has been designed but not evaluated by Langer, Kumal and Mittal (2009).
   4 See “Text Me! Flash Me!” in Ghana (http://www.comminit.com/node/291748) and “Mo-

bile4Good” in Kenya and Nigeria (http://oneworldgroup.org/mobile4good).




                                           4
Sample question 1: What does HIV reinfection mean?

Response: There are different types (strains) of HIV/AIDS so even if you
are already infected you can catch another type of the virus which can make
you more sick. HIV reinfection is when somebody who already has HIV gets
the virus again by having sex without a condom with an infected person or if
infected fluid gets into their body through cuts/unsterilized sharp instruments.
Use condoms EVERY TIME to protect yourself + others.

Trigger words: HIV, Aids, reinfection

Sample question 2: Does urinating after sex kill sperms?

Response: Pregnancy happens when male sperm meets a female egg. They
meet as a result of sex. Sperm have tails to help them swim up to the fallopian
tubes + fertilize an egg. Pregnancy can NOT be avoided by having sex standing
up or urinating after sex. Family planning is the ONLY way to stop pregnancy.
ONLY CONDOMS PREVENT HIV/AIDS+STIs. Reply 1 to learn about birth
control, 2-emergency contraception, 3-jumping after sex, 4-asprin/panadol after
sex to stop pregnancy, 5-signs of pregnancy.

Trigger words: Urinate, kill, sperm


    An additional feature of the service is an interactive clinic directory. Users
can query clinic locations by sending in a text message with a key word and
the location they are interested in and receive a reply with the names, contact
information and services offered by the nearest health facilities.
    The service was developed in cooperation between Google.org, Google, Gra-
meen Foundation and MTN independently of the study. The initial idea was to
capitalize on the expanding reach of mobile networks and Google’s technological
know-how in order to improve access to socially beneficial information. After
prototyping a number of different ideas, the group settled on an SMS-based
interactive advice service on sexual and reproductive health for three reasons.
First, misconceptions about sexual and reproductive health are widespread in
Uganda, and access to reliable information or sexual education is limited. Sec-
ond, the team deemed sexual and reproductive health an area of healthcare that
lends itself well to giving advice without providing diagnoses. Third, the team
thought that confidentiality and anonymity of the mobile phone-based service
would be especially valued. The service was piloted in two suburbs of Kampala
and launched in June 2009. Use of the service was open to the public and avail-
able to both MTN and non-MTN network users, although it was free for MTN
clients and cost the price of a regular text message for non-MTN clients.5
    Figure 1 in the Appendix shows pie charts that summarize categorically the
   5 Although the original plan by MTN was to charge a nominal fee for the service, as of yet,

no fee has been added by MTN nor are we aware of a plan to add one.



                                              5
type of information disseminated. Not considering ‘uncategorized’ responses,6
    the modal category of queries was ‘body changes and sexuality,’ with 31%
of answers. Within this category, 40% were questions on sex (12% of overall
answers) and 31% were questions on genital organs (9% of overall answers).
The second largest category is miscellaneous (17%) and the third largest cat-
egory is HIV (10%). Maternal and neonatal health comprised 8%. Although
issues of intellectual property and participant privacy prevented a rigorous test
for concordance, in ad-hoc testing by the researchers and more rigorous test-
ing by the developers, the English-language information disseminated matched
the information requested well. According to anecdotal evidence, the search
algorithm performed less well in Luganda. This notwithstanding, among those
respondents who reported having used the service in our endline survey, 73%
responded that they found the information they had received from the service
very useful, and another 19% said that they found it useful. Responses are very
similar when restricting the sample to those respondents who reported having
used the service in Luganda (69% and 22% said they found the information
received from the service very useful or useful, respectively).7


3     Experimental Design and Survey and Quali-
      tative Data
Clustered Encouragement-Design Randomized Evaluation
We conducted a clustered randomized evaluation in 60 villages across the four
districts of Masaka, Mpigi, Mityana and Mubende in Central Uganda. Villages
were randomly assigned to either the treatment or control group. Treatment
villages were exposed to a targeted high-intensity marketing campaign by a pro-
fessional marketing firm from August through October 2009. Marketing teams
visited trading centers three to six times, depending on population size, and
each time spent a full day promoting the service through demonstrations, fly-
ers and posters in both English and Luganda. This marketing thus provides
the “encouragement” to use the service.8 The new service was presented as an
   6 Unfortunately, miscellaneous and uncategorized texts make up about one third of the

responses. Due to privacy regulation we only have access to the categories of sent responses,
and are therefore not able to categorize these texts.
   7 The corresponding survey question read “How useful would you say was the information

you received: very useful, useful, somehow useful, or not useful?” The question was answered
by 277 respondents, of which 180 said they had used the service primarily in Luganda.
   8 Encouragement designs are often used in social science evaluations where it is difficult

or impossible to ensure that all members of the treatment group get fully treated, and no
members of the control group receive any treatment (i.e. perfect compliance). Instead, the
treatment group is “encouraged” to participate through information or incentives, and the
control group is not encouraged. The estimation depends on the strength of the encouragement
to create differential usage in treatment and control groups. Note that this approach estimates
the impact only on those whose participation is affected by the encouragement. Those who
would have participated regardless of the encouragement are treated in both the treatment
and control group, and thus differenced out in the treatment effect estimates. Note that the
encouragement design in this study does create differential usage initially, but that usage


                                              6
anonymous, objective source of information to which users could send any ques-
tion related to sexual and reproductive health. No benefit or incentive accrued
to respondents in the treatment group other than being informed about the free
service and trained in using it, and the marketing was conducted as part of a
natural marketing push by a well-established marketing firm.
    The goal of the targeted marketing campaign was to achieve higher uptake
in treatment locations than in control locations. The entire study area was
largely blocked off from national marketing media campaigns, such as radio and
newspaper ads, in order to minimize awareness and use of the service in the con-
trol group.9 As the differential in uptake between treatment and control group
in Figure 1 and Table 2a in the Appendix show, this was effective. Although
usage is not substantially different between treatment and control groups after
November 2009, most of the overall usage in the study area comes before that
point and was heavily concentrated in the treatment communities.10 This allows
us to evaluate rigorously the impact of introducing the service, but note that
this is not an estimate of a program that receives ongoing encouragement and
marketing, since the program only did one large initial marketing effort. The
study was approved by three human subjects committees: Yale University, In-
novations for Poverty Action and the Uganda National Council of Science and
Technology (#SS2176).

Quantitative Data
The quantitative data come from four sources: an individual survey conducted
at baseline, another at endline, a community survey, and metadata on topics
queried at 6001 from MTN. All quantitative data were collected using identical
procedures in both treatment and control areas.
   The baseline survey was conducted prior to the launch of the intervention
by enumerators hired by our research team independently of MTN, Grameen
Foundation and Google. A total of 1,791 ran-domly selected individuals from all
60 study villages were interviewed in February 2009. The household selection
was conducted by random walk,11 and individual respondents were randomly
eventually converges between treatment and control group, as shown in Figure 1. Thus, our
research design estimates the impact of the initial encouragement marketing push, not that
of a program that continues to have ongoing marketing.
    9 While the national launch of the service took place about the same time as the high

intensity marketing campaign, ads were limited to local newspapers and radio programs which
target other parts of the country. MTN marketing trucks did not pass through the study
districts.
   10 Between December 1, 2009 and April 1, 2010, the average total number of text messages

sent per day from all phones associated with treatment villages was 4.0, compared to an
average total number of 1.5 messages sent per day from all phones associated with control
villages. The difference in means is highly statistically significant
   11 For random selection of respondents, field teams drew detailed maps of the village and

visited every xth household, where x was dependent on the overall population of the village.
If no person was eligible at the selected household, enumerators went to the immediate next
household. Once they had identified an eligible respondent, they continued to the xth next
household.




                                             7
selected from a household roster. Household members were eligible to partici-
pate in the survey if they were 18-35 years old, had a functioning phone with
a MTN SIM card in the household, and had completed a minimum of six years
of primary school (because literacy was essential to use the 6001 service).
    The follow up survey was conducted one year after the baseline in Febru-
ary 2010, with an increased sample of 2,424 respondents. One methodological
goal of this study was to determine if being previously surveyed had an ef-
fect on mHealth service usage. Therefore a randomly selected 1,200 baseline
respondents were interviewed again for the follow-up,12 and 1,224 new respon-
dents were chosen from among the sample communities according to the same
criteria as in the baseline.13 Given that the marketing intervention only began
in August 2009, the period between the first encouragement to use the service
and endline data collection was six months. The plan had been to roll out the
intervention immediately following the baseline, but delays occurred on the side
of the implementing partners. The follow-up survey could not be extended be-
cause of contractual obligations and negotiations with the different parties to
this intervention.
    The community survey on general community characteristics was conducted
with two to four knowledgeable people from each community, including the
elected local chairperson, at the same time as the baseline and follow up surveys.
Observable characteristics such as mobile network coverage, distance to nearest
health center, and distance to tarmac road were verified by enumerators. Finally,
we also collected data from MTN and Google on the topics queried on 6001 for
the entire study period.

Qualitative Data
In addition to the quantitative data sources described above, we conducted eight
focus group discussions and 39 individual in-depth interviews in eight treatment
villages after the endline was conducted. Two treatment villages from each of the
four study districts were randomly selected for inclusion in the qualitative study.
Within the villages, researchers interviewed a convenience sample of people who
had used the service. Given the gender sensitive topic, men and women were
interviewed separately by an enumerator of their own gender. Topics covered
include perception of the service; usage behavior; perceived knowledge, behav-
ior, and attitude changes; and user experience. All interviews, both qualitative
and quantitative, were conducted in the local language.
  12 A total of 385 selected respondents had to be replaced with other randomly selected

respondents from the baseline because they could not be located for the interview at endline.
Attrition is balanced across treatment and control groups.
  13 That is: Aged 18-35, current MTN phone ownership in the household (i.e. at time of the

endline), and completed at least six years of primary education. The households were chosen
within villages in the same random walk manner.




                                             8
Quantitative Measures
As main outcome variables from the survey, we use composite indices of HIV
knowledge, contraception knowledge, attitudes towards condom use, non-promis-
cuity, safe sexual behavior, sexual health outcomes, health seeking behavior, and
perceived own risk compared to others.14
    We use a list randomization technique (Corstange 2009; Karlan & Zinman
2012) to get more truthful answers on sensitive topics, such as condom use, the
number of sexual partners, unfaithfulness, and attitude changes with respect
to the social acceptability of these behaviors. A randomly selected half of our
sample was asked the sensitive question in the form of a true or false statement
(direct elicitation). In addition, we asked them how many of four innocuous
statements were true for them, without telling us which ones. The other half of
the sample were not asked the sensitive question, but how many of five state-
ments consisting of the same four innocuous ones plus the sensitive statement,
and were again asked how many of these were true for them, without telling us
which ones (indirect elicitation). Since respondents were randomly assigned to
either elicitation method, the number of the four innocuous statements which
are true for them is in expectation the same.
    Randomization to the direct or indirect elicitation group was repeated for
each survey question asked this way. Subtracting the mean number of true
statements in the direct elicitation group from the mean number of true state-
ments in the indirect elicitation group will then give us an unbiased estimate of
the percentage of our sample for whom the sensitive statement was true, with-
out however being able to tell for which individual it was true. For an indirect
measure of the number of sexual partners, we asked respondents assigned to the
indirect elicitation group to add the number of sexual partners in the past three
months to the face of a die which they rolled without showing the numerator
  14 Index components are equally weighted and had been standardized prior to index con-

struction. Missing values resulted in list-wise deletion. Respondents receive one point for
each ’good’ response. The indices presented in table 2 consist of the following components:
(1) Contains variables on HIV transmission during pregnancy, delivery, breastfeeding, and
non-transmission by sharing food or through mosquito bites. (2) Contains variables on named
contraception methods (pills, injections, female condoms, foam, IUD, implants, male condoms,
emergency pill, female sterilization, male sterilization). (3) Contains variables on agreement
to ”A male condom should always be put on before intercourse” and ”It is not embarrassing
to buy or ask for a condom”. (4) Contains: Never been unfaithful in past 3 months, number
of sexual partners in past 3 months, relationship to last sexual partner was neither casual
acquaintance nor commercial sex worker interacted with recent sex, used any type of contra-
ceptives during last sex interacted with recent sex and used condom during last sex, interacted
with recent sex. (5) Contains: Never been unfaithful in past 3 months and number of sexual
partners in past 3 months. (6) Contains: Relationship to last sexual partner was neither
casual acquaintance nor commercial sex worker interacted with recent sex, used any type of
contraceptives during last sex interacted with recent sex and used condom during last sex, in-
teracted with recent sex. (7) Contains: Ever had an STD, ever had a bad smelling discharge,
ever had genital sore or ulcer, current (or partner’s) pregnancy is unwanted and currently
pregnant (or partner). (8) Contains: Ever tested for HIV, ever sought treatment for an STD
and ever visited health center / worker for an issue related to SRH. (10) Contains variables on
perceived risk taking relative to other people and perceived own HIV risk. Average treatment
effects on each index component are presented in tables 3-6 in the Appendix.



                                              9
and to only report the sum of the two values. Subtracting 3.5, the average face
value of a fair die, yields the average number of sexual partners reported by
individuals in the indirect elicitation group.
    One advantage of these methods is that they elicit responses to sensitive
questions which are less biased by social desirability. Another advantage is
that they allow us to estimate the impact of the intervention on changes in
perceptions of social norms, by comparing the difference between direct and
indirect responses, i.e. a measure of social desirability, across treatment and
control groups, of specific behaviors. To our knowledge, the use of indirect
elicitation techniques to estimate the impact of an intervention on attitudes, on
perceptions of what one should answer, is novel.

Orthogonality and Treatment Compliance
Table 1 shows that the assignment to treatment was orthogonal to key demo-
graphic variables, mobile phone usage, community characteristics, and baseline
values for key outcomes measures.15 Of particular relevance for the interven-
tion is the ability to read. Over 80% of respondents are able to read without
difficulty in either English or Luganda, as observed by enumerators. Literacy
levels are balanced across treatment and control group.
    Table 2a in the Appendix shows the usage data, from both self-reports and
from MTN data, that confirm the success of the encouragement design in gen-
erating large differences in usage between treatment and control areas. 7%
of respondents in the control group ever sent a text message to the service’s
shortcode 6001, compared to 40% in the treatment group. The difference in
the number of text messages sent between treatment and control groups re-
mains significant after the end of the marketing campaign; although we do see
a marked drop in use of the service after the marketers left the villages. In
qualitative interviews, respondents in treatment villages said they would have
liked to be reminded about the existence of the service for a longer time period.
Usage trends are displayed in Figure 1. Among those who ever used the service,
the median number of text messages sent to 6001 is four. Figure 2 displays the
distribution of the number of text messages sent to the service. About 40% of
the users sent messages on only one day, 21% on two different days, 23% on
three to five, and 16% on six or more different days. The median number of
days between first and last use of the service is 6 days. Among those above
median in terms of frequency of usage, usage was over an extended period of
time: the median number of days between first and last use is 35. Users were
more likely to be male, young, married, to own a personal phone, have slightly
higher education levels and to be wealthier (proxied by number of meals eaten
per day). High frequency users had comparatively low levels of knowledge of
sexual and reproductive health at baseline (see table 2c in the Appendix).
 15 Balance   tests for additional variables are presented in Table 1 in the Appendix.




                                              10
4    Empirical Results
We use survey data to measure different outcomes Y for estimating intention-
to-treat effects with the Ordinary Least Squares specification:
       Yi = β 0 + β 1 ∗ Ti + β 2 ∗ BY i + β 3 ∗ Endlineonly i + β 4 ∗ Xi + i
where Yi denotes an outcome variable, Ti is a dummy variable which takes the
value 1 if individual i lives in a village assigned to the treatment group, BYi
captures the baseline value of outcome variable Yi for respondents on which we
have both baseline and endline observations, and takes the value 0 otherwise.
Endlineonlyi is a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if a respondent was in
the endline only. Xi is a vector of control variables including demographics and
the stratification variables. The robust error term εi is calculated allowing for
clustering at the village level, which is the unit of randomization. In addition,
we analyze whether impact was heterogeneous with respect to gender, as many
interventions on sexual health target by gender in particular (although this
intervention had no such focus).

    Our primary theory was that the intervention effectively improved access
to reliable information about sexual health, and that this would lead to higher
knowledge. With the assumption that low levels of information lead individuals
to underestimate the riskiness of unsafe sex, the theory of change then posits
that higher knowledge will change attitudes and then lead to less risky sexual
behavior. We now proceed through this theory of change step-by-step:

   Hypothesis #1: Access to the texting service increases knowledge on HIV
and/or contraception. Although respondents reported that “those who used
the service learnt how to protect themselves against dis-eases like AIDS, syphilis
and other diseases” in qualitative interviews, in the quantitative survey data we
do not find a measurable impact on knowledge relative to the control group.
Table 2 Panel A presents results for H1 with respect to knowledge regarding
possible modes of HIV transmission and regarding contraception methods and
use, respectively. We find no support for H1 in aggregate for either outcome
index. We also do not find heterogeneity with respect to gender.

    Hypothesis #2: Access to the texting service changes attitudes towards safer
sexual practices with respect to condom use. The theory of change predicts
that increased knowledge would then shift attitudes towards less risky sexual
attitudes towards condom use. However, since knowledge did not increase, we
do not expect to see a change in attitudes. Table 2 Panel B presents results for
H2, and indeed we find no support for H2 in aggregate or by gender.

   Hypothesis #3: Access to the texting service, through an increase in HIV
knowledge, leads to more safe sex and less promiscuous sexual activity. The
observed impact on sexual behavior is the opposite of what we expected. Our
theory of change predicts that increased knowledge would then shift attitudes,

                                        11
which would then shift behavior. Since H1 and H2 were rejected, we do not
expect to find support for H3. Table 2 Panel C presents results for sexual
behavior. No support is found for H3, and in fact the results are the opposite: we
find the composite index of non-risky behavior16 decreases (i.e., shifts towards
riskier behavior) as does the index of non-promiscuity. We find the overall
behavioral index decreases by 0.11 standard deviations (p-value of 0.017). The
treatment effect for males is two and three times larger, respectively, than that
for women, however this gender difference is not significant statistically (p-value
of the test of equality of the coefficients for men versus women is 0.53 for the
aggregate index, 0.17 for the non-promiscuity index, and 0.75 for the safe sex
index). One possible explanation for this finding could be that people learned
from the service how to protect themselves. As one respondent put it in a
qualitative interview: “If men learnt through this service that there is a way of
minimizing the chances of being infected with an STI, say, by using a condom,
they may find the courage to begin having more relationships outside the one
they are already having.” However, we believe the evidence suggests people
engaging in promiscuous behavior were no more likely to use condoms.17
    Table 3 reports results on direct versus indirect elicitation (i.e., employing a
list randomization technique (Corstange 2009)) on three key behaviors: use of
condoms during last occurrence of sexual intercourse, unfaithful behavior in last
90 days, and number of sexual partners in last 90 days. Again, we find little
support for hypothesis H3. Using indirect elicitation, we find no significant
improvements in sexual behavior, but the opposite.
    In fact, for two of the three outcome measures, we find the opposite of the
intended effect. For infidelity, we find an increase overall from 12% to 27% (p-
value of 0.02). Infidelity is defined as ever having been unfaithful to one’s current
partner in the past three months. Single respondents are recorded as not having
been unfaithful. For number of sexual partners, we find an overall increase from
0.62 to 0.85 (p-value of 0.04). Men increase the number of partners from 0.63
to 1.04 (p-value of 0.02), whereas women increase the number of partners from
0.61 to 0.69 (p-value of 0.59). One might have expected at least women to
under-report their number of partners, but given that the averages are below
one, our result is less surprising.

  16 The composite non-risky behavior index includes (1) never been unfaithful in past 3

months, (2) number of sexual partners in past 3 months, (3) number of sexual partners in
past 3 months, (4) relationship to last sexual partner was neither casual acquaintance nor
commercial sex worker interacted with recent sex, (5) used any type of contraceptives during
last sex interacted with recent sex and (6) used condom during last sex, interacted with recent
sex.
  17 We do not find any evidence that the service led people to use condoms (the coefficient on

condom use during last sex interacted with having had sex in the past year is small, negative
and not significant, see Appendix table 6a, column 6). Since we find evidence that the service
resulted in some users being more promiscuous, any increase in condom use among people who
became more promiscuous would have needed to be accompanied by a decrease in condom
use by other respondents in the treatment group in order to result in the overall null finding
on condom use. While we cannot rule this out, we believe this is unlikely, implying that there
was no increase in condom use of those engaging in more promiscuous behavior.



                                              12
    Hypothesis #4: Individuals are more aware of the risks associated with their
behavior. The theory of change starts with improving access to information,
leading individuals to be more informed about sexual health. This measure
combines knowledge with a potential change in actual behavior, and examines
whether individuals change their perception of the riskiness of their behavior.
Table 2 Panel D presents the results for H4. We find in aggregate a decrease
in perception of one’s own non-riskiness (i.e. safeness) compared to others.
This finding is also confirmed by qualitative interviews. Respondents reported
that they became more sensitive to the risks associated with different sexual
behavior, summarized by one young male as “I felt that unprotected sex was
riskier, and protected sex was safer,” and were more likely to advise friends and
relatives whom they considered at risk to go for HIV testing.

    Hypothesis #5: Access to the texting service changes individual behavior and
perception around norms towards safer and less promiscuous sex, i.e., individ-
uals perceive that it is more acceptable socially to engage in safe sex relative
to risky sex, and to engage in less promiscuous behavior. Table 3 presents the
results for testing H5, and we find support for it. Here we use the comparison
between direct elicitation and indirect elicitation (list randomization and dice
role) on the survey to draw inference regarding a change in norms. We com-
pare what individuals tell our surveyors during follow up data collection about
their behavior in direct elicitation questions (which may suffer from social de-
sirability bias) compared to what the respondents reveal on average to be their
true behavior (through the list randomization and dice role techniques). The
empirical test is a difference-in-difference estimator, comparing the treatment
minus control for direct elicitation compared to indirect elicitation. We have
three outcome measures: no condom use at last sexual intercourse, unfaithful
in past three months, and number of partners in past three months.
    On the self-reported direct elicitation of risky behavior, we find few if any
changes. However, as shown above for H3, we find large increases in risky sex
and promiscuous behavior when asked indirectly. This difference between direct
and indirect elicitation is important, and revealing, about changes in norms
amongst our studied population. It implies that either norms for those in our
study did not change (i.e., the direct elicitation reveals what people believe they
should do) or through increased knowledge individuals learned what they are
supposed to say, i.e., a shift in norms towards safer behavior (despite a shift
towards riskier actual behavior).
    Importantly, we are able to reject the opposite of H5: that behavior shifted
towards riskier more promiscuous behavior because norms likewise shifted to-
wards riskier and more promiscuous behavior. Had this been true, we would
have observed increases in the direct elicitation method as well as the indirect
method. This is consistent with the qualitative interviews, in which respondents
throughout stressed individual considerations in engaging in safer or more risky
sexual practices, but did not refer to norms shifting.




                                        13
Why did 6001 Not Have the Intended Effects? Qualitative Evidence
Qualitative interviews shed light on the reasons why the 6001 service had such a
counterintuitive impact. For information provision to result in behavior changes
and improved health outcomes, people must use the service, obtain useful infor-
mation from it, and be willing and able to act on it. While a number of qual-
itative respondents say they learned about risk prevention and STI symp-toms
from the service and changed their behavior in response to it, others mention
reasons for not using the service or not acting upon the information received.
We summarize the two most common responses below.
    As Figure 1 shows, usage dropped markedly after the marketing period.
This appears to be driven by two factors. First, many people said they missed
being reminded about the service: “. . . when there is a new thing introduced,
we all get excited about it, but after a while, we tend to forget. That is what
happened to me, I used the service for a while, then soon forgot about it, and
if you hadn’t come to ask about it, I don’t think I was going to think about
it for a long time. But since you have come, I think I will try it again. . .
by the way, is it still working?” Second, a number of respondents said that
they were not satisfied with the quality of the search algorithm in Luganda,
which was the main language of usage: “. . . that was the issue, you would ask
one question, but receive another answer.” One respondent highlights negative
social feedback loops amplifying the effect: “. . . this service confused people
[by] giving inappropriate responses to their questions, and yet it was the newest
service at the time. You see when something has just come, people try it and
if they get dissatisfied with it they leave it very fast. [. . . ] Now the reason
why most people stopped using the service was that whenever they would ask
their friends whether they received an appropriate response to their query, the
answer they would receive was ‘No’ - which would resonate with their own
experience. That is where it would end, and the service died like that.” In
sum, our qualitative interviews underline the importance of constant reminders,
positive social feedback loops, and a positive user experience in the beginning
in order to achieve sustained usage of new technology. Recall also that the
majority of respondents claimed to have found the service either “very useful”
or “useful,” so it is difficult to know exactly how much weight to place on stories
of initially confusing or inappropriate responses.
    Respondents also suggested that they faced constraints on their ability to
change their behavior, even after receiving accurate information on sexual and
reproductive health, for two main reasons. First, lack of access to resources could
pose a stumbling block. One respondent poignantly asked: “Now, you have the
information, and you are even told where to get further tests and treatment,
but you don’t have money for treatment, or even transport to the place you
have been referred to: Now have you been helped at all?” Second, since risky
sexual behavior inherently involves more than one person, respondents may not
have been able to stop engaging in risky practices due to the power balance in
their relationship. Specifically, it can be difficult for Ugandan women to stand
up to their male partners: “You may tell him that lets start using condoms


                                        14
to protect ourselves, after getting advice from these messages, [. . . ] because I
am worried about our situation. He then asks why you are worried, how come:
all along you had never gotten worried. When you tell him the source of the
information, trouble then starts. For example saying that MTN does not live in
my house so cannot decide for me what to or not to do.” Based on the qualitative
interviews, this effect is even more pronounced for younger, unmarried women
of lower socioeconomic status.
    Considering that a small number of people used the service in a sustained
manner, only some of whom received the relevant information and were then
willing and able to act on it, it is not surprising that we see many null effects.


5    Discussion and Conclusion
We evaluate a novel mobile phone-based health program in Uganda, developed
and implemented by partner organizations, in which treatment communities
were randomly assigned to learn about a service providing individually-initiated
access to information on sexual and reproductive health via text messages. We
find no increase in health knowledge regarding HIV transmission or contracep-
tion methods, and no change in attitudes. Rather than seeing reductions in
risky sexual behavior, we actually find higher incidence of risky sexual behav-
ior, and more infidelity, although more abstinence as well. Overall, individuals
perceive their behavior as being riskier, which could be an indication of better
probabilistic assessments but is also likely a result of the riskier (self-reported)
behavior and possibly a desire to answer the surveyor in a particular way.
    Mechanisms of change are typically difficult to isolate, and this evaluation is
no different. This was a fairly dynamic intervention, with different and endoge-
nous intensities of treatment, likely heterogeneous treatment effects, a limited
(albeit still large) sample frame for analysis, and highly sensitive outcomes.
That said, we posit two mechanisms that may have been influential: a change
in norms towards risky behavior, and sexual sorting. Using a novel application
of the indirect list randomization methodology in order to estimate a treatment
effect on social desirability bias, we find no evidence that individuals in the
treatment group perceive risky sexual behavior as more socially acceptable.
    We believe the sexual sorting mechanism is more likely, and worthy of further
research to isolate and measure it more fully. In particular, qualitative inter-
views suggest sexual sorting as a possible mechanism for change. Both male
and female respondents reported that married women learned from the service
about the risks associated with having an unfaithful partner, or used the service
to shine a spotlight on what they already knew, and as a result insisted that
their husbands be faithful and go for testing with them. Some husbands com-
plied while others did not, leading women to deny them sex and men to seek it
from elsewhere. One woman summarized it as “Once he wants sex, he means it,
yet the woman is dodging him around (because she became aware of the risks),
so he decides to get another one to satisfy his desires.” Sexual sorting is also
supported by the finding that there was on average a four percentage point re-


                                        15
duction in likelihood of recently having had sex (p-value of 0.02). This is largely
driven by women, who are 6.3 percentage points less likely to have had sex in
the past 12 months (p-value of 0.00), compared to a decrease of 1.4 percentage
points for men (p-value of 0.58). Although technically we cannot reject the null
hypothesis that treatment effects are the same for men and women, we do have
suggestive evidence that the increase in promiscuity was driven by men (p-value
of 0.17), while the decrease in sexual activity was driven by women (p-value of
0.14).
    Naturally, since the type of information individuals receive depends on the
questions they pose, and there is much variety, there should be no surprise that
the impacts indicate a multitude of uses and mechanisms. Previous work on
sexual health in East Africa (Madajewicz et al. 2007) has found that young
women responded to information about HIV risks by switching to lower-risk
partners, but only in the context of an NGO-led program with a clear message
and face-to-face interaction.
    In our setting, individuals must first choose whether to access the service,
and then what to ask, and finally what (if anything) to do with the information
received. We find that easing access to this information is not sufficient to in-
duce safer behavior, and may directly or indirectly lead to riskier choices. It may
be that only in the presence of a guiding hand, such as a local health worker,
can this category of information improve outcomes, but our study does not vary
that feature so we can only suggest this as a potentially important mechanism.
Further work is needed to study whether such first-order interventions work
on particular demographics, and what changes to the intervention, for example
inclusion of a personalized component, are necessary for other demographics.
We also find evidence from a variety of sources suggesting sexual sorting as a
potential mechanism, which generates distributional impacts over and above the
average impacts, and we believe that further research should focus on under-
standing such differential responses to information campaigns. Finally, as in any
evaluation, the findings may be contingent on the specific setting in which it oc-
curred and the specifics of the partner organization’s implementation. Thus one
should not draw extreme conclusions from this study about the efficacy of any
technology-driven information intervention; rather, it would be appropriate to
learn from this study that the mere introduction of an information technology,
designed by development experts, but left to individuals to self-direct in terms
of their usage, does not necessarily lead to the socially desired impacts set out
in the original intention of a program.




                                        16
References
Adetunji, J., & Meekers, D. (2001). Consistency in condom use in the context
of HIV/AIDS in Zimbabwe. Journal of Biosocial science, 33(1), 121-138.

Aker, J., & Mbiti, I. (2010). Mobile phones and economic development in Africa.
Center for Global Development Working Paper, (211).

Chong, A., M. Gonzalez-Navarro, D. Karlan, & M. Valdivia (2013). Effec-
tiveness and spillovers of online sex education: evidence from a randomized
evaluation in Colombian public schools. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper #18776.

Corstange, D. (2009). Sensitive questions, truthful answers? Modeling the list
experiment with LISTIT. Political Analysis, 17(1), 45-63.

Déglise, C., Suggs, L. S., & Odermatt, P. (2012). SMS for disease control
in developing countries: A systematic review of mobile health applications.
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 18(5), 273-281.

Duflo, E., M. Kremer and J. Robinson (2010). Why don’t farmers use fertilizer?
Evidence from field experiments in Kenya. Working Paper.

Dupas, P. (2011). Do teenagers respond to HIV risk information? Evidence from
a field experiment in Kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
3, 1-34.

Free, C. et al. (2011). Smoking cessation support delivered via mobile phone
text messaging (txt2stop): A single-blind, randomised trial. The Lancet, 378
(9785), 49-55

Foster, A. D., & Rosenzweig, M. R. (1995). Learning by doing and learning
from others: Human capital and technical change in agriculture. Journal of
Political Economy, 1176-1209.

Gallant, M., & Maticka-Tyndale, E. (2004). School-based HIV prevention pro-
grammes for African youth. Social Science and Medicine, 58(7), 1337-1352.

Gurman, T. A., Rubin, S. E., & Roess, A. A. (2012). Effectiveness of mHealth
behavior change communication interventions in developing countries: A sys-
tematic review of the literature. Journal of Health Communication, 17(sup1),
82-104.

Haberer, J. E. et al (2010). Real-time adherence monitoring for HIV antiretro-
viral therapy. AIDS and Behavior, 14(6), 1340-1346.



                                      17
Istepanian, R. S. et al (2009). Evaluation of a mobile phone telemonitoring
system for glycaemic control in patients with diabetes. Journal of Telemedicine
and Telecare, 15(3), 125-128.

Jalan, J., & Somanathan, E. (2008). The importance of being informed: Exper-
imental evidence on demand for environmental quality. Journal of Development
Economics, 87(1), 14-28.

Jensen, R. (2007). The digital provide: Information (technology), market per-
formance, and welfare in the South Indian fisheries sector. The Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics, 122(3), 879-924.

Kahn, J. G., Yang, J. S., & Kahn, J. S. (2010). ‘Mobile’health needs and
opportunities in developing countries. Health Affairs, 29(2), 252-258.

Kaplan, W. A. (2006). Can the ubiquitous power of mobile phones be used to
improve health outcomes in developing countries? Globalization and Health, 2
(9), 1-14.

Karlan, D. S., & Zinman, J. (2012). List randomization for sensitive behavior:
An application for measuring use of loan proceeds. Journal of Development
Economics, 98(1), 71-75.

Langer, A., Kumar, B., Mittal, A., & Subramaniam, L. V. (2009, March).
Mobile medicine: Providing drug related information through natural language
queries via SMS. In Advance Computing Conference, 2009. IACC 2009. IEEE
International (pp. 546-551).

Lester, R. T. et al (2010). Effects of a mobile phone short message service on
antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): A randomised
trial. The Lancet, 376(9755), 1838-1845.

Lim, M. S. et al (2008). SMS STI: a review of the uses of mobile phone text
messaging in sexual health. International Journal of STD & AIDS, 19(5), 287-
290.

Lim, M. S. et al (2012). Impact of text and email messaging on the sexual
health of young people: A randomised controlled trial. Journal of Epidemiology
and Community Health, 66(1), 69-74.

Madajewicz, M. et al (2007). Can information alone change behavior? Response
to arsenic contamination of groundwater in Bangladesh. Journal of Development
Economics, 84(2), 731-754.




                                      18
Mahmud, N., Rodriguez, J., & Nesbit, J. (2010). A text message-based in-
tervention to bridge the healthcare communication gap in the rural developing
world. Technology and Health Care, 18(2), 137-144.

Mechael, P. N. (2009). The case for mHealth in developing countries. Innova-
tions: Technology, Governance, Globalization, 4(1), 103-118.

Mulira, N., A. Kyeyune, and A. Ndiwalana (2010). Uganda ICT sector perfor-
mance review 2009/2010.

Pop-Eleches, C. et al (2011). Mobile phone technologies improve adherence to
antiretroviral treatment in resource-limited settings: A randomized controlled
trial of text message reminders. Aids, 25, 825-834.

Quinn, C. C. et al (2011). Cluster-randomized trial of a mobile phone person-
alized behavioral intervention for blood glucose control. Diabetes Care, 34(9),
1934-1942.

Toyama, K. (2008). Can technology end poverty? Boston Review, 35(6).

Uganda Communications Commission. Rural Communications Development
Policy for Uganda (2009) & (2011).

UNAIDS (2010). 2010 report on the global AIDS epidemic.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
Institute for Statistics.

Vital Wave Consulting (2009). The opportunity of mobile technology for health-
care in the developing world (UN Foundation-Vodafone Foundation Partnership,
Washington, DC).




                                      19
Figure 2: Self-reported number of interactions with service among users
                         Table 1: Summary Baseline Values and Balance Tests

                                              Treatment                  Control           p-value
                                             N       Mean             N         Mean       T vs C
                                                               Demographics
Male                                        894           0.49       897            0.50      0.59
Age                                         894          25.37       896           25.26      0.67
Years of education                          892           8.14       893            8.11      0.80
Respondent owns a mobile phone (%)          894           0.72       897            0.71      0.67
Ever sent a text message or SMS? (%)        887           0.63       886            0.61      0.30
                                                          Community characteristics
MTN coverage (1-5)                           30           4.07        30            4.00      0.82
Distance to next tarmac road (km)            30          14.79        30           16.09      0.75
                                                               Main outcomes
HIV knowledge index                         894           0.00       895            0.00      1.00
Contraceptive knowledge index               894           0.00       895            0.00      0.96
Condom use attitudes index                  891           0.09       887            0.00      0.05
SRH outcome index                           894       -0.07          897            0.00      0.12
SRH service seeking index                   894       -0.03          897            0.00      0.48
Ever had sex in past 12 months (%)          891           0.81       892            0.80      0.73
Perceived relative non-riskiness index      886       -0.03          891            0.00      0.48
                                                                     Table 2: Main Outcome Variables
Treatment effects on                                                               Overall                                                      By Gender
                                                                                                                      Male                   Female       F-test: Male = Female
A. Knowledge                                                                ß          se           n                ß           se        ß         se      F-stat     p-value              n
    (1) Composite HIV knowledge index                                    0.0575       0.04       2,274            0.0347        0.05    0.0793      0.06      0.34        0.56             2,274
    (2) Composite contraception knowledge index                          0.0196       0.03       2,275           -0.0124        0.05    0.0501      0.04      1.00        0.32             2,275
B. Attitudes
    (3) Condoms use attitudes index                                      0.0064       0.04       2,266            0.0465        0.04        -0.0318       0.05           1.91         0.17 2,266
C. Behavior
    (4) Composite current behavior index*                              -0.1128**      0.05        2275          -0.1552**       0.06        -0.0723       0.06           1.03        0.32  2,275
    (5) Non-Promiscuity index*                                         -0.1096**      0.04        2266         -0.1679***       0.06        -0.0543       0.06           1.90         0.17 2266
    (6) Safe Sex behavior index*                                        -0.0521       0.04        2270           -0.0797        0.06        -0.0258       0.08           0.25         0.62 2270
    (7) Composite outcome index                                         -0.0400       0.04       2,275           -0.0425        0.05        -0.0377       0.06           0.00         0.96 2,275
    (8) Health services index                                           -0.0210       0.04       2,275           -0.0369        0.06        -0.0059       0.05           0.21         0.65 2,275
    (9) Ever had sex in past 12 months                                 -0.0393**      0.02       2,264           -0.0142        0.03      -0.0631***      0.02           2.25         0.14 2,264
D. Risk Perception
    (10) Perceived relative non-riskiness index                        -0.1010**      0.04       2,267         -0.1754***       0.06        -0.0300       0.06           2.99        0.09  2,267
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values unless indicated with *. Robust standard errors are clustered at the village level. Controls for stratification variables are
included. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01. Index composition:
(1) Contains variables on HIV transmission during pregnancy, delivery, breastfeeding, and non-transmission by sharing food or through mosquito bites.
(2) Contains variables on named contraception methods (pills, injections, female condoms, foam, IUD, implants, male condoms, emergency pill, female or male sterilization).
(3) Contains variables on agreement to "A male condom should always be put on before intercourse" and "It is not embarrasing to buy or ask for a condom".
(4) Contains: Never been unfaithful in past 3 months , number of sexual partners in past 3 months, relationship to last sexual partner was neither casual acquaintance nor commercial sex
worker interacted with recent sex, used any type of contraceptives during last sex interacted with recent sex and used condom during last sex, interacted with recent sex.
(5) Contains: Never been unfaithful in past 3 months and number of sexual partners in past 3 months.
(6) Contains: Relationship to last sexual partner was neither casual acquaintance nor commercial sex worker interacted with recent sex, used any type of contraceptives during last sex interacted
with recent sex and used condom during last sex, interacted with recent sex.
(7) Contains: Ever had an STD, ever had a bad smelling discharge, ever had genital sore or ulcer, current (or partner's) pregnancy is unwanted and currently pregnant (or partner).
(8) Contains: Ever tested for HIV, ever sought treatment for an STD and ever visited health center / worker for an issue related to SRH.
(10) Contains variables on perceived risk taking relative to other people and percived own HIV risk.
                                                   Table 3: Difference in Difference between Direct and Indirect Responses

                           NO CONDOM AT LAST SEX                                          UNFAITHFUL                                         NUMBER OF PARTNERS

                    Direct    Indirect Diff: Direct- Diff in                  Direct    Indirect Diff: Direct- Diff in                Direct    Indirect Diff: Direct- Diff in
                  proportion proportion Indirect      Diff                  proportion proportion Indirect      Diff                proportion proportion Indirect      Diff

Overall
   Treatment             0.649         0.681       -0.032                        0.129        0.268     -0.139***                         1.195         0.854    0.341***
                         (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.05)      -0.063           (0.01)       (0.05)        (0.04)     -0.157 ***        (0.04)         (0.08)      (0.09)    -0.171
    Control              0.667         0.635        0.031        (0.06)          0.137        0.119          0.018      (0.06)            1.131         0.619    0.512***      (0.12)
                         (0.02)       (0.04)        (0.04)                       (0.01)       (0.05)        (0.05)                       (0.03)         (0.08)      (0.09)
    Diff: T-C           -0.018         0.046       0.063*                       -0.008      0.149**     -0.157***                         0.064       0.235**     -0.171*
                         (0.03)       (0.06)         0.05                        (0.02)       (0.06)        (0.05)                       (0.05)         (0.12)      (0.09)
     N                  1,220         1,176        2,396                        1,242        1,123          2,365                        1,241         1,154        2,395

Male
   Treatment             0.578        0.715      -0.137**                        0.197        0.270        -0.073                         1.318         1.037      0.281*
                         (0.03)       (0.06)        (0.07)      -0.146 **        (0.02)       (0.07)        (0.06)     -0.091             (0.07)        (0.12)      (0.14)    -0.263
    Control              0.586        0.576         0.009        (0.08)          0.196        0.178         0.018       (0.09)            1.172         0.628    0.544***      (0.18)
                         (0.03)       (0.06)        (0.06)                       (0.02)       (0.07)        (0.07)                        (0.05)        (0.13)      (0.14)
    Diff: T-C           -0.008      0.138**      -0.146**                        0.001        0.092        -0.091                        0.146*       0.409**     -0.263*
                         (0.04)       (0.08)        (0.07)                       (0.03)       (0.09)        (0.07)                        (0.09)        (0.18)      (0.14)
     N                    581          573         1,154                          610          524         1,134                           608           544        1,152

Female
   Treatment              0.711           0.649        0.062                      0.061         0.266    -0.205***                        1.076         0.691    0.385***
                          (0.03)          (0.06)      (0.06)      0.007           (0.01)        (0.06)       (0.06)     -0.219 **         (0.05)        (0.10)       (0.11)   -0.096
     Control              0.743           0.688        0.055      (0.08)          0.081         0.067         0.014      (0.09)           1.092         0.611    0.481***      (0.15)
                          (0.02)          (0.06)      (0.06)                      (0.02)        (0.06)       (0.06)                       (0.05)        (0.10)       (0.11)
     Diff: T-C           -0.032          -0.039        0.007                     -0.020       0.199**    -0.219***                       -0.016         0.080       -0.096
                          (0.04)          (0.08)      (0.06)                      (0.02)        (0.09)       (0.06)                       (0.06)        (0.15)       (0.11)
     N                     639             603        1,242                        632           599         1,231                         633           610        1,243
Simple difference in means comparison. The third column compares respondents who were directly or indirectly (using ListIt methods) asked, within a
treatment group. The third row compares respondents between treatment and control group, within an interview method. The fourth column presents
the difference in difference, i.e. the difference between the two differences (Direct-Indirect and Treatment-Control). Standard errors are presented in
parentheses. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
Appendix Figure 1: 6001 Hits by Topic According to Metadata, Nationwide
                    Appendix Table 1: Additional Baseline Values and Balance Tests
                                                                        Treatment                   Control           p-value
                                                                       N         Mean           N         Mean        T vs C
                                                                                           Demographics
Married or Cohabiting (%)                                             891           0.59       895            0.57       0.41
Has partner, but not cohabiting (%)                                   894           0.18       897            0.17       0.78
Low perceived relative HIV risk                                       848           0.49       858            0.49       0.81
Can read without difficulty (%)                                       893           0.84       894            0.81       0.22
Total number of mobile phones in household                            886           1.51       883            1.51       0.84
Some difficulty charging in trading center (%)                        886           0.33       887            0.31       0.28
                                                                                   Community characteristics
Total number of households                                             30        381.50      30       370.30             0.89
Remote                                                                 30          0.20      30          0.27            0.55
Rural-Urban scale (1-5)                                                28          3.04      25          2.84            0.49
Average percentage of Muslims                                          30          0.18      30          0.20            0.63
Distance to next periodic market (km)                                  30          2.10      30          3.36            0.24
                                                                                            Outcomes
Never had STD (%)                                                     885           0.65       881            0.64       0.60
Partner or respondent are currently pregnant (%)                      894           0.12       897            0.12       0.79
Partner or respondent are currently unwantedly pregnant (%)           894           0.03        897           0.03       0.58
Has ever tested for HIV (%)                                           894           0.57        897           0.59       0.36
Any ANC visits if currently pregnant, females only (%)                357           0.20        372           0.17       0.25
Number of ANC visits if currently pregnant, females only              327           0.78        357           0.69       0.50
Stratification variables include number of households, distance to tarmac road, distance to next periodic market, remoteness
by category, urbanity by category, MTN network coverage, average education level, average SRH knowledge level, average
SRH behavior score and predominant religion.
                                    Appendix Table 2b: Determinants of Use of 6001
                             Dependent Variable: Ever Used 6001 (Observed and Self-reported)
                                      Sample frame:     Full sample     Males only     Females only                Full Sample
                                                                                                                    Covariate
                        Coefficient reported below for:        Covariate          Covariate          Covariate   interacted with
                                                                                                                    treatment
Male                                                           0.0561***                                              -0.0186
                                                                  [0.02]                                               [0.03]
Own HIV risk perceived as low at baseline                         0.0419             0.0580            0.0305         -0.0487
                                                                  [0.03]             [0.04]            [0.04]          [0.03]
Married or cohabiting at baseline                               0.0502**           0.0618*             0.0348          0.0258
                                                                  [0.02]             [0.04]            [0.03]          [0.05]
Age                                                             -0.0038*          -0.0070**           -0.0011         -0.0019
                                                                  [0.00]             [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.00]
Education                                                       0.0069*            0.0112**           -0.0002        -0.0131*
                                                                  [0.00]             [0.01]            [0.01]          [0.01]
Number of siblings                                                0.0002             0.0006           -0.0002          0.0004
                                                                  [0.00]             [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.00]
Father's education                                                0.0003             0.0075           -0.0041         -0.0046
                                                                  [0.00]             [0.01]            [0.01]          [0.01]
Meals eaten per day                                             0.0244*             0.0253             0.0158         0.0331
                                                                  [0.01]             [0.02]            [0.02]          [0.02]
Condition of footwear                                           -0.0108*            -0.0177           -0.0087          0.0151
                                                                  [0.01]             [0.01]            [0.01]          [0.01]
Ability to read                                                  -0.0156            -0.0275           -0.0049          0.0468
                                                                  [0.01]             [0.02]            [0.02]          [0.03]
Owns personal phone                                            0.0656***          0.1874***            0.0089        -0.0983*
                                                                  [0.02]             [0.03]            [0.03]          [0.05]
Frequency of using text messages                                  0.0067             0.0071            0.0100       0.0413***
                                                                  [0.01]             [0.01]            [0.01]          [0.01]
Remoteness (community)                                           -0.0196            -0.0478           -0.0016          0.0140
                                                                  [0.07]             [0.08]            [0.07]          [0.06]
MTN coverage (community)                                          0.0254             0.0359            0.0153         0.0313*
                                                                  [0.03]             [0.03]            [0.02]          [0.02]
Average SRH knowledge at baseline (community)                     0.0805            0.0743             0.0818         0.0974
                                                                  [0.11]             [0.14]            [0.09]          [0.07]
Average SRH behavior at baseline (community)                     -0.0981            -0.0837           -0.1152         -0.0409
                                                                  [0.15]             [0.19]            [0.14]          [0.11]
Percentage of Muslims (community)                                -0.2171            -0.0406          -0.3444**         0.1281
                                                                  [0.18]             [0.19]            [0.17]          [0.13]
Number of households (community)                                 -0.0000            -0.0000           -0.0000       -0.0001**
                                                                  [0.00]             [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.00]
Distance to next tarmac road (community)                          0.0016           0.0027*             0.0008         -0.0004
                                                                  [0.00]             [0.00]            [0.00]          [0.00]
Distance to next periodic market (community)                     -0.0081            -0.0104           -0.0054          0.0013
                                                                  [0.01]             [0.01]            [0.00]          [0.01]

Observations                                                    2,276              1,099               1,167         2,276
Notes: Probit regression reporting marginal effects, robust standard errors clustered at the village level are
reported in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                 Appendix Table 2a: 6001 Awareness and Usage
                                                                                                                               P-value t-
Question                                                                                        Control   Treatment       n
                                                                                                                                  test
R espondent has ever heard of Google SMS                             Yes                           46%          57%       2410        0.00
R espondent has ever heard of 6001 service                           Yes                           24%          48%       2405        0.00
R espondent has heard of 6001 /Google SMS through…                   Radio                         14%          13%       2405        0.51
                                                                     Vantage                        4%          27%       2405        0.00
                                                                     Friends                        2%           2%       2405        0.40
                                                                     Family                        0.1%         0.4%      2405        0.10
                                                                     Champion                       0%           1%       2405        0.00
                                                                     Teacher                        0%          0.3%      2405        0.04
                                                                     Other                          4%           4%       2405        0.61
                                                                     Had not heard of it           76%          52%       2405        0.00
Respondent has ever sent a message to 6001                           Self-reported                  3%          22%       2424        0.00
                                                                     Self-reported & observed       7%          40%       2424        0.00
Median # of messages sent to 6001 if ever used                       Self-reported & observed         3               4       574
Median # of different days on which service was used if ever used    Observed                         5               4       236
Median # of days between first and last use if ever used              Observed                        3               6       236
Median # of days between first and last use if used on 4 or more diff Observed                       47           35          236
days
Respondent has used 6001 in…                                          English                      66%          26%           303     0.00
(conditional on having used 6001)                                    Luganda                       34%          68%           303     0.00
                                                                     Both                           0%           5%           303     0.15

Most frequently mentioned reasons for not using 6001 service         Not interested                 8%          12%       2424        0.00

(conditional on having heard of 6001)                                Don’t know how to text         2%           4%       2424        0.02
                                                                     Don't have phone               1%           2%       2424        0.02
                                                                     Afraid of fees                 2%           1%       2424        0.16
                                                                     Know how to text, but
                                                                                                    6%           6%       2424        0.40
                                                                     instructions unclear
                                                                     Don't speak English or
                                                                                                    0%           0%       2424        0.32
                                                                     Luganda
                                                            Appendix Table 3: Components of Knowledge Indices

HIV Knowledge                                             Respondents knows HIV can be transmitted…                         Respondents knows HIV cannot be transmitted…

                                          ...during pregnancy       …during delivery            …during breastfeeding       …through sharing food       …through mosquito bites
                                                       (1)                    (2)                         (3)                        (4)                          (5)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                         Full sample               0.0025                      0.0094                     0.0044                      0.0328                       0.0290
                                                   [0.03]                      [0.01]                     [0.02]                      [0.02]                       [0.03]
   # of observations (# of individuals)            1,092                       1,092                      1,092                       1,092                        1,091

B. By Gender
                                   Male           -0.0508                    0.0150                        0.0102                    0.0458                         0.0203
                                                   [0.04]                     [0.01]                       [0.02]                     [0.03]                        [0.03]
                                  Female           0.0576                    0.0036                       -0.0016                    0.0192                         0.0379
                                                   [0.04]                     [0.01]                       [0.02]                     [0.02]                        [0.05]
              F-test: Male = Female                 3.00                       0.58                         0.11                       0.62                           0.09
              F-Test: p-value                       0.09                       0.45                         0.74                       0.43                          0.77
   # of observations (# of individuals)            1,092                      1,092                        1,092                      1,092                          1,091
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the village
level are reported in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                          Appendix Table 4: Components of Contraceptive Knowledge Index
                                           Respondents knows…
                                                                            …female                                                              …male             …emergency       …female          …male
                                           … the pill      …injections      condoms           …foam            …IUDs            …implants        condoms           pill             sterilization    sterilization
                                                (1)             (2)              (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)               (8)                 (9)             (10)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                         Full sample           0.0045           0.0046           -0.0151          -0.0019          -0.0310           0.0231           -0.0161          -0.0059          -0.0089          -0.0300**
                                               [0.01]           [0.03]            [0.02]           [0.01]           [0.03]           [0.03]            [0.03]           [0.01]           [0.02]            [0.01]
    # of observations (# of individuals)        1,092            1,092            1,081            1,080            1,084             1,082            1,090            1,082            1,082             1,081

B. By Gender
                                    Male      -0.0036          -0.0094         -0.0000           0.0077            0.0112           0.0228           -0.0183           -0.0042          -0.0219           -0.0317
                                               [0.02]           [0.04]          [0.03]            [0.01]            [0.04]          [0.03]            [0.04]            [0.01]           [0.02]            [0.02]
                                 Female       0.0128            0.0192         -0.0308          -0.0120*          -0.0746*         0.0234            -0.0137           -0.0076           0.0045           -0.0282
                                               [0.02]           [0.03]          [0.03]            [0.01]            [0.04]          [0.05]            [0.04]            [0.01]           [0.03]            [0.02]
            F-test: Male = Female               0.36             0.47            0.66              5.11              2.13            0.00              0.01              0.05              0.49             0.02
            F-Test: p-value                     0.55             0.50            0.42              0.03              0.15            0.99              0.92              0.82              0.49             0.89
   # of observations (# of individuals)        1,092             1,092          1,081             1,080             1,084            1,082            1,090              1,082            1,082            1,081
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in brackets.
                                                Appendix Table 5: Components of Attitudes Indices
                                                            Perceived rel. non-riskiness                                       Condom use attitudes
                                                                                                                Respondent agrees to the statement that….
                                                                              Perceived own HIV risk             A male condom should
                                               Relative to others, I do not   compared to a typical person       always be put on before It is not embarrasing to
                                               take risks in my life          (1 larger, 3 smaller)                    intercourse       buy or ask for a condom
                                                             (1)                             (2)                            (3)                       (4)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                             Full sample                 -0.0933**                      -0.0225                           0.0186*                      -0.0240
                                                           [0.04]                        [0.04]                            [0.01]                       [0.02]
                               Observations                2,267                         2,209                             2,206                        2,258

B. By Gender
                                        Male           -0.1621***                       -0.0247                           0.0314**                      -0.0173
                                                           [0.05]                        [0.05]                              [0.01]                      [0.02]
                                     Female               -0.0278                       -0.0203                             0.0061                      -0.0305
                                                           [0.06]                        [0.06]                              [0.01]                      [0.02]
                 F-test: Male = Female                      2.99                          0.00                                2.06                        0.22
                 F-Test: p-value                            0.09                          0.95                                0.16                        0.64
                               Observations                2,267                         2,209                               2,206                        2,258
Note: The higher the value of the dependent variable in (1), (2) and (3), the more comfortable disagreeing. All regressions include controls for
baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in brackets.
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                                   Appendix Table 6a: Components of Behavior Indices and Related Variables

                                                                     Number of sexual
                                                                     partners in past 3 Relationship to last
                            Ever had sex with 2                     months (No control sexual partner was                                          Used condom
                             or more different                      on baseline values)      neither casual                Used any type of       during last sex,
                             partners in same      Never been       (negative sign, i.e. a acquaintance nor                 contraceptives        interacted with
                            week during past 3 unfaithful in past 3   negative effect       commercial sex                  during last sex,      recent sex (No                         Currently has partner,
                             months (negative months (No control       means more          worker, interacted               interacted with     control on baseline Currently married or       but not
                                    sign)       on baseline values)      partners)          with recent sex                    recent sex             values)           cohabiting^      married/cohabiting^
                                     (1)                 (2)                 (3)                   (4)                             (5)                  (6)                  (7)                  (8)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                Full sample       -0.0195            -0.0658*            -0.1345*               -0.0053                        -0.0985*               -0.0232                0.0064               -0.0338**
                                   [0.02]              [0.03]              [0.07]                [0.466]                         [0.05]                [0.03]                [0.01]                 [0.01]
               Observations          998               2,199               2,247                  2,270                           461                  2,218                 2,270                  2,275

B. By Gender
                         Male         -0.0331                -0.0527            -0.2827***                -0.0075               -0.0587               -0.0511                  0.0231               -0.0480**
                                       [0.03]                 [0.05]               [0.10]                 [0.012]                [0.07]                [0.04]                  [0.02]                  [0.02]
                       Female         -0.0062                -0.0781              0.0059                  -0.0033              -0.1336**               0.0030                 -0.0095                 -0.0202
                                       [0.02]                 [0.05]               [0.09]                 [0.008]                [0.07]                [0.04]                  [0.02]                  [0.01]
       F-test: Male = Female            0.60                   0.14                 5.28                    0.09                  0.61                  0.75                    1.96                    1.34
               F-Test: p-value          0.44                   0.71                 0.03                    0.76                  0.44                  0.39                    0.17                    0.25
                Observations            998                   2,199                2,247                   2,270                  461                  2,218                   2,270                   2,275
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in brackets.
^ not an index component. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                                   Appendix Table 6b: Components of Outcome Index

                                                                                                   Current (or partner's)
                                                          Ever had bad     Ever had genital sore      pregnancy is        Currently pregnant
                               Ever had STD             smelling discharge       or ulcer               unwanted             (or partner)
                                     (1)                        (2)                 (3)                     (4)                   (5)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                Full sample       0.0076                     -0.0086               0.0366**                0.0085                 0.0051
                                   [0.02]                     [0.01]                 [0.02]                [0.01]                 [0.01]
               Observations        2,228                      2,267                  2,259                 1,093                  1,093

B. By Gender
                          Male            -0.0073                 0.0010               0.0183                0.0219                0.0055
                                           [0.03]                 [0.02]                [0.02]               [0.01]                [0.02]
                         Female            0.0218                -0.0178              0.0540**              -0.0053                0.0048
                                           [0.03]                 [0.02]                [0.03]               [0.02]                [0.02]
    F-test: Male = Female                   0.60                   0.40                  0.96                 1.09                  0.00
                F-Test: p-value             0.44                   0.53                  0.33                 0.30                  0.99
                 Observations              2,228                  2,267                 2,259                1,093                 1,093
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification variables. Robust standard
errors clustered at the village level are reported in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                             Appendix Table 6c: Components of Treatment Seeking Index and Related Variables

                                                                                                                                    Any ANC visit     Number of ANC
                                                                       Ever sought         Ever visited health    Ever had STD      during current   visits during current
                                                                     treatment for an      center / worker for (symptoms) and did pregnancy (females pregnancy (females
                                              Ever tested for HIV          STD            issue related to SRH not seek treatment        only)               only)
                                                       (1)                  (2)                     (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                            Full sample             -0.0136               -0.0202                0.0122                -0.0048                -0.0330               -0.0204
                                                     [0.02]                [0.01]                [0.02]                 [0.01]                [0.031]               [0.106]
                              Observations           2,275                 2,275                  2,265                 2,275                  1,090                  863

B. By Gender
                                       Male         -0.0322              0.0009                 -0.0063                 0.0066
                                                     [0.03]               [0.02]                 [0.04]                  [0.02]
                                    Female           0.0042             -0.0403*                 0.0298                 -0.0157
                                                     [0.03]               [0.02]                 [0.02]                  [0.01]
                      F-test: Male = Femal            1.13                 1.26                   0.86                    1.24
                            F-Test: p-value           0.29                 0.27                   0.36                    0.27
                              Observations           2,275                2,275                  2,265                   2,275
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the village
level are reported in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.
                      Appendix Table 7: Information on Health Services

                              Knows place to get Knows place to get Knows place to get Knows place to get
                                an HIV test        free HIV test       STD test          free STD test
                                     (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)
Full sample from follow-up survey
A. Overall
                  Full sample     -0.0076              0.0192           -0.0014             -0.0343
                                   [0.01]              [0.03]            [0.02]              [0.03]
                Observations       1,090                1,093            1,091               1,093

B. By Gender
                           Male        -0.0104               0.0423               0.0059                0.0081
                                        [0.01]                [0.04]               [0.02]                [0.04]
                         Female        -0.0047               -0.0047              -0.0091              -0.0786*
                                        [0.01]                [0.04]               [0.02]                [0.04]
         F-test: Male = Female           0.10                  0.85                 0.19                  2.92
                 F-Test: p-value         0.76                  0.36                 0.67                  0.09
                  Observations          1,090                 1,093                1,091                 1,093
Note: All regressions include controls for baseline values of the dependent variable and for stratification
variables. Robust standard errors clustered at the village level are reported in brackets. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, ***
p<0.01.
