                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE SUPPLY OF GENDER STEREOTYPES AND DISCRIMINATORY BELIEFS

                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                            Yueran Ma

                                        Working Paper 19109
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19109


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government for financial support. This paper
was written for an NBER Conference honoring Claudia Goldin. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19109.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Edward L. Glaeser and Yueran Ma. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Supply of Gender Stereotypes and Discriminatory Beliefs
Edward L. Glaeser and Yueran Ma
NBER Working Paper No. 19109
June 2013
JEL No. J16

                                            ABSTRACT

What determines beliefs about the ability and appropriate role of women? An overwhelming majority
of men and women born early in the 20th century thought women should not work; a majority now
believes that work is appropriate for both genders. Betty Friedan (1963) postulated that beliefs about
gender were formed by consumer good producers, but a simple model suggests that such firms would
only have the incentive to supply error, when mass persuasion is cheap, when their products complement
women’s time in the household, and when individual producers have significant market power. Such
conditions seem unlikely to be universal, or even common, but gender stereotypes have a long history.
To explain that history, we turn to a second model where parents perpetuate beliefs out of a desire
to encourage the production of grandchildren. Undersupply of female education will encourage daughters’
fertility, directly by reducing the opportunity cost of their time and indirectly by leading daughters
to believe that they are less capable. Children will be particularly susceptible to persuasion if they
overestimate their parents’ altruism toward themselves. The supply of persuasion will diminish if
women work before childbearing, which may explain why gender-related beliefs changed radically
among generations born in the 1940s.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Yueran Ma
Harvard University
yueranma@college.harvard.edu
I. Introduction



Why do gender-related beliefs emerge and shift over time? According to the General Social
Survey waves of 2003, 2004 and 2007, 47 percent of women born before 1946 (and 59 percent
of men) agree or strongly agree with the statement “It is much better for everyone involved if the
man is the achiever outside the home and the woman takes care of the home and family.” Only
29 percent of women born after 1945 share that view. A full 50 percent of female respondents
(from all cohorts) agreed with that statement in America’s West South Central Region, while
only 26 percent of New Englanders shared the view.

We have less survey evidence on discriminatory beliefs about women’s ability in the workforce
than we do about women’s “proper” role in the home, perhaps because surveyors may not have
trusted respondents to answer truthfully. Nonetheless, the evidence that does exist also suggests
dramatic transformations about beliefs about women’s capacity during the late 20th century. In
1953, Gallup asked “If you were taking a new job and had your choice of a boss, would you
prefer to work for a man or for a woman?” In the 1953, 57 percent of women and 79 percent of
men expressed a preference for a male boss, as opposed to only 8 percent of women and 2
percent of men who expressed a preference for a female boss. By 1987, the share of female and
male respondents expressing a preference for a male boss had dropped to 37 and 29 percent
respectively, with men now preferring a female boss (Simon and Landis 1989).

Moreover, an abundance of personal histories, ethnographic work and field-specific statistical
research suggests that men, and often women as well, have often believed that women are less
capable in many-workplace relevant tasks (e.g. Lerner 1987). The literature on women and
perceived math ability is voluminous, and suggests that men and women often both believe that
women are less able in mathematics (see Gunderson et al. 2012). The women who pioneered
their way up corporate ladders have often described a common male presumption that their
talents were limited. Literature is replete with stories (such as Ibsen’s “A Dollhouse”) of women
who experienced low expectations in their own homes, from both spouses and parents. Major
thinkers from Aristotle to Freud have often depicted women as severely lacking in vital decision-
making areas.

This paper does not attempt to add new measurement of discriminatory beliefs, nor does it
attempt to quantify the effect that such beliefs may have had on women’s labor force successes
or family outcomes. In Section II, we discuss some of the survey, ethnographic and literary
sources that persuade us to accept that patriarchal, discriminatory beliefs have existed and that
they are important enough to investigate further.

Section II also discusses why we also assume that these gender-related stereotypes cannot be
understood as a purely Bayesian response to commonly available facts, but that they should
instead be understood as the product of persuasion. The surveys discussed above are taken in the

                                                 2
same year, by respondents who observe the same labor markets, and yet respondents born before
and after 1945 have markedly different opinions about the working women, suggesting that an
impact of upbringing on beliefs is far stronger that it should be in a perfectly rational world.
There are abundant reasons to believe that male attitudes toward the innate abilities of females
have shifted dramatically since the Victorian past, and it is hard to see how women’s “innate”
characteristics could have experienced any such dramatic shift.

As in Glaeser (2005), we assume that beliefs reflect persuasion rather than reality, and we focus
on the supply of persuasion. Gender-related stereotypes and ethnic hatred differ in major ways.
Hostile racial, ethnic, and religious beliefs emphasize the threat created by the bad motives of an
out-group (which sociologists often term “untrustworthiness”), which then generates an incentive
to harm or avoid that group. Gender-related stereotypes rarely imply that women are innately
evil, which would be a hard sell given the common experience of maternal altruism, or that
women should be universally avoided, which would run against common male preferences.
While discriminatory gender-related beliefs may certainly harm women, the holders of these
beliefs often believe that women are morally superior, not evil, and rarely intend any intentional
harm to women as a group.

To understand the supply of erroneous beliefs, we must understand who has the incentives to
spread falsehood. In Section III of this paper, we discuss potential sources of error: politicians,
companies, co-workers, spouses and parents. This discussion motivates our decision to focus on
parents and market entrepreneurs. While many politicians, such as Theodore Bilbo and Adolph
Hitler, devoted a significant amount of their public proselytizing to spreading ethnic hatred, we
know of none who built a public career on spreading misperceptions about female competence.2
Indeed, it is easy to understand why politicians have so rarely had incentives to spread gender-
based stereotypes.

Friedan (1963) suggested that patriarchic beliefs were spread by magazine publishers and
companies selling products for the home that complemented women’s time in the household.
Our model of market-supplied beliefs, discussed in Section IV suggests that the conditions
needed for this to explain patriarchy are unlikely to hold, but the story seems common and
plausible enough to formally model. Co-workers do have an incentive to persuade hiring
authorities that women are less able in the workforce, but the power of this force should be
muted, since employers have both the incentives and should have the resources to see through
their own employees’ talk.3



2
  The efforts of Phyllis Schlaffly and others against the Equal Rights Amendment certainly defended traditional
family arrangements, but rarely suggested any lack of female competence.
3
  It is, of course, possible that employers have “preferences” against hiring women, as in Becker (1957), but the
spirit of this paper is to focus on the causes of such “preferences” or beliefs. We find it more plausible to believe
that employers beliefs were themselves shaped by pre‐adult influences than by their workers’ persuasion.

                                                           3
Parents with a strong preference for own grandchildren may also have an interest in persuading
daughters that the formal labor force is not for them, and other sources have suggested that
parents or teachers have helped perpetuate gender stereotypes (Gunderson et al. 2012).
Moreover, parents have far greater resources available with which to influence beliefs than co-
workers or even spouses. Parents have some control over children’s time and experiences for
many years, during periods where children are less likely to have strong alternative sources of
information. This combination of incentives and power leads us to believe that parents are a
primary source of gender stereotypes and we model that process in Section IV.

Section IV, and V, discuss the two models that follow from this discussion. Our first model
follows Friedan’s (1963) emphasis on the generation of beliefs by sellers of household goods.
As in Glaeser and Ujhelyi (2010), we assume that companies have access to a technology that
broadcast stories which are taken as evidence about the relative returns of working in or out of
the household. We aim to capture Friedan’s description of magazine articles, generated by male
publishers perhaps eager to please their advertisers, which depict happy housewives and
miserable career women. We assume that women discount many of these stories, but as long as
the marginal story is given some credence, then it will have some effect on the amount of time
women spend at home or work.

The model suggests that gender stereotypes will be strongly dependent upon the market structure
in consumer goods production, the effectiveness of communication technology and the naiveté of
women about third party stories. In order for Friedan’s model to work, the costs of persuasion
must be low, the household goods market must be extremely oligopolistic, and household
products must complement, not substitute, for women’s time in the home. Since manufacturing
lifestyle norms is an industry-wide public good, a highly competitive industry will not engage in
much of that sort of persuasion.

Arguably, the late 1950s was an era that combined large market power held by a few large home
product producers, more effective means of communication and limited skepticism about that
communication, yet those conditions are unlikely to have held throughout the long history of
patriarchal beliefs. Moreover, if this force was so strong, there should have been more counter-
persuasion during that period by producers of technologies, like the washing machine, the
dishwasher, the microwave and the vacuum cleaner, that substitute for women’s time in the
home.

Moreover, it is hard to see why fomenting gender related stereotypes is the cheapest means of
persuading married women to buy new cookbooks or cooking appliances. It would seem more
likely that the providers of home-related products, whether complements or substitutes for
women’s time, will broadcast a simpler message: a nice home is nice. Indeed, such banal
messages often seem like the theme of home product advertisements, which really imply little
about whether women are capable of finding fulfillment in the workforce. The model leaves us


                                                4
wondering whether corporate interests had either the incentives or the power to shape
widespread beliefs in the way that Friedan (1963) suggests.

Section V starts with an alternative model on the parental formation of beliefs for female
children. Parents typically have far more ability to force stories with morals on their children,
and perhaps parental persuasion has been similar to the corporate persuasion suggested by
Friedan (1963). Our model in Section V follows more standard economic assumptions and links
the persuasion process to a Bayesian signaling model. We do not assume that parents have
access to a persuasion technology, but rather that they can send costly signals, including altering
the education of their children or their own workplace behavior, which may shape children’s
beliefs, either about their own ability or about the ability of women as a whole.

We focus on differential education choices by gender. If young women believe that parents have
access to private information about their own ability, then education choices will be seen as a
signal about their own individual ability. If young women and men believe that parents lack
such private information, but base their decisions on their assessment of female ability more
generally, the education given to daughters has the ability to generate beliefs about an entire
gender. We focus on the first assumption in the first part of Section V and the second
assumption in the second part of Section V.

In the model, parents are altruistic toward their children but they have an independent desire to
have more grandchildren. This desire creates an incentive for them to try to generate beliefs that
lead to more childbearing. If education increases the returns from working in the labor force
relative to childbearing, this will generate lower levels of women’s education, even if women
know their ability levels with certainty.

The under-provision of education effect gets more pronounced if parents, but not their daughters,
have private information about the ability of their own daughters or of women generally. Parents
of skilled daughters may have an incentive to try to imitate parents of less able children by
giving them less education, which may persuade daughters that their own time is best spent in
childbearing. If daughters have rational beliefs, this will cause more able women to think that
they are merely average, but will not lead to any aggregate misperception about women’s ability.

In the second part of Section V, we turn to persuasion of both sons and daughters. If parents are
making decisions based primarily on the ability distribution of women as a whole, then their
investment decisions may persuade both sons and daughters that women are generally less
capable in the workforce. This will lead to an added benefit of underinvestment for parents
hoping to encourage more fertility in both sons and daughters.

This effect will be particularly strong if children are credulous Bayesians (Glaeser and Sunstein
2009) who make the understandable error of overestimating their parents’ altruism toward
themselves then the situation can become more extreme. Trusting their parents too much leads
daughters to underestimate their parents’ incentive to act strategically. This tendency will

                                                 5
heighten the parents’ incentive to behave in a strategic manner, by under-investing in education.
Daughters may end up believing that they are in a separating equilibrium, when only the parents
of the less able provide little schooling, while they are actually in a pooling equilibrium, where
all parents provide little education to their daughters.

At the end of Section V, we discuss the timing of work and childrearing. In this model, women
who have been educated or not, have the choice of when to schedule a continuous term of home
production for producing children. One disadvantage of postponing childbearing is that it leads
to a shorter time of continuous work, which limits human capital accumulation. A second
disadvantage reflects potential health risks from delaying childbearing. In the model, the major
advantage of postponing is that women can learn their ability levels if they work during an
earlier period, which enables them to make better decisions about the tradeoff between parenting
and work.

As long as the desire to eliminate breaks in work history is not too strong, then women have
children immediately or wait depending on the state of medical technology, as discussed by
Goldin (2006). In the model, reduced risks from late childbearing will delay childbearing and
lead to more information at that decision-making stage. The critical implication is that parental
investment in misinformation makes sense when women have kids early but not late. This fact
implies that the shifts in the timing of women’s childbearing should have had a major effect on
the supply of gender stereotypes. As such, over a longer time period, technologies such as the
pill (Goldin and Katz 2000) may have reduced the incentive to persuade daughters that their time
is better spent bearing children.

Section VI concludes and discusses the interplay between sources of incorrect information and
real world experience. Working before childbearing means that there is enough information to
counteract persuasion. In a similar fashion, gender-related quotas that limit the number of
women on the job seem unlikely to persist in the same way as glass-ceilings that prevent women
from rising above a certain level. Gender related quotas should be unstable, if they are sustained
with incorrect beliefs, because the few women hired for the job end up providing information
that counteracts false beliefs. Glass ceilings, by contrast, provide no such evidence, which allow
false beliefs to persist and maintain the incentives to perpetuate such beliefs.



   II.      Discrimination and the Social Formation of Beliefs



We have a great deal of information about women in the workforce, including the relative
productivity of men and women in the household, the availability of market-provided household
services, and perceived workplace discrimination against women (e.g. Goldin 1990; Blau et al.
forthcoming). We have less evidence on beliefs about female competence. Perhaps this dearth

                                                 6
of information is understandable. In late 20th or early 21st century America, we would hardly
expect many respondents to honestly admit to thinking that women are less capable.
Nonetheless, the relative absence of polling data about female competence makes it difficult to
fully document shifts in beliefs about women and their capacities.

There is however a great deal of more “anecdotal” evidence suggesting that women have often
faced strong belief-related barriers to employment. Men have often held strong opinions that
women were just not up to certain jobs. Often, these beliefs have crumbled in the face of reality,
but certainly some of these beliefs persist.

Attitudes toward Women and Work

In this subsection, we briefly review the polling data that is available about gender stereotypes
from the General Social Survey (GSS) and other sources. The General Social Survey, and other
surveyors, has been asking questions about traditional gender roles since the early 1970s.
Unfortunately, these gender-role related questions do not map clearly into any particular taste or
belief. A patriarchal viewpoint can reflect a higher opinion of female productivity in the
household sector, or a belief that employers discriminate unfairly against women.

Figure 1, for example, shows the average responses to the question “It is much better for
everyone involved if the man is the achiever outside the home and the woman takes care of the
home and family” by birth year for men and women separately. The graph shows a strong
downward pattern for both men and women. For cohorts born at the start of the 20th century,
almost all men and women thought that traditional gender roles were best. The share of
respondents sharing that view declines to about 30 percent by 1950 and then levels off. There
are some odd positive upticks in the responses to the question in the most recent cohorts, but this
may reflect measurement error. Certainly, the basic pattern documents a profound change across
cohorts born in the first half of the last century, and this pattern presents itself during every year
in which the survey question was asked.

The second figure shows a similar response to the GSS question asking whether mothers
working outside the home are harmful or harmless for young children. Again, cohorts born at
the start of the 20th century almost uniformly believed that children were hurt by women working
outside the home. By 1960, almost half of respondents did not state this belief. Even though an
overwhelming majority of respondents say that women working are just fine overall, a modest
majority still say that working while children are young harms children.

There are far fewer questions that seem to directly capture assessments of female competence,
and most that are relevant concern very particular tasks or occupations. The General Social
Survey asks some highly specialized questions, in individual years only, that would seem to
relate to female competence: the first (asked in 1974 and 1982) asked if men make better
political leaders.


                                                  7
The cohort pattern, shown in Figure 3, is clear. About 40 percent of people born earlier in the
20th century think that men make better political leaders. By the latter decades of the century,
this belief is down to 20 percent. We cannot generalize from political competence to competence
in the workplace, but the effects are still quite striking.

Another question that is potentially related to ability was asked in 1996. Men and women were
both asked if women earn less than men because they work less hard. This question about
female work effort shows a striking non-linearity (shown in Figure 4), where beliefs about
greater male effort decline with year of birth during the first half of the twentieth century and
then a rise after that date. We have no real explanation for this pattern, but it does suggest that
cohort does have an impact on these beliefs.

The Social Formation of Beliefs

Why do discriminatory beliefs differ radically over groups and across time? The economics of
discrimination began when Gary Becker (1957) presented a model of discrimination based on the
preferences of employers, customers, and fellow workers. Becker’s approach posits that some
members of one group dislike working with or buying from members of another group. The
Becker model describes the reality of the mid-1950s, and provides many keen insights, like the
negative impact on profits generated by an employer’s discriminatory tastes.4

Even if whites had no innate dislike of blacks and men were willing to work with women,
members of one group might still benefit if they were able to coordinate to expropriate the rights
of another group (Krueger 1963; Thurow 1969), or if there was a society-wide equilibrium that
restricts the choices of a disadvantaged group (Akerlof 1976).5 The South’s Jim Crow system
was not merely the decentralized preferences or beliefs of ordinary people. It was socially and
legally organized, and seems in many contexts to have generated transfers from blacks to whites.
Those transfers were perhaps most obvious in the case of segregated schools, which allowed tax
dollars to be spent far more heavily on white, rather than black children, especially when blacks
were particularly immobile (Margo 1991).

These models certainly fit many aspects of the Jim Crow south, and they may also reflect some
forms of gender-based discrimination as well. As Myrdal (1944) discussed in his classic study of
American segregation, integration-oriented whites were no more allowed to travel in black
railcars than blacks were allowed to travel white cars. Firms proudly trumpeted their whites only
policies, and the system only changed with massive legal intervention from the federal
government, which can be seen as breaking the old equilibrium with outside force. Margo

4
  Lazear’s (1999) model of culture and language provides a complementary communication-based explanation for
some forms of discrimination in the labor market. Difference cultures, or ways of speaking, can make coordination
difficult and lead to lower productivity.
5
  Akterlof (1976) presents a model where a caste system, such as the Jim Crow South, was an unfortunate but stable
equilibrium that reflected a society-wide rule where members of one clique are punished for interacting with
members of a second clique.

                                                        8
(1991) predicts that centralized discriminatory behavior would change as blacks could move
north, and indeed that seems to have happened.

It is less clear that there was an organized conspiracy against women in the mid-20th century, that
was similar to the Jim Crow system in the south, or that the legal pressure exerted by the Equal
Pay Act of 1963 or the Civil Rights Act of 1964 had the same cathartic impact for women that it
did for African-Americans. Moreover, neither centralized discrimination models nor the
Beckerian taste-based discrimination model can explain the changing nature of views toward
African-Americans and women, because they were not intended to endogenize beliefs or
preferences.6 In centralized discrimination models, members of the ruling clique rationally
respond to incentives, and have neither negative opinions nor disproportionate ill will toward
either women or minorities.

Arrow’s statistical discrimination model (1973) provides an alternative model that can explain
discriminatory hiring practices and beliefs. The model suggests that employers and ordinary
people have a low opinion of certain groups and these low opinions lead to discriminatory
behavior. Certainly, it appears to be the case that at various times employers have held a low
opinion of the competence of both blacks and women.

However, the great challenge of statistical discrimination models is that they typically also
assume that people are fairly rational in their belief formation. This implies that attitudes need to
be tethered to reality. Yet it is difficult to accept that there was much evidence to suggest that
either women or blacks were as inept as many mid-century employers appear to have thought.
Previous work (Glaeser 2005) focusing on beliefs about malevolence (rather than competence)
emphasized that while Southern voters a century ago seem to have been convinced that African-
Americans were a great threat to their safety, it was whites, not blacks, who had systematically
enslaved, brutalized, sexually assaulted and even killed members of the other group. It is harder
to document the error in beliefs about competence, but it seems quite likely that many people had
beliefs about women and minorities that were not based on any real evidence and that bore little
resemblance to the truth.

If it is true that beliefs about blacks and women systematically differed from reality, it becomes
necessary to focus on theories that can generate widespread divergence between the truth and
beliefs. There are at least two well-known systematic biases that can potentially generate such
beliefs internally, without any external persuasion: the fundamental attribution error and self-
serving biases. If the fundamental attribution error leads observers to associate the negative
outcomes of others with intrinsic personal characteristics, rather than external constraints, that
individuals could readily believe that poor labor market outcomes for either blacks or women

6
  Subsequent work by Becker and Murphy (2000) endogenizes preferences, and this paper is strongly indebted to
their work. Our decision to focus on belief rather than preference formation reflects our own preference for the
greater discipline created by belief-formation models, as in Section V, that require at least some Bayesianism. In the
case of the model in part two of Section V, results would be identical if we allowed preference formation.

                                                          9
represent low levels of innate ability rather than discrimination. Self-serving biases, which lead
people to prefer views that make them see themselves in a positive light, could also lead white
men to have negative views of blacks and women, because such views prop up white self-
esteem.

While these behavioral quirks may have contributed to negative assessment of blacks and
women, there are limits to the power of these theories. For example, females’ own belief in
gender stereotypes, discussed in the previous subsection, cannot be the result of self-serving
biases, since the beliefs do not seem to be self-serving. Moreover, the fundamental attribution
error suggests that adverse outcomes for others are attributed to intrinsic factors, but that
personal disappointments are blamed on external constraint. Yet women themselves seem to
share patriarchal beliefs.

Here, we focus on the social formation of error, and our critical assumption is that human beings
are sensitive to social persuasion. In the discussion and two models that follow, individuals will
be reasonably rational, but they will not totally discount falsely generated signals about the
characteristics of out-groups.

On one level, the social formation of error runs against a long-standing tendency of economists
to assume a high level of rationality and even accuracy in beliefs. Yet if we accept that mid-20th
century white males had erroneous opinions of the ability levels of blacks and women, we must
consider at least the possibility that some beliefs have little basis in reality. While our approach
runs against the economist’s predilection for hyper-rationality, it fully embraces the role that
incentives can play in the generation of all sorts of outcomes, including incorrect beliefs.

Naturally, those incentives must battle against the incentives of listeners to learn the truth. In the
political context, those incentives may be quite weak. After all, no individual voter has a strong
incentive to ascertain the truth about any particular story, if the truth will only serve to make his
or her vote a bit wiser. In the labor force context, those incentives may be quite stronger.

Moreover, we will assume that widely spread falsehoods will not persist if there is obvious
evidence to the contrary. In any sensible learning model, this fact will suggest that racial or sex-
based quotas are not typically stable, while glass ceilings may be. The existence of a glass
ceiling toward women (or perhaps a low dark roof for blacks in the Jim Crow South) ensures that
there is no hard evidence on how women or blacks can perform in higher positions. The absence
of information allows incorrect beliefs to persist.

Discrimination vs. Hatred

These models also help us to distinguish discrimination from hatred. Hatred is modeled as a
belief that an out-group is malevolent, and prone to engage in harmful behavior if they are
empowered. Discrimination is a belief that an out-group is different and perhaps less capable,
but not necessarily harmful or malign. Hatred leads to policies such as segregation and

                                                 10
genocide, as in-groups attempt to shield themselves from the perceived threat. Discrimination
will lead to different hiring practices and perhaps even exclusion from political decision-making.
Yet policies based on beliefs about lesser ability levels will not attempt to explicitly harm the
out-group, because the out-group is not perceived as dangerous. While we might try to harm
people who are perceive to be malevolent, before they harm us, we have little incentive to attack
people who are merely somewhat dim.

Historically, African-Americans have suffered from both discrimination and hatred. They have
been perceived as being less competent, and they have also been perceived as being a threat.
These beliefs were able to persist, arguably, because blacks were excluded from positions where
they might do harm and kept out of jobs where they could have demonstrated ability.

Women have suffered from discrimination but not typically from hatred. The primary
experience of extraordinary altruism in the lives of most men is the self-sacrificing behavior of
their own mothers, which would make it hard to accept that women are somehow naturally
malevolent. Indeed, many of the most profound opponents of women in the workplace or in
politics, who certainly subscribe and even promulgate views about female competence, have also
held up women as the fairer sex that is more generous and good-hearted than men. When
Senator Vest of Missouri opposed women’s suffrage in 1887, he said “I believe that [women] are
better than men, but I do not believe they are adapted to the political work of this world.”

It is historically rare for out-groups to be simultaneously depicted as malign and incompetent.
Indeed, such views would be counter-productive if a hate-producer is looking to generate support
for policies that are harmful to the out-group. If a group is incompetent, then it is less
threatening and that would mean less need to engage in defensive mechanisms. Jews, for
example, have historically been depicted as both malign and powerful, which together justified
the use of extreme anti-Semitic policies. The Soviet Union was depicted as an Evil Empire,
which called for massive US military spending. If the Soviet Union was merely an evil
bumbling bureaucracy (arguably a more accurate description during the Reagan era) then there
would have been far less need for military spending.

In the case of patriarchic beliefs, it is possible to conceptually distinguish beliefs about ability
and societal norms. A woman, for example, might stay in the home because she believes that her
workplace productivity is relatively low in comparison to her productivity in the household.
Alternatively, she may believe that staying home is just the “right” thing to do. But while these
two notions may differ in some deep sense, they will be typically practically indistinguishable,
and even conceptually the distinction is murky. In a sense, believing that remaining in the
household sector is “right” is not all that different from believing that productivity in that sector
is higher than in the workplace. There is a conceptual distinction between believing that women
are less able in the workplace or more able in the household sector, and surely both beliefs have
existed, but when it comes to time allocation decisions the beliefs are interchangeable.


                                                 11
   III.    The Entrepreneurs of Error


If common beliefs are socially formed, then they are unlikely to be produced by accidents.
Instead, interested individuals must have incentives to spread falsehood. In this section, we
discuss four potential sources of misinformation about female ability levels, and explain our
decision to model only two sources of falsehood. One primary distinction is whether incentives
exist to minimize the workplace talents only of a particular woman or to minimize the ability
level of all women.

We focus on cases where spreading misinformation is intentional and instrumental. There have
certainly been countless instances where politicians, for example, have uttered gender
stereotypes, but most of the time, this seems more likely to reflect a pre-existing norm, rather
than any conscious political strategy. It is of course possible that those politicians are part of a
social echo chamber which amplifies existing opinions, but we are interested in where the
opinions get started. We therefore look for a setting where someone with the power to persuade
also has the motive to depict women as either less capable or more suited for work outside the
labor market.

Political Entrepreneurs

In Glaeser (2005), political entrepreneurs spread hatred against an out-group because hatred
complemented the policies proposed by those politicians. Southern conservative politicians in
the 1890s had an incentive to spread anti-black hatred because their proposed policies would be
harmful to disproportionately poor African-Americans relative to the policies proposed by their
populist opponents (Woodward 1955). The model suggests that there were several factors
needed for a steady supply of erroneous beliefs, including low costs of supply, persistent policy
differences between parties that disproportionately impacted an out-group, political weakness of
the out-group, and the relative segregation of that out-group to reduce alternative sources of
information.

None of these conditions holds for gender-related policies throughout most history prior to 1950.
The politician had to have access to the pulpit, cheap political persuasion, which, outside of
cities, required both the printing press and voter literacy. For this reason, politically-induced
hatred of groups, as opposed to religiously induced hatred, appears to have been a largely 19th
century innovation. There just was not enough actively popular proselytizing politicians prior to
1750 to be responsible for patriarchal beliefs prior to that period.

Two prominent gender-related issues emerged in US politics during the 19th century: women’s
suffrage and temperance (eventually prohibition). Prominent leaders in women’s suffrage, like
Elizabeth Cady Stanton, also led temperance organizations and prominent temperance leaders,

                                                 12
like Frances Willard, were also suffragists. Prohibition was partially justified as a policy that
would protect wives and children from abusive, drunken husbands, and suffrage was justified as
the means of passing prohibition. Both issues culminated in constitutional amendments ratified
immediately after World War I.

The early connection between these issues and abolitionism (Fogel 2000) may have made them a
more natural fit for the GOP than with the Democratic Party, and Republicans were stronger
supporters of the bills that eventually led to the Nineteenth Amendment, but neither issue
became a major party plank until 1916, when both parties’ platforms supported extending voting
rights to women.7 Neither party’s platform endorsed prohibition before the passage of the
Eighteenth Amendment.

Beliefs about female competence would be far more relevant to the issue of female suffrage, and
arguments about female incapacity were routinely made by the opponents of suffrage. By 1916,
a large number of states already allowed women’s suffrage, especially in presidential elections,
making it politically unwise to insult a large voting bloc.

Yet even in that case, the political language was limited perhaps because the parties never split
decisively on suffrage, and politicians had far less chance of changing male beliefs about
women, than they did of conjuring the fear of a race riot. While many rural Germans in 1925
had little experience of Jews, allowing Nazi propaganda a clean field to shape anti-Semitic
beliefs, most men have known plenty of women, thereby limiting the ability of any political
voice to shape beliefs.

Moreover, since the Nineteenth Amendment passed, women have gone from being politically
absent to the second largest and now the largest voting bloc. Telling a majority of voters that
they are stupid (or evil) would seem to be immense electoral folly, which perhaps explains why
the politicians have rarely led the charge promoting gender stereotypes. Since 1950, primary
gender-related political issues have included legislation banning gender discrimination, including
the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), and abortion-related policies. While there has been plenty
of vilification on both sides of the abortion, the suggestion that abortion limitations are justified
by broad limits on female decision-making ability has been fairly rare (suggestions that teenage
girls are incapable of making wise decisions are more common), presumably because there are
so many female voters.8


7
  In 1916, the Republican platform “favors the extension of the suffrage to women, but recognizes the right of each
state to settle this question for itself,” while the Democrats “recommend the extension of the franchise to the women
of the country by the States upon the same terms as to men.” The Republicans are endorsing suffrage, but not an
amendment to force it on unwilling states, while it is unclear if the Democrats are supporting such an amendment or
not. In 1872, the Republican platform provided the amorphous words “The Republican party is mindful of its
obligations to the loyal women of America for their noble devotion to the cause of freedom “ and “the honest
demand of any class of citizens for additional rights should be treated with respectful consideration.”
8
  Democrats do, of course, assert that Republicans are waging a “war on women,” a charge that Republicans hotly
deny.

                                                         13
Presumably for the same reason, ERA opponents were more likely to oppose allegedly
unnecessary federal regulation, rather than to say that discrimination was broadly justified on
ability related grounds. The Republican platform of 1980 affirmed “our Party's historic
commitment to equal rights and equality for women,“ and supported “equal opportunities for
women,” but also claimed that “states have a constitutional right to accept or reject a
constitutional amendment without federal interference or pressure,” and that federal “pressure
against states which refused to ratify ERA” must cease. Phyllis Schlafly was the most prominent
political entrepreneur opposed to the amendment, and she based her opposition both on a defense
of traditional family structure and by claiming that the amendment would strip women of
traditional privileges, such as avoiding the draft. While there have been instances where
politicians do seem to have actively promoted gender stereotypes, particularly around the issue
of female suffrage, this seems to have been a relatively minor phenomenon, at least relative to
the spread of stereotypes by other actors.

Market Entrepreneurs

A belief that women are less capable in the market place has one obvious beneficiary:
competing male co-workers. This would suggest that men should have the incentive to spread
the idea that women are less competent. Within a corporate hierarchy, presumably the sensible
strategy would be to emphasize the limits of a particular woman. In other settings, where no
single female competitor exists, then it may make more sense to disparage women more broadly.

Spreading false beliefs will be more common when women really are a potential threat, and this
means that we can make sense of the rise and female of discrimination in certain jobs that is
discussed by Goldin (2000). During the early 20th century, the threat of a female competitor was
small and this meant that men spent little effort on persuading prospective bosses not to hire
women. During the middle years of the 20th century, the threat became more obvious and men
began to persuade more assiduously. At the end of the 20th century, there were enough examples
of real women working that misinformation had much less effect.

Several factors would be necessary for this persuasion to represent a dominant force. First,
people making hiring decisions would need to be susceptible to persuasion from the subordinates
who will compete with the new hiree. This is not inconceivable—deans, for example, are quite
reliant on faculty members when hiring—and junior faculty members are often allowed to weigh
in on junior faculty hires. This process does suggest that persuasion would be occupation
specific. It may be possible to persuade a superior that one’s particular task (mathematics,
construction work) requires male attributes, but it is unlikely to be as easy or as sensible to try to
persuade the superior that women are less capable at all workplace tasks. However, if women
are accepted as being less able in enough occupations, presumably the natural inference is that
there is something more general going on.




                                                 14
Second, the persuaders would need to solve the free rider problem. No one worker has much of
an incentive to persuade. The propagation of these beliefs would be therefore be more likely in
small firm settings, or in cases where other organizations exist to collectively represent the
interests of male workers. For example, in 1941, the United Auto Workers (UAW) filed a strike
against the Kelsey-Hayes wheel plant, demanding “the removal of girl employees from machine
work,” (Milkman 1982). But while the UAW might demand segregation-by-job in particular
plants, and would regularly fight for equal pay provisions that reduced the possibility of men
losing jobs to lower cost female employees, the union was far more interested in representing
female employees than disparaging them.

Third, if beliefs have some connection to evidence and Bayesian reasoning, then discriminatory
beliefs in the workforce can only persist when there is no evidence to the contrary, which is true
even if beliefs come from other sources. So hard discriminatory barriers, justified by these
beliefs may be able to persist, while quotas, based on incorrect beliefs, seem unlikely to be
stable. Many have argued that women working at typically male jobs during World War II
helped dispel the idea that they were incapable of doing these typically male activities. The
relative durability of glass ceilings may be connected with the formation of beliefs, because they
ensure that there is no direct evidence on upper level administrators in one particular company,
and advocates of discrimination can more plausibly argue that upper level jobs are more
heterogeneous across firms than lower level jobs. That heterogeneity makes it easier to deny the
relevance of female achievements in other firms.

Individual workers might disparage women, and unions might occasionally strike against female
employment, but overall co-worker-spread discriminatory beliefs does not appear to have been a
major force, presumably because of the relatively weak incentives and limited ability for workers
to spread discriminatory beliefs to employers. Industrialists have every incentive to see through
male claims about female incompetence and look for low cost labor, as Lowell did when starting
his textile mills almost two centuries ago. While co-workers may have served as an occasional
source of discriminatory beliefs, they are unlikely to be that significant, especially in more
traditional societies.

The alternative, but far less natural, market entrepreneur who has an incentive to promulgate
gender stereotypes is the consumer goods company. Friedan (1963) is the primary proponent of
this view, and given her significance in this literature, we will explicitly model this process. Yet,
as we will show, typical companies usually have only weak incentives to invest in such major
life decisions as choosing to work vs. home-making. An industry must be oligopolistic,
consumer goods must strongly complement not substitute for women’s time at home, and the
costs of persuasion must be low.

It is possible that these conditions existed with Friedan (1963), although they seem unlikely to
hold today. Many important home products—the dishwasher, pre-made meals—substitute rather


                                                 15
than complement time spent in the home, suggesting that their sellers should have been
advocates of women working, not the opposite.

There is little doubt that magazines and advertisements provided many examples of the joys of
home-making, but the instrumental aim of those examples seems far more likely to generate
positive associations for using a particular product. Even a washing machine company has the
incentive to show a happy woman at home with her washing machine, not because the company
wants to her to stay at home, but rather because it wants her to think about how wonderful
having a washing machine can be.

Family Entrepreneurs

The long history of patriarchal attitudes, before mass media, before widespread democracy,
before even the possibility of significant female integration into the workforce, suggests that
these attitudes ultimately have a deeper source. Perhaps, the deepest source of all is the family
or clan itself, and ancient institutions, such as the church, that are often allied with adults in the
family. If patriarchic views are common, if not ubiquitous, then it seems reasonable to believe
that they are delivered for deep reasons and there is no deeper motivation than the perpetuation
of the gene pool.

A particularly natural reason for supplying patriarchic beliefs is that these beliefs increase
childbearing. Fertility is typically seen as a complement toward being in the home and substitute
with being away from home. Children typically need childcare and that is typically most cheaply
provided at home. Multiple pregnancies are often more difficult for working mothers to fit into
their schedules. Given that fathers always bear far less of the costs of pregnancies and often bear
far less of the cost of child-rearing, empowering men within the household may also lead to
higher levels of fertility, especially in cultures that lack cheap forms of birth control.

For basic biological reasons, grandparents will often want more children than their own children
will independently desire. For example, assume a Beckerian dynastic utility function for
grandparents that equals U(Own Consumption) + V(Children’s Utility, Number of Children) +
W (Grandchildren’s Utility, Number of Grandchildren). In this case, the grandparents will want
more grandchildren than their children would independently produce, because the grandparents
receive a direct benefit from grandchildren, over and above the indirect impact that
grandchildren have through their children’s own welfare. The envelope theorem implies that if
children have maximized their own welfare with respect to their own progeny, then grandparents
will always want more. There are multiple means of prodding children to be fertile, including
bribes and verbal haranguing, but investing in beliefs may be a reasonable tool.

Parents have both a strong motive and abundant means of influencing children’s beliefs, such as
exposing children to gender stereotypes in childhood literature. Weitzman et al. (1972)
examines children’s storybooks in the US, and finds pervasive differences in the ways that
genders are depicted, with boys being adventurous and girls being pretty and passive. Bereaud

                                                   16
(1975) examines French children’s books and similarly finds that they portray girls as “timid,
passive and dependent” and women “in the traditional housewife role or in low-paid, unskilled
occupations.” Children’s books are bought by parents, so it is reasonable to believe that parents
want such images broadcast to their own children.

In the pluralistic US today, parents can also choose other influences, such as religion. If parents
want to encourage childbearing, then they can take their children to religious institutions that
encourage childbearing. Some of the most extreme examples of pro-natalist religious entities are
the Mormon Church and various ultra-orthodox groups. These institutions and the traditional
Catholic Church also encouraged large families and traditional female lifestyles. Religious
support for childbearing may reflect both a desire to cater to parents who want grandchildren, but
also a desire to fill the pews in decades to come. Religious groups that did not support
childbearing, such as the Shakers, tend to disappear over time.

As we will model, parents can also engage in more costly signals to children about their abilities.
A mother may herself adopt a traditional lifestyle to convince her daughters to do the same and
her sons to marry someone who acts similarly. Providing little education for daughters is another
means of suggesting that her possibilities in the workplaces are limited, and that she should focus
more on producing grandchildren. We will formally model under-education of women.

We will focus on the signaling choices of individuals, which will inevitably lead to some
heterogeneity in the population. That heterogeneity may be smoothed out by institutions, such as
churches, which will lead to a more ubiquitous set of attitudes. A state may also embrace
traditional lifestyle choices for pro-natalist reasons, which may in turn be motivated by the desire
for a large army. Hitler’s Germany for example, pushed a strong ideology of motherhood and
traditional female roles (Rossy 2011).

Empirically, demographers have documented that parental preferences do affect children’s
preferences and decisions on marriage and childbearing. Axinn, Clarkberg and Thornton (1994)
show that mothers’ preference for the size of their children’s family is significantly positively
correlated with the children’s family size preferences when the children are young adults. Barber
(2000) shows that both sons and daughters whose mothers prefer early marriage, large families,
and low minimum education for their children end up entering parenthood earlier. This effect is
significant controlling for family income, parental education, the mother’s work choice and other
family background variables. Such evidence corroborates our idea that parental influence is
possibly quite powerful.

An Aside on Homophobia

The core assumption of our model is that parents want more grandchildren than their sons and
daughters naturally will give to them. The same parental preferences should also generate
incentives to engage in other forms of belief investment, most notably inculcating opposition to
homosexual lifestyles. If homosexuality leads to less own grandchildren, then parents who value

                                                17
own grandchildren will invest in their children’s beliefs to that end. They will attempt to
convince them that homosexuality will lead to unhappiness and perhaps worse.

In this setting as well, religious organization may offer parents a means of perpetuating beliefs
that serve their biological interests. If the church supports traditional lifestyles and opposes
homosexuality, then parents may have an incentive to take their children to church despite their
own private religious beliefs.



IV. Corporate Investment in Gender Stereotypes



Betty Friedan’s The Feminine Mystique depicts advertisers and magazine editors as colluding to
persuade women that they will be happier in the home than in the workplace. The essential
assumption for this idea to make economic sense is that spending on consumer goods is a
complement to time spent in the household. If producers want to sell more consumer goods, they
also have an incentive to spend to persuade women that they will be unproductive in the
workplace and happy in the home.

Throughout this paper, we will focus on beliefs about women’s productivity in the workplace,
and we will generally treat this productivity as purely pecuniary. This is at best a simplification,
and at worst wrong. Friedan is at least as focused as beliefs about the non-pecuniary nature of
work in the home and job. Such beliefs are perfectly analogous to the beliefs about female
ability in the workforce that we focus on here.

In this model, we assume that women choose work hours to maximize a household utility
function equal to               ,    , where       refers to non-household consumption which has
a price of one,   refers to time spent working in the household, and      refers to household
consumption, which is purchased at an endogenously determined price . Time allocations and
earnings occur before consumption decisions, but the quasi-linear structure crucially implies that
realized productivity does not impact the optimal level of household consumption. Both husband
and wife have a time budget of one. The husband’s earnings equal                   1        , where
    refers to human capital level and     refers to ability level and   , refers to the amount of
time that the husband spends working in the household. The function V(.,.) is assumed to be
concave.

The wife’s earnings will equal                1          . The term is meant to capture any
potential discrimination in the labor market,      refers to her human capital level and    refers to
ability level and    , refers to the amount of time that the wife spends working in the household.
As long as                             , and that it is not optimal to have more than one person’s



                                                 18
entire life spent in the household, then the husband will specialize entire in the formal work and
the wife will specialize in the household sector, but will also spend some time working.

We think of this static model as an approximation to a lifetime time allocation problem. The
assumption that less than a full life is spent working in the household means the wife will spend
some part of her lifetime in the labor market, perhaps before or after peak child-rearing periods.
This assumption is broadly compatible with the fact that even during the 1950s, large numbers of
women worked before marriage (Goldin 1990). The assumption that
is broadly compatible with the fact that husbands are far more likely to be in the labor force than
wives, especially during the Friedan period. In principle, that specialization could instead reflect
greater female productivity in the household sector, and equivalent productivity in the labor
force, which would have little impact on the model.

If the wife’s expected workplace-related ability is denoted , then she will set
        ,     . The condition              ,     will also hold. This produces our first result:

Proposition 1: Holding prices constant, time spent in the household declines with , , and
and decrease with   if and only if        0. Spending on household consumption will always
decline with   and decrease with , , and        and      if and only if      0.

This proposition provides the core logic behinds Friedan’s logic that companies selling consumer
goods might benefit if women spent more time on household production, and could even
potentially gain from discrimination against women in the labor market. If consumer goods and
time in the household are complements, this will mean that total spending on consumer goods
increases if women face stronger discrimination in the labor market, or have lower levels of
human capital or higher levels of ability.

This proposition implies that a key implication of Friedan’s model is that pro-traditional
household messages will only be broadcast by companies that produce goods that complements
women’s time, yet Fox (1990) documents that mechanical appliance advertisements “involved
promotion of an ideology about housework that reinforced women's dedication to it.”

Since such dedication runs somewhat counter to the incentives of many mechanical appliance
producers, it seems more likely that these advertisements were intended simply to portray
housework and housework appliance in an appealing light, rather than to promote home-making
as a lifestyle.

The implications of Proposition 1 are not completely general. The quasi-linear form eliminates
the role that income effects can play in spending on consumer goods, and means that lower
levels of household income, from women not working, does not yield lower levels of spending.
More significantly, many household consumption items, like dishwashers, are a substitute rather
than a complement with women’s time in the workplace. The purveyors of such goods will have


                                                19
no incentive to persuade women to stay home, but rather to emphasize the returns to working
hard.

We will now assume a strong form of complementarity: the function V(.,.) has the form
             , where 0           1 and 0         1. With this assumption it follows that

                1                                                  and                  1

                                     . We assume this Cobb-Douglas functional form, not because
we believe it to be generally true, but rather because it simplifies the subsequent algebra, and
because Proposition 1 already highlights the important role that complementarity plays in the
incentive to persuade.

To capture the role of persuasion, we assume that there is uncertainty about , but about no
other parameter. This assumption would be most reasonable if women had experienced home
production, but not life in the formal labor force. Learning about labor force returns seems
somewhat more reasonable to us than learning about productivity in the home sector, since
presumably the magazine readers of the period experienced life in the home sector on a daily
basis. It is perhaps more reasonable to believe that there was uncertainty about the impact of
work in the home on longer term outcomes, such as children’s success or marital survival.
Incorporating learning about such long-run outcomes, or about the home sector more generally,
would do little to change the intuition of the model but would add considerable complexity.

If the uncertainty is not resolved before consumption and work decision are made, then in the
relevant first order condition we must use not the actual value of        but its expected value. The
quasi-linear utility function implies risk neutrality, and that all of the uncertainty gets taken on in
the form of consumption of the numéraire good. The decision-maker sets the expected value of
time in the workforce equal to the marginal utility of household time spent.

We assume that women must choose their hours of work before observing their ability level and
that women are able with probability “1-p” and in this case        1. They are less able with
probability “p” and in this case their workforce productivity equals 1-a. While women actually
care about their own productivity level, they must infer this probability level based on their
beliefs about the general competence of women. While this assumption may seem strange, it is
vital for the Friedan hypothesis to be correct, for the magazine writers and advertisers that she
discusses do not have the ability to provide person-specific information to each reader, but only
to convey general information about the “usual” outcomes of women in the workforce or at
home.

Specifically, we assume that women are born believing that with probability one-half women are
able in the workforce with probability    ∆ and with probability one-half they have ability



                                                  20
equal to      ∆ . If they had no further information they would deduce that their probability of
being less able equals .

In equilibrium, we assume that women observe          examples of women being successful in work
and     examples of less successful labor force outcomes. We also assume that women are
sufficiently savvy to recognize the possibility that people are trying to persuade them, so that
they believe that only some of the bad stories are true, while others may be discarded as
manufactured. We let       denote the total number of believed stories. Bayes’ rule implies that
women believe the probability that women are generally less able with probability          ∆ equals
                     ∆          ∆
                                                  , which we denote         .9
        ∆            ∆          ∆             ∆

Stories can be both true and manufactured. We assume that the decision-maker is aware of                ,
examples of true positive labor market outcomes for women, and that women also understand
that none of these stories are manufactured.

There are , bad stories that are real and       total manufactured bad stories. We adopt a
flexible belief model that assumes that women believe that ,              ,        of the bad
stories are true. This assumption nests a number of possibilities about the credulity of the
listeners. If ,         , and     0, then women know exactly the number of stories that are true
and added stories will have no effect on their beliefs. If ,     0 and       1, then listeners are
credulous Bayesians, as in Glaeser and Sunstein (2009), believing everything is true. For
intermediate values, women put some, but not full, weight on the manufactured stories. This
leads to Lemma 1 (proofs to all lemmas and propositions are in the appendix).

 Lemma 1: As long as      0 then the posterior probability that women are typically low ability is
increasing and concave with respect to .

There are Q total suppliers of the household product in the market, who first manufacture false
examples of female failure in the labor force at a cost of k. After promulgating these stories,
they sell household products, and engage in Cournot competition with the other firms. All firms
have a unit cost of one. If the number of women equals M, then there optimal firm behavior
means that post-advertising profits will equal:                                      , where   is a
constant.10


9
    The probability that women are generally less able with probability   ∆ equals
                 ∆         ∆
                                          .
       ∆         ∆         ∆         ∆
10
     The value of equals 1   1       1                              1            1         which is 1
     1− 1− times each firm’s output.



                                                            21
Each firm has the opportunity to invest in stories, at a cost k, per story documenting some
instance where a woman has entered the workforce and been unsuccessful. In practice, this may
take the form of stories illustrating the bliss of staying at home. This assumption is far simpler
than the relatively complicated worldview suggested by Friedan, in which magazine editors are
part of a general conspiracy to promote non-working women, but it may be less accurate. The
total number of stories     sums the investment of each individual firm.

Thus, each firm j chooses     to maximize                        1         ,        ,


 ∑                       . The function 1             is increasing, but convex in p, implying that
spending on household goods displays increasing returns with respect to doubts about female
labor force competence. We assume that the second derivative of this with respect to is
negative around the first order condition, so that this first order conditions characterize a
maximum, which implies that

           "   ,     ,    ∑                           ,      ,   ∑
     (1)
               ,     ,    ∑                           ,     ,    ∑


This requirement is essentially that the diminishing returns of persuasion on beliefs is stronger
than the increasing returns to doubts about competence. With this assumption, Proposition 2
follows:

Proposition 2: Total investment per firm is rising with M and declining with k, Q, and                ,
and total market investment is falling with Q, An increase in causes the total number of
negative stories that are believed to rise. As such, women’s assessment of their ability in the
workforce is rising with k, Q, ,           , and and rising with M.

Proposition 2 presents the comparative statics related to the belief formation by producers eager
to sell consumer goods. Perhaps most notably, investment by firms is a function of market
structure. Firms in highly competitive industries will not have the incentive to invest in industry-
level public goods, like gender-specific norms. As such, if Friedan’s model is right, then the
model suggests that the market for consumer goods during her day must have been almost
monopolistic in nature.

It is of course possible that some external agents, such as the magazine editors that Friedan
discusses, managed to coordinate across disparate firms. However, they would need some
mechanism for solving the free rider problem, and it hard to see how they had that much clout.

The proposition also delivers other comparative statics that are less surprising. Higher values of
k, the cost of transmission, will reduce the spread of misinformation. That effect may explain
the rise of misinformation in Friedan’s era when magazines had become more common and more
effective. The rise of television could also have played a role in reducing the costs of persuasion.

                                                 22
An alternative explanation is that M increased because of national markets for goods (and
media). The nationalization of the market makes the returns to persuasion higher and increases
the returns from persuasion.

Friedan may have been right about her era, but if she was right, then she lived in a highly
unusual period that combined a number of requirements for corporate supply of patriarchal
beliefs. First, consumer goods need to complement rather than supplement women’s time.
Second, the consumer goods industry had to be highly oligopolistic. Third, the ratio k/M needed
to be low, which means that the cost of transmitting ideas was low relative to the size of the
market.

In earlier time periods, k/M is likely to have been much higher, because of more fragmented
regional markets and greater costs of transmitting ideas. In later periods, industrial organization
surely became more competitive and goods seem more likely to be substitutes for women’s time.
This model provides conditions under which Friedan’s hypothesis is true, and they might have
held in America in 1960. Still, they are unlikely to be common enough to explain a phenomenon
which is common across many societies in many different levels of development. As such, we
now turn to the development of patriarchy within the family, which seems far more likely to
explain an extremely widespread social phenomenon.



V.     Teaching Gender Stereotypes to Sons and Daughters



We now turn to our primary model that examines persuasion by parents of daughters and sons.
The critical assumption is that the parents care both about the welfare of their children and
directly about their grandchildren. Parents have many tools for influencing beliefs about female
competence in the workforce, including telling stories, attending religious services, maternal
behavior and so forth. But we will focus on the provision of education for daughters. Female
education is a particularly important signal that parents can send to daughters about their
productivity outside the home, and it is relatively measurable.

Our model concerns three generations, called grandparents, parents, and children. The children
make no choices in the model and are assumed to be homogeneous. The parents’ generation
decides only on the number of children, and their children’s human capital, but we will not be
focusing on their human capital level investment. The grandparents’ generation selects the
investment in human capital for a specific child in the second generation. We assume that we are
looking at the decision of grandparents after their fertility decision has been made.

When they are adults, daughters in the second generation choose fertility levels, N, human
capital levels for their boy children (  ) and human capital levels for their girl children (


                                                23
to maximize: Consumption +                  .5             .5            , where V(.),    . and
    . are all increasing, concave functions. We are assuming that ½ of all children are male and
that the benefits of skill may be different between boys and girls, perhaps because of the
signaling issues that we will turn to when we consider the grandparents generation.

We focus on the case where all daughters will marry homogeneous husbands, and that
consumption is                1                .5          .5      , where , reflects any other
income including husbands’ earnings, which we assume is independent of the women’s
education, N reflects the number of children and     reflects the human capital per child.
Household time is proportional to the number of children, so               . We assume that
women make fertility decisions before observing their workplace productivity, although we relax
this assumption in the last part of Section V. As before, they base their decisions on their
estimate of workplace ability .

The first order conditions that determine human capital level investments are ′
   ′         1. We let      denote . 5                        , and  denote . 5
.5     evaluated at the welfare maximizing levels of human capital investment. We assume that
          . We have made three assumptions that together ensure that the investment in
children’s human capital is independent of the number of children: quasi-linear preferences, the
benefits from investing in children scales up linearly with the number of children and the costs of
human capital investment similarly scale up linearly with the number of children. Quality and
quantity of children are not completely independent, however, as the net benefit from investing
in quality will impact the incentive to have more children.

The first order condition that determines fertility is                      ′                       ,
which implies that the number of children is increasing with       and decreasing with      ,   ,       and
   . Every one of these last parameters increases the opportunity cost of having more children.
We use this equation to implicitly define a function               , which represents the number
of children that a women will have depending on her level of human capital and beliefs about her
workplace ability. The other elements that determine utility have been suppressed because they
are fixed. We further assume that W(.) is increasing, concave and that       →           ∞.

Holding        and other parameters constant, the derivative of N with respect to      is
                                                                                       "
                 0. The second derivative of N with respect to      is
     "                                                                       "

                     , which is negative as long as    ′′′   is not too negative, as it will not be if
           "
V(.) has a standard form such as     , with    1. We now turn to the grandparents’ generation,
and focus on their choice of investment in human capital for a single, female child in the second
generation.



                                                  24
 Assuming that parents accurately assess the daughter’s ability level    , the welfare of parents
(that is related to a specific child) equals:

(3)                           1                                                       NG

where     refers to the investment of human capital in the parent. The parameter       reflects the
direct impact of the second generation’s welfare on the welfare of the first generation. The
parameter     reflects the impact of the third generation’s welfare on the welfare of the first
generation. This independent impact of grandchildren on grandparents’ utility is the critical
assumption of the model. Because of this link that leaps a generation, grandparents want to raise
children who will produce more grandchildren and invest more in those grandchildren.

These preferences are grounded in both evolutionary biology and everyday experience. Standard
evolutionary preferences suggest that animals act as if they care about reproducing their gene
pool, not just for a single generation but for generations to come. The grandparents who prod
children to wed and have children of their own have become a cliché. Many grandparents also
explicitly subsidize grandchildren, if they have the resources, by providing funds for education
or even buying a house in a neighborhood with a good school district.

Given these preferences, grandparents will always want their children to have more progeny than
they will naturally choose on their own. Grandparents will internalize the benefits that parents
themselves get from childbearing and then will still want at least a little bit more. They will also
want parents to spend a bit more investing in children’s human capital.

We have chosen a stark and simple case to highlight how a desire for own grandchildren may
lead to lower human capital investment in girls, and the generation of beliefs about female
inability in the workplace, but we are well aware that reasonable perturbations of the model
could generate alternative predictions. We have structured these preferences and production
functions so that there is no tradeoff between quantity and quality. If one existed, then
grandparents could conceivably care so much about grandchildren’s quality that they might
actually not want higher fertility levels. We have also assumed that maternal human capital only
impacts childbearing by increasing opportunity costs. If maternal skills help generate human
capital in the next generation, then this would create more of a grandchild-related incentive for
investment in daughters.

We first focus on investments in a daughter’s human capital, assuming that         is known at every
point. We then turn to the possible scenario in which the parent, but not the daughter has
received a private signal about the daughter’s ability, in which case investing in education can
serve as a costly signal to the daughter of her skills. Finally, we address sexist indoctrination of
sons.

When the future mother’s ability level is known to all, then the first order condition for the
grandparent is:

                                                 25
   (2)        ′         1                  ′       G                   1
                                                             "

We assume that second order conditions, described in the Appendix, hold for this to be a
maximum.

Given our assumption on the second order condition, Proposition 3 follows:
                                                                                         "
Proposition 3: Parents will invest a positive amount in daughters’ education if

           where N represents the number of children chosen by a daughter with no education.
If this condition holds, and parents do invest in a positive amount of education, then the level of
education is declining with      and increasing with . The level of education will increase with
                                "
  and     if and only                                                         .
                                                                   "


Proposition 3 implies that parents will always invest a positive amount in their daughter’s
education if     is sufficiently small, and that the amount of education that their daughter receives
is decreasing as     rises. The incentive to under-invest in daughters is directly a function of the
altruism toward grandchildren, but of course, this would diminish if daughters’ human capital
were an input into the human capital of the next generation. By contrast, as the grandparents
care more about their daughters relative to their grandchildren, investment in the daughters’
education will rise.

The parameters and         are complements to daughters’ education, and they will typically cause
the investment in the daughters’ education to rise, as long as    is relatively small, so the
dominant effect of these parameters is to increase the payoff to daughters’ education. A
somewhat less intuitive possibility is that if  is sufficiently low, higher values of and
which increase the returns to work may actually reduce the tendency to invest in daughters’
education. If      is low enough, then the grandparent only cares about investing in human
capital because it impacts the supply of eventual grandchildren. As higher values of and
reduces the number of grandchildren directly, this may sufficiently increase the grandparents’
demand for more grandchildren that they may offset these higher labor market returns with less
investment in human capital.

Belief Formation

We now turn to the core of the model: the formation of daughters’ beliefs. We assume that the
first generation parents know their daughters’ ability, but that daughters themselves only infer
their talents from their parental investment in their human capital. As such, a daughter whose
parents invest heavily, both personally and through external investments, will typically infer that
she has raw skill, since skill is a complement with investment in the model. If parents ignore a
daughter’s education, then she will naturally infer that she has little innate talent. At this point,

                                                 26
we focus on the formation of beliefs by a single individual, but in the next section, we discuss the
implication of this for beliefs by sons and by society as a whole.

As before we assume that there are two possibilities for : 1 and 1-a. It is useful for us to
define the investment level chosen under perfect information as        for skilled daughters and
          for unskilled daughters. These produce fertility levels      and          respectively,
which generate parental welfare levels       and           . The values of        and
satisfy                                                  , and 1    ′                1

                    , and other values are defined similarly. We also define a value                as
      "
the level of human capital that would be chosen by parents of unskilled daughters if their
daughters believe erroneously that they are skilled. We also assume a minimum level of
investment that parents are legally required to make denoted , which is less than                   .

We define          by                                              , and          by 1
                                             . These are the fertility levels implied by human
capital level H and the belief of the daughter that she is either skilled or unskilled respectively.
Differentiation shows that                   . As before, parents always prefer more children in
equilibrium because the children who make the decision do not internalize that impact that their
fertility has on parents’ welfare through . We go forward, and assume that for any given :

    (3) 1

This assumption guarantees that parents of both skilled and unskilled children would prefer the
fertility levels that result if the daughter believes she is unskilled to the fertility levels that result
if the daughter believes that she is skilled. This will lead the parents of skilled daughters to want
to imitate the parents of less skilled daughters, and it creates a signaling game involving parental
investment in human capital.

We will assume a Bayesian equilibrium, where daughters’ beliefs are such that if only parents of
skilled daughters or unskilled daughters choose an investment level in equilibrium, the daughters
who receive that level of investment will infer that they are either skilled or unskilled
respectively. If both types of parents choose a level of investment in equilibrium, then daughters
will believe that they are skilled with some probability weakly between zero and one. We will
refine equilibrium beliefs as we proceed.

If parents of skilled daughters choose an investment level that is not chosen by parents of
unskilled daughters, then they will only choose       . Any other investment level, chosen
independently, will not change daughters’ self-assessments, and will only reduce parental
welfare. Parents of both types may both choose the same investment level, but they cannot both
choose two or more investment levels. Generically, the beliefs that make one type of parent

                                                    27
indifferent between two levels of investment will not make the other type of parent indifferent
between two types of investment. We assume that the parents of skilled daughters strictly prefer
investing       , and the daughter knowing that she is skilled, to investing nothing and
convincing the daughter that she is unskilled. From this is follows that:

Lemma 2: There exists one value of H, denoted , at which parents of skilled daughters are
indifferent between choosing and appearing to be the parents of unskilled daughters and
choosing         . There is no value of H greater than at which parents of unskilled daughters
are indifferent between choosing H and appearing to be the parents of skilled daughters and
choosing and being thought to be the parents of unskilled daughters. At                , holding
beliefs constant, the welfare of parents of skilled daughters is strictly increasing in H, and this
value of H is rising with and       and falling with .

If we place no further restrictions on off-the-equilibrium-path beliefs, then multiple equilibria are
possible. For example, it is possible for there to be a continuum of pure separating equilibria,
where parents of skilled daughters choose            and parents of unskilled daughters choose any
value of H below , as long as the parents of unskilled daughters prefer that value of H and
being known to have an unskilled daughter to choosing                , which is the best that they can
do if their daughters believe that they are skilled. It is also possible for the unskilled parents to
choose two levels of H that yield equal utility levels, as long as one is above             and one is
below         and both yield equal utility. It is also possible for there to be a pooling equilibrium,
where both parents of skilled and unskilled daughters choose a common level of H, as long as the
payoff for the parents of skilled daughters is better off than if they choose           and the parents
of unskilled daughters are better off than if they chose         . . Semi-pooling equilibria are also
possible, where some fraction of both groups mix and choose a common equilibrium, as well
also choosing some separate investment level.

To generate a unique equilibrium when >                 , it is sufficient to assume a Perfect Bayesian
Equilibrium where daughters believe that if one type of parents would never deviate to a human
capital level H, for any rational fertility response, then the deviation came from the other group.
This assumption leads to proposition 3a:

Proposition 3a: If >          , then there is no pooling equilibrium, skilled parents choose to
invest       and unskilled parents choose          .

To generate a single equilibrium for a wider range of parameter values, we now assume a variant
of the D1 refinement (Cho and Kreps 1987) which requires that if an off-the-equilibrium path
investment level is more attractive for one type of parent, given any set of beliefs by children,
then children assume that this type of parent has generated this deviation with probability one.
In this model, the children’s response to the parents’ human capital investment is their fertility
level. If ∗       and ∗       makes the parents of skilled and unskilled children respectively

                                                  28
indifferent between their equilibrium payoff and any deviation H, then if ∗            ∗
                                                                                             the
                                                                                 ∗         ∗
deviation seems more likely to have come from a parent of a skilled child. If
then the deviation seems more likely to have come from a parent of an unskilled child. The D1
refinement requires to think that the deviation comes, with probability one, from the parent of an
unskilled child if and only if ∗          ∗
                                                . This assumption produces:

Proposition 3b: If                       , then skilled parents choose       and unskilled parents
choose . If           , then all unskilled and some skilled parents choose . The number of
parents of skilled daughters choosing        will decrease with    and increase with .

Following Lemma 2, the value of can be conceived as a representation of the level of labor
market discrimination or . When is high, and there is little labor market discrimination, then
   will also be high and a separating equilibrium will exist with no distortion of parental
incentives. The parents of the less skilled educate less—the parents of the more skilled educate
more. The desire to persuade plays little role in the education of young women.

For lower levels of , where labor market discrimination has gotten more severe, the desire to
distort views influences the education choices of the parents of the less skilled, but not the
parents of the more skilled. The parents of the less skilled provide less and less education for
their daughters in order to distinguish themselves from the parents of the more skilled. Their
daughters end up having more children both because their opportunity cost of time is less and
also because they know themselves are less able in the workforce.

For even lower levels of , some parents of the skilled begin imitating the parents of the
unskilled. Ultimately, there can be a complete pooling equilibrium where all parents end up
providing girls the legal minimum of education. Any deviation upwards will be seen as an
indication that the girl is skilled, and will generate lower fertility levels. This force essentially
traps society in a world where women are less educated and unable to distinguish among the
more or less skilled.

Parental altruism works throughout this model. As parents care about their daughters more,
relative to their grandchildren, pooling is less likely and skilled daughters receive more
education. But if parents are particularly focused on their long-run genetic legacy, then
daughters pay the cost in lower educational outcomes.

 The model has several implications. When labor market discrimination is strong, then parents
of skilled and unskilled daughters alike choose to provide them with minimal education. The
skilled daughters may particularly suffer, because their parents are trying to ensure that they do
not realize their skills.

As women are less discriminated against, this leads to more investment in the skilled daughters,
and there can be a discrete jump in educational investment for this group. Previously, some


                                                  29
members of the skilled group will be treated like less skilled children, and a lucky few will
receive more schooling. Afterwards, all members of the skilled group will get more schooling.
We think of this as capturing the gradual rise in women’s college education in the US during the
early 20th century.

Eventually, signaling concerns lose power in a pure separating equilibrium, and the skills
essentially serve to maximize welfare as described in Proposition 3. Of course, all daughters will
still be undereducated, because parents are trying to engender more fertility, but they will at least
become informed about their talents. The underinvestment in female education may vanish
altogether, if parents lose control over educational investment, or female education does little to
reduce fertility, or daughter’s education leads to more investment in grandchild quality, which
her parents value.

This model suggested that the population would have only two levels of education for women,
but that would not be the case if there were visible differences in parameters across the
population. In that case, different parameters will lead to different equilibria, although for any
given set of observable parameters, parents will still use education to influence their daughters’
beliefs.

If taken literally, then in the parameter space when pooling occurs, skilled daughters do not
know that they are skilled, but at least they, and everyone else, correctly infers the share of
women in the population who are skilled. Yet children may be unable to actually know the true
share of skilled daughters, since they do not observe any daughters being well educated. Since
there is little hard evidence on skills, parents may be able to persuade sons and daughters alike
that skilled daughters are rare even if they are common. Such stories would not be falsified by
anything in the children’s experience.



Implications for Sons and Credulous Bayesianism

The previous discussion focused on the formation of beliefs of daughters, but given our
assumptions about preferences, parents will also have an incentive to induce sons to favor
traditional family structures. Moreover, the opinions that men hold about women’s ability in the
workforce are important outcomes that deserve their own explanation.

Parents presumably have many tools to influence sons’ beliefs, including literature, fertility
choices and maternal behavior. We will continue to focus on the education of daughters.
However, in the previous subsection, we assumed that parents were perfectly informed about the
ability levels of daughters, but that daughters themselves only learned their productivity levels
after they made their own fertility choices. We now assume that neither parents nor daughters
know the daughters’ productivity levels exactly. Instead, we assume that parents, but not
children, are perfectly informed about the share of women in the population who are more able.

                                                 30
This knowledge is presumably provided by a lifetime’s worth of experience. In this case, the
parental investment decision is not just a signal of one daughter’s ability, but a signal of the
overall competence of womankind.

To simplify matters, we assume that daughters are homogeneous—either all high ability or all
low ability—and children assume that parents know the truth. Ex ante, children believe that
women are less able with probability “p.” We assume that in the family—and across society—
sons and daughters observe the investment decisions of parents in both sexes. As before, the
fertility of the next children will equal                       ′                , and this will be
true for both sons and daughters. But since each child will have a spouse with their own views,
we assume that in a family decision making unit, the collective belief about        equals
     ,         1         ,        so that the parental generation takes the spouses beliefs as fixed,
so belief formation’s power is somewhat muted, but spread over more children. If the parents
have exactly equal number of sons and daughters and           .5, then the impact of investment in
daughters’ human capital on total fertility of grandchildren will be the same as before. We will
simplify the discussion by considering a family with exactly one son and one daughter.

If children correctly understand their parents’ preferences, then we are in a situation quite similar
to the one discussed above. Just as before, we will define           as the human capital
investment of parents in daughters if those parents are known to know that all daughters have
ability level 1-a and       as the human capital investment of parents in daughters if those
parents are known to know that all daughters have ability level 1. We also define as the level
of human capital investment in daughters that makes the parents who know that daughters are
skilled indifferent between investing        and having children who believe women are more
capable and investing     and having children who believe that women are less capable.

Children believe that they are in a signaling game, and assuming our version of D1, Proposition
4 follows:

Proposition 4: If         , then parents who know that girls are equally capable as boys will
invest in      , but if        , then some or all parents who know that daughters are equally
capable as boys will invest , and children of both genders will believe that there is some
chance that women are less capable then men even when this is not the case.

This proposition, which is essentially identical to 3b, emphasizes that when the uncertainty is
about the overall nature of womankind, rather than a particular daughter, parents may perpetuate
stereotypes by under-educating their female children. If             , then it is possible for parents
who know perfectly well that women are as capable as men, will make education decisions as if
their daughters were less capable, in order to persuade both sons and daughters that women are
less effective in the workforce. So even if the reality is that women are equally capable, children
will think that there is some probability of a real difference in abilities.

                                                  31
There are reasons, however, that we might doubt this version of the world. This suggests a very
stark difference between female and male education. It suggests that as discrimination
decreases, there should be sharp societal jump from under-educating women.

An alternative approach, which is somewhat less attractive given strict assumptions about hyper-
rationality but which perhaps lies closer to the truth, is that children misperceive parental
preferences, and believe that        0. As such, they believe that parents make decisions only to
better children’s welfare, and not to manipulate their children’s beliefs. This a version of
Glaeser and Sunstein’s (2009) “Credulous Bayesianism” where agents use Bayes’ rule to infer
but they underestimate the incentives of people around them to persuade. Given the pervasive
altruism that exists in parent-child relationships it would be particularly natural for children to
think that parents are particularly benign.

We might also assume that children merely underestimate , rather than thinking that it is equal
to zero, but that would leave us with the complications of a signaling model. If     is thought to
be zero exactly, then children will look at parents’ investment in daughters and believe that these
investments maximize:                          1                                            , and
hence                                                and          equals


                                                   , which is positive as long as children believe that
their parents’ maximization problem is concave.

Children may recognize that they will form their ultimate beliefs based on their prospective
spouses’ knowledge, but we appeal to the law of iterated expectations and assume that children
think that their parents’ beliefs (being correct) will also equal their spouses’ beliefs.

We assume that parents know that            1, but that they are trying to influence the beliefs of
both their sons and daughters in their educational investment decisions. Parents also do not
believe that their investments will influence the beliefs of their children’s prospective spouses so
they expect their daughter’s fertility to be                       1            and their son’s fertility
to be                ,   1         , where      and      are the prevalent levels of investment in
daughters and beliefs about women’s ability level in the wider population.

If they have     daughters and       sons, then the following proposition follows:

Proposition 5: If children believe that     0, then parents will choose to invest in daughters’
education so that both sons and daughters believe that women are less talented than men.
Investment in daughters will decline with     and     and so will beliefs about daughters’ ability
levels, while investment will rise with . If           and            and hence           , then
investment in daughters is rising with if and only if          .


                                                   32
Since children believe that parents lack ulterior motives, underinvestment in daughters is
interpreted as meaning that daughters are expected to be less able. This belief will occur in both
daughters and sons, and it will become more extreme if parents have stronger preferences toward
grandchildren.

The underinvestment in daughters becomes more extreme when there are more boys in the
household and less extreme when there are more girls. The logic of this effect is not that boys
take up girls’ resources (there are no income effects in this model), but rather that boys present
an added target for indoctrination. When it comes to daughters, underinvestment carries a cost
(too little human capital) and comes with a benefit (daughters choose to have more children).
When it comes to sons, this underinvestment only creates a benefit (sons choose to have more
children).

While the logic of this argument appears clear, it runs counter to the finding of Butcher and Case
(1994) that women with only female siblings receive less, not more, education. Of course, these
findings could reflect forces outside of the model, such as spillovers from boys to girls during the
middle 20th century. Within the context of this model, two things would need to change to
rationalize the Butcher and Case finding. First, indoctrinating boys through investment in
women would need to be unimportant, perhaps because there are other ways to indoctrinate or
perhaps because boys have little control in ultimate fertility decisions. Second, there would need
to be some spillover in beliefs across women, so that the payoff of indoctrination was higher
when there are more girls.

The final comparative static concerns “ ,” which reflects the weight put on mothers’ beliefs in
the ultimate fertility decision. When a family has more boys, then higher values of “ ” will tend
to increase investment in girls, and when a family has more girls then higher values of “ ” will
decrease investment in girls.

Timing of Work and Persuasion

The models of persuasion that we have discussed ultimately assume that women are choosing
their fertility levels with little direct knowledge of their workplace ability, but that would seem to
depend on the timing of work and childbearing. If the mother works initially, she will surely
have a better assessment of her talents from that direct source than from anything she may have
inferred from either refrigerator advertisements or even her parents’ investment in her human
capital. That knowledge will then essentially eliminate the incentive to persuade initially.

For simplicity, we continue to assume that each child requires a fixed time investment of ,
although we ignore investment in children’s human capital. We assume that mothers maximize
the expected value of                               , where y(t) is the earnings at each t, so there
are no discounting issues. Women end up being paid their expected or realized productivity
level times          .

                                                 33
We only consider two options in childbearing. First, the mother has children immediately,
basing her fertility decision on her expected workplace earnings. Second, the mother delays
childbearing to the point where she has learned her actually productivity in the workplace and
then decides on fertility knowing her actual ability level. We ignore more complicated
strategies, and assume that the primary costs of delay are health or time related, so that the
expected time cost of N children, when childbearing begins at time , will be                 where
   0     1 and            0. These assumptions capture both the added difficulty of having
children when older and that the ability to produce own children has historically been impossible
for women at some age. We ignore other benefits of later childbearing (more experience in life)
and other costs (more human capital may depreciate during the childbearing period).

Moreover we continue to assume        equals either 1 or 1-a (hence the probability that ability
equals 1 equals 1         , where     is the women’s expected ability level. The expected payoff
from having children immediately will be                         1                 , meaning that as
before N satisfies                      ′     . With delay, the woman learns her true ability level
and eventually chooses fertility to maximize                            ′   , where we let
denote this health cost of delaying fertility until the point of knowledge. This leads to
Proposition 6.

Proposition 6: There exists a value of      at which women are indifferent between postponing
work or postponing childbearing, and for higher values of     women will postpone childbearing
and for lower values of , women will postpone work. If women postpone childbearing, then
changes in the initial beliefs about workplace will have no impact on their fertility decision.

Proposition 6 suggests that medical changes which delay childbearing may have far-reaching
impact on social beliefs. If women are making fertility decisions early in life, then those
decisions will be based not on their actual workplace productivity, but rather on the information
that they have gleaned about the relative pleasure of working and childbearing. That position of
ignorance creates a possible role for persuasion for grandparents interested in encouraging
fertility, or anyone else interested in persuading men and women.

But if women experience work first, then the impact of any such persuasion is highly muted.
The knowledge gained in the labor force will surely swamp the knowledge inferred from parental
education decisions or the persuasion of consumer goods companies. As such, the delay in
childbearing can powerfully change the incentives to persuade. This effect links the time series
of women working with the time series of opinions about female competence at work. As
Goldin (2006) describes, women were initially prone to work after marriage and then the pattern
switched and more women worked earlier. That switch should, if the model’s assumptions are
correct, act to reduce the incentive to invest in gender-related beliefs and stereotypes. If women
are waiting to learn their type before having children, then they are likely to be less responsive to
parental misinformation about their ability level or likelihood of enjoying work.
                                                 34
VI.     Conclusion



This paper has produced a series of models which attempt to capture the different possible
sources of gender stereotypes. We have discussed belief formation potentially influenced by
politicians and co-workers, and modeled in detail the possible influence on gender specific
beliefs by consumer good producers and by parents. We argued that Friedan’s model of belief
formation by consumer goods producers required assumptions that seemed unlikely to hold
during most time periods. Parental persuasion seems like a likely factor driving the perpetuation
of gender-related beliefs.

We recognize that this model will run counter to the experience of many daughters, who
experienced parents who pushed them to succeed, and gave them nothing but positive
affirmation of their own talents. While such occurrences do run counter to the literal structure of
the model, we do not believe that they are incompatible with a somewhat richer view of the
world.

In many cases, parents may have been more interested in grandchildren quality than in
grandchildren quantity. If daughters’ human capital, and even workplace success, ended up
leading toward more investment in grandchildren, then grandparents would indeed have an
incentive to push their daughters toward education and success in the workforce.

Moreover, we have treated parents as the only source of information available to children.
Consider a world in which there are a variety of social institutions which broadcast messages
about women’s ability in work. We may even assume that these institutions exist to cater to
parents who want allies in prodding children toward childbearing. Churches, for example, often
seem to have served that role.

If parents believe that their daughters or sons are already exposed to information depicting
women as less competent, and they also believe that their daughters will invest too little in
themselves if they adopt those social beliefs (even given the parents’ pro-grandchildren
preferences), then the parents may work against those social beliefs. For example, assume that
the prevalent social belief is that women have ability level and that parents know that their
own daughter has ability level . Those parents may not want the daughter to behave as if she
knew her full ability level, but they may still want to think that she as an ability level higher than
 . They will then tell their daughter to disregard the negative stereotype, even if they would
prefer it if she thought her own ability was slightly less than .

Gender-related beliefs do seem to have had an impact on labor markets and family choices.
Those beliefs do not seem to have always been based on reality. We have adopted an economic

                                                  35
approach to error that emphasizes the incentives to mislead. We hope that further work develops
further models along this line, and does more to subject our and similar models to serious
empirical tests.




                                              36
References

Akerlof, George. 1976. “The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful Tales.”
The Quarterly Journal of Economics 90(4): 599-617.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1973. "The Theory of Discrimination." In Discrimination in Labor Markets,
edited by Ashenfelter Orley and Albert Rees, 3-33. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Axinn, William G., Marin Clarkberg, and Arland Thornton. 1994. “Family Influences on Family
Size Preferences.” Demography 31(1): 65-79.

Barber, Nigel. 2000. Why parents matter: parental investment and child outcomes. Westport,
CT: Bergin & Garvey.

Becker, Gary. 1957. The Economics of Discrimination. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. 2000. Social Economics: Market Behavior in a Social
Environment. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bereaud, Susan R. 1975. “Sex role images in French children's books.” Journal of Marriage and
the Family 37: 194-207.
Blau, Francine, Peter Brummund, and Albert Yung-Hsu Liu. “Trends in Occupational
Segregation by Gender 1970-2009: Adjusting for the Impact of Changes in the Occupational
Coding System.” Demography (forthcoming).
Butcher, Kristin F. and Anne Case. 1994. “The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on Women's
Education and Earnings.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(3): 531-563.

Cho, In-Koo and David M. Kreps. 1987. “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 102(2): 179-221.

Fogel, Robert William. 2000. The Fourth Great Awakening and the Future of Egalitarianism.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fox, Bonnie J. 1990. “Selling the Mechanized Household: 70 Years of Ads in Ladies Home
Journal” Gender & Society 4(1): 25-40.
Friedan, Betty. 1963. The Feminine Mystique. New York: W.W. Norton.
Glaeser , Edward L. 2005. “The Political Economy of Hatred.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
120(1): 45-86.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Cass Sunstein. 2009. “Extremism and Social Learning.” Journal of
Legal Analysis 1(1): 263-324.
Glaeser, Edward L. and Gergely Ujhelyi. 2010. “Regulating Misinformation.” Journal of Public
Economics 94(3-4): 247-257.


                                               37
Goldin, Claudia. 2000. “Labor Markets in the Twentieth Century.” In Cambridge Economic
History of the United States, Vol. III, The Twentieth Century, edited by Stanley J. Engerman and
Robert E. Gallman, 549-625. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2006. “The quiet revolution that transformed women’s employment, education, and
family.” American Economic Review 96: 1–21.

———. 1990. Understanding the gender gap: An economic history of American women. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2000. “Career and Marriage in the Age of the Pill.”
American Economic Review 90(2): 461-465.

Gunderson, Elizabeth, Gerardo Ramirez, Susan Levine, and Sian Beilock. 2012. "The Role of
Parents and Teachers in the Development of Gender-Related Math Attitudes." Sex Roles 66(3/4):
153.
Krueger, Anne O. 1963. “The Economics of Discrimination.” Journal of Political Economy
71(5): 481-486.

Lazear, Edward P. 1999. “Culture and Language.” Journal of Political Economy 107(6): 95-126.

Lerner, Gerda. 1987. The Creation of Patriarchy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Margo, Robert A. 1991. "Segregated Schools and the Mobility Hypothesis: A Model of Local
Government Discrimination." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(1): 61-73.
Milkman, Ruth. 1982. “Redefining ‘Women's Work’: The Sexual Division of Labor in the Auto
Industry during World War II.” Feminist Studies 8(2): 336-372.

Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy.
New York: Harper & Brothers.

Rossy, Katherine M. 2011. "Politicizing Pronatalism: Exploring the Nazi Ideology of Women
through the Lens of Visual Propaganda, 1933-1939." The Graduate History Review 3(1): 49-77.

Simon, Rita J. and Jean M. Landis. 1989. "A Report: Women's and Men's Attitudes about a
Woman's Place and Role." The Public Opinion Quarterly 53(2): 265-276.

Thurow, Lester C. 1969. Poverty and Discrimination. Washington D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Weitzman, Lenore J., Deborah Eifler, Elizabeth Hokada, and Catherine Ross. 1972. “Sex-role
socialization in picture books for preschool children.” American Journal of Sociology 77(6):
1125-1150.

Woodward, C. Vann. 1955. The Strange Career of Jim Crow, Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                               38
Proofs of Propositions:



Proof of Proposition 1: Consider the two relevant first order conditions
        ,   , and              ,     . Let Z denote              , and then differentiate both
conditions totally with respect to Z. This produces the derivative                                                                                             and

                                                  . The first term is negative, proving the results for ,                                           , and     which
increase Z and have no other impact on the conditions. The second term is negative if and only
if                   0. Differentiating with respect to                                           yields:                                          and

                                 . The second term is unambiguously negative and the first term is negative if and
only if                          0.

Proof of Lemma 1: The posterior probability that the women is low ability equals
         ∆       ,               ,                            ∆               ∆       ,               ,                           ∆
                         ,            ,                                               ,               ,
                                                                                                                                          and the derivative of this with
             ∆                                                ∆               ∆                                               ∆
respect to                       equals:
                         ∆                        ,       ,                                                   ,           ,
     ∆                   ∆
                                      ∆                                       ∆                   ∆                                         ∆
                                                                                                                                                   0. The second
                     ∆       ,                ,                   ∆               ∆           ,                   ,               ∆

                                                                      ∆   ,               ,                                   ∆
derivative is negative since                                                                                                          .
                                                                      ∆                                                       ∆




Proof of Proposition 2: The firm’s first order condition for investing in misleading stories about
women in the workforce is:


                                                                          1                       ,                   ,                                         ′     ,
                                 1

                                                      ,


The second derivative is

                                                                  1               ,                       ,           ∑                           times


                             ′            ,               ,           ∑
 1          ,        ,     ∑               "   ,         ,      ∑        and we have assumed that
this is negative, which requires that the second term is larger in absolute value than the first term.
                                                                                                      39
This expression can be rewritten as:           ,      where Z represents a vector of exogenous
characteristics. If          ,       0, which we assume, then is declining with Z if
           ,      0. For any other exogenous characteristic, the derivative of with respect to Z
is positive if and only if         ,       0. This means that stories are declining with Q, and
         and rising with M. The total number of stories      must also be declining with Q,
                                                                                                                                ,
because                        ,                                         ,                0, or                                             0.
                                                                                                                                    ,


The derivative with respect to                       satisfies                    ,                                         ,            0, where
         0. As such                              0, or the total number of messages heard must be rising with .

The second order condition needed for this to be a maximum is that                                           "                  "           1

                          ′             G                                                                         ′                     0, which
                                                                                      "
                                                                                                  "                   "
we assume. Sufficient conditions for this to hold are that                                                                is greater than

                         , which ensures concavity even when                                  is near zero, and       "
     ′           G       ′′′       , which holds as long as ′′′                       is small or negative.



Proof of Proposition 3: The first order condition for parental investment in a daughter’s
education is that

                                                                                                                                                 ∂N
1                    ′              1                                         ′                   G                                     H
                                                                                                                                                 ∂

The childbearing choices during the next generation set                                                           H             ′            G ,
so       equals                             and the first order condition for parental investment can be written as
                               "


1        ′                          1                                         which can be written as
                                                                 "
1        ′                                   ,   ,     , where x represents any of the other exogenous variables, and
g(.,.) represents                           1                                             .
                                                                     "

As           →                     ∞ , then the derivative of parental well-being with respect to                                       when that
variable equals zero, will be positive as long as                             1                                           is positive at that
                                                                                                             "
                                             "
point, which requires




                                                                         40
Differentiating                ′                                     ,   ,        1 totally with respect to any “x” produces
         "                         ,                ′                                         ′                                            . For the second

order conditions to hold, we need                               "                 ′                           0 or


     "               1                                                                                                                                            0,
                                                        "                                                 "                                    "
                                                                                                      "                                    "
which we assume. Sufficient conditions for this include that                                                                                    is greater than

                     , which ensures concavity even when                                      is near zero, and                       "
     ′           G       ′′′           , which holds as long as ′′′                       is small or negative. If                             and V’’’(N)
                                                                                      "
both equal zero then the condition is that 1                                              .

With that assumption, the sign of                                   depends on the sign of                                        . The terms               and    do

not directly impact N, and since                                             1                    0 and                                            0, we know
                                                                                                                                     "
that investment in the daughter’s human capital is rising in direct altruism and declining with
altruism toward the number of grandchildren.

The derivative                 equals                                                                                     . The term                   can be
                                                                                          "

labeled y, since these two terms always enter together. In that case,                                                             equals           1

                         and               equals                   . Plugging these values in implies that                                                  equals:
         "                                                  "
                                            ′           G                                                         ′                  G
             1
                                                "                                                             "                                         "

which is positive if and only if

                                                "                                                                         ′               G
                                                ′                                                                     "

or

         1                                                  2                                                                                                          .
                                       "                                                                                      "                               "


If V’’’(.) is small, then this condition always holds if                                             , but doesn’t hold if                             is
sufficiently close to zero.




                                                                                 41
Proof of Lemma 2: Define skilled parental welfare at given a deviation that is perceived as
having come from an unskilled child’s parent as        ,       , . This function is continuous in
H, and by continuity, for H sufficiently close to        ,   ,        , is greater than the payoff
to choosing       and for H sufficiently close to 0, the parents of skilled children strictly prefer
choosing       . By continuity, there must exist at least one value of H so such that
     ,      ,    equals           ,            , , the welfare of parents of skilled children when
they choose            .

The derivative of G with respect to H is                                           which equals              ′    1

                           ′                                             1.
                                                            "

The derivative of this expression with respect to                             is    1      times

  "                1
                                                        "


                                                                         which is equal to         "             1
                           "                                    "


                                                                                               plus    "              1
       "                                                    "                       "


                                            . The first expression is negative by assumption (we assumed the
                               "
maximization problem was everywhere concave for skilled and unskilled parents). The second

expression is negative as long as                   "               1                                      , which also must be
                                                                                           "
true since
  "              1
                                                    "                                          "                      "
must be negative at                    0.

Since the function                 ,        ,       is concave and begins below                        ,              ,   and
ends above                 ,                    ,       for H close to              , the line can only cross once. The first
time         ,     , crosses             ,        , it must be upward sloping. If
      ,       , crossed a second time, it would have a negative slope at that point, and by
concavity, must lie below            ,          ,   for all higher levels of H, and this is false.
As such there exists exactly one crossing point, which defines , and         ,       , , the
welfare of skilled parents at the point whose daughters believe themselves to be unskilled, is
strictly increasing with H at that point.

The term         satisfies                                  1
                                                                                           1

                                                                        42
                                                                                          . If G(H,N) represents the welfare of unskilled
parents at human capital level H and fertility level N, then the welfare of skilled parents at the
same point would equal       ,                  1          . The value of        maximizes
    ,                                                 1                                 , and that this maximizes level the welfare of skilled
parents equals                        ,                                     1                  . Imagine that the there was a value of H’>                            at
which            ′,               ′                       ,           . For this to be the case, it would need to be true that
              1                                                       ′ 1                  ′         . But differentiation gives us that the
derivative of                                 1                                 is strictly positive, so this is impossible. Hence, if skilled
parents are indifferent between and being thought to have unskilled children or            and
being thought to have skilled children, then the parents of unskilled children will never prefer an
H above and being thought to have skilled children.



The expression that defines                                       can be written as                               ,             ,               ,            ,   , and
the derivative of this with respect to any parameter x satisfies:
         ,                    ,                                                                      ,        ,
                                                                                                                      . Since           ,                ,       is

maximized over                                , then the envelope theorem applies, and                                                                  0.

Moreover, the derivative                                                        is positive since the slope of                      ,               ,   is positive
                                                                                                                                            ,                ,
at the crossing point. That means that the sign of                                                       equals the sign of
    ,        ,
                      .

                                                              ,                 ,                ,        ,
For x= , the value of                                                                                                 equals    times                   1
                                                  1                                 , which is strictly positive since                                                and
                                          .

                                                                  ,                 ,                ,        ,
For x=       , the value of                                                                                            equals
                                                                                         and is strictly negative.

                                                                  ,                 ,                ,        ,
For x=       , the value of                                                                                            equals
                          1                                                                                                                                      1
                                                  -                                            . This is positive since this is the difference in the



                                                                                                43
daughters’ welfare level and she benefits both from having more human capital and from
knowing her ability level correctly.

Proof of Proposition 3a:

If               , then there exists a separating equilibrium entails the unskilled choosing
and the skilled choosing         . These are equilibria, and they are stable, because neither group
wants to imitate each other. The parents of less skilled daughters have no incentive to deviate
since they are already receiving their best possible outcome. As such, any deviation can only
come from the skilled, and if the skilled deviate, as long as they are believed to be skilled they
will receive a lower payoff.

Are there other separating equilibria when                ? The parents of the skilled are always
better off at      , than at any other separating human capital level, so there can be no
equilibrium where the parents of the skilled choose a different level of H. That fact is true even
without the equilibrium refinement.

Consider any other choice ′ by the parents of the unskilled and consider a deviation to
         . There is no set of beliefs by children, or fertility response, that could induce the parent
of the skilled to make that deviation, and so only the unskilled will make it and this means that
the only reasonable belief by children is that they are unskilled given a choice of            . That
response means that the unskilled will deviate to             . As such, the unskilled can only
choose           . The parents of the skilled will not choose this investment level, even if they are
thought to be parents of the unskilled, and as the unskilled all choose this level, the skilled will
go ahead and choose          .

It is similarly impossible to generate a pooling or semi-pooling equilibrium in this range of
parameter values since the unskilled can always deviate to             . In this pooling equilibrium,
the parents of the unskilled are always doing worse than in the separating equilibrium (since it is
their best outcome) and the parents of the skilled are always doing better (since they always have
the option to separate). The parents of the skilled will therefore happily deviate if the fertility
response is                 while the parents of the unskilled will require a higher fertility level to
deviate. This means that children will infer that such a deviation can only come from the less
skilled, and this inference will cause to want to deviate.

Proof of Proposition 3b:

If              > then the only separating equilibrium will again require that the parents of the
skilled invest       as discussed above. A separating equilibrium does exist where the parents
of the unskilled choose and the parents of the skilled choose         . The parents of the skilled
will not choose to deviate to , since they are getting equal welfare by choosing        . The


                                                  44
parents of the unskilled will not choose to deviate to any lower level of H, because their welfare
is locally increasing in H, assuming that children think that they are unskilled.

Consider the deviation to any level of H between and           . Let    ,    define the welfare
of unskilled parents choosing this level of human capital investment. The welfare of parents of
the skilled choosing that level of human capital investment would equal     ,
           1         , which also equals their welfare when they invest          , by construction.
Consider any deviation to H’> and let ′           denote the associated fertility level which
makes the unskilled indifferent between that level of human capital investment and investing .
Since the welfare of the skilled is always increasing in fertility, they will require a strictly lower
                                                        ′
level of fertility to deviate if and only if H’ 1                               1           .

If ′            , then it follows that the skilled will deviate for a lower fertility response, and
hence any deviation must come from the skilled. Since there is no H that will induce a parent of
an unskilled daughter to deviate from if they are thought to be parents of a skilled daughter,
they will not deviate.

There does not exist a separating equilibrium where the parents of the less skilled choose on their
own a value of H greater than because the parents of the more skilled would choose to imitate
them and that does not require our refinement. There does not exist a separating equilibrium
where the parents of the less skilled choose a lower level of H, because if they deviate to      ,
then children must realize that if they choose             , the parents of the unskilled would
strictly prefer this outcome. Moreover, if they choose                , the parents of the skilled
would strictly prefer to remain investing               . As a result, children must infer that the
deviation came from the parents of the less skilled and that will induce the parents of the less
skilled to deviate.

As such, there is a unique separating equilibrium, where parents of the skilled invest         and
parents of the unskilled invest . Without the D1 refinement a semi-pooling equilibrium would
also be possible. It is impossible for the skilled independently to choose an investment level
below         (because the skilled could always do better choose           or for the parents of the
unskilled to choose an investment level below (because they could always raise their
investment level to that amount and do better). If the skilled and unskilled both choose some
level H below          and above , then this could in principle be an equilibrium. This pooling
point would have to have the exact share of skilled and unskilled so that either the skilled parents
are indifferent between choosing this level and choosing          or the unskilled would be
indifferent between choosing this investment level and choosing or possibly both.

However, such a pooling or semi-pooling equilibrium would fail the D1 refinement. Consider a
candidate pooling point H*> . At the pooling point, fertility is denoted N*. We have assumed

                                                  45
that both welfares are increasing with N, and note immediately that such a point must deliver
weakly higher welfare to the parents of the unskilled than they receive by choosing and
weakly higher to the parents of the skilled than they receive by choosing         , since both
groups can deviate to those levels and reveal their types. The welfare level must also be lower
than the unskilled parents receive at          if their children recognize themselves as being
unskilled, since that is the best outcome possible for the parents of the unskilled.

 Given any human capital investment H and associated fertility level N, the welfare of the
parents of the unskilled is denoted          1       1                    Q N , where Q(N)
equals                                                 NG .

At the same levels the welfare of the parents of the skilled equals                    1
Q N , as such the derivative of the welfare of the skilled parents with respect to H is always
greater than the derivative of the unskilled parents with respect to H, and the derivative with
                                               ∗∗
respect to N is always lower. Define               as the fertility level that makes more skilled
                                                                          ∗∗
parents indifferent between pooling at H* and deviating and                   as the fertility level that
makes less skilled parents indifferent between pooling at H* and deviating. Note that these
alternative fertility levels are defined as the levels that would make parents indifferent, not the
                                                                                                      ∗∗
fertility levels that children would themselves choose. The derivative at (H*, N*) of
                                                            ∗, ∗                   ∗       ∗
                                               ∗
with respect to H** satisfies:                                                 ∗       ∗       . The
                                     ∗∗
derivative at (H*, N*) of                     with respect to H** satisfies:
                        ∗    ∗
      ∗
                    ∗            ∗        .

If      1         ′ ∗ 1         ∗
                                         1, as it will be for any H less than or equal to
(since that point is defined as maximizing welfare with respect to H for less skilled, and at the
pooling equilibrium, the returns to H will be higher for the less skilled both because fertility is
lower and because           ∗, ∗ does not include the negative impact that H has on fertility),
            ∗∗           ∗∗                                            ∗∗
then                           0, because the denominator of               is smaller and the numerator
is farther from zero (or negative). In that case, a marginal downward deviation will be attractive
for a wider range of fertility levels for the less skilled, and D1 implies that a slight downward
deviation will be thought to come from the less skilled, and hence the less skilled will deviate.

If      1        ′ ∗ 1          ∗
                                         1, then locally, the welfare of the unskilled parents is
decreasing in H. There must, however, exist a value of ∗∗ less than H* and greater than at
which the parents of the less skilled are indifferent between ∗ , ∗ and ∗∗ , ∗ . Locally, we
know that locally any deviations to ∗∗ , ∗ will yield higher welfare than the equilibrium
level, since welfare is locally falling in H. But we also know that deviating to , ∗ yields
lower utility than the equilibrium level, since the equilibrium must be at least as good as            ,


                                                           46
and ∗       , both because human capital is higher and because the children do not believe that
they are unskilled at ∗ , and welfare is decreasing in fertility. Hence be continuity, there exists
some value of ∗∗ , ∗ that makes the less skilled indifferent, but at that point             ∗∗
                                                                                                1
          ∗         ∗∗        ∗              ∗                  ∗        ∗       ∗
   1                     Q                      1       1                    Q     , then it
                      ∗∗       ∗          ∗∗
follows that             1                      Q ∗                ∗
                                                                      1     ∗          ∗
                                                                                           Q ∗ ,
and the more skilled would not deviate downwards at fertility level N*, and hence the deviation
is thought to come from parents of the less skilled, and hence those parents will deviate.

When            , then the equilibrium involves pooling at this point, and some parents of the
skilled may remain at         . We can rule out pure separating, since the parents of the more
skilled will always choose          and will strictly prefer imitating the less skilled at any feasible
level of H. We can rule out any pooling at a higher level of H, by the argument made
immediately above, since the parents of the less skilled will always choose to deviate
downwards. That leaves us with pure pooling, or semi-pooling. Pure pooling can only exist if
the welfare of the parents of the skilled at the pooling point is greater than the welfare they
would have by choosing             and being known to be more skilled.

At the pooling point, any deviation upwards will be thought to come from the more skilled, by a
variant of the argument made above, and again, following roughly the algebra above, the less
skilled will be less likely to deviate, and hence any deviation is thought to come from the parents
of the more skilled daughters, and hence no deviation will occur.

The semi-pooling equilibrium will ensure that the parents of the skilled are indifferent between
choosing       and choosing . Let                denote the fertility level at that point, which
must satisfy the first order condition                1     1                          ′
    , where       indicates the proportion of skilled parents is the mix of parents who are

providing     . In this case,                             0. The value of         must also satisfy
                                          "


                  1
                                              1
                                                  .

For any parameter that does not impact the fertility choice by daughters, the equality can be
written as            ,              ,              ,        ,          , . Using
                                         0, differentiating this expression totally with respect to x
yields:



                                                      47
           ,              ,           ,           ,            ,


           ,              ,           ,           ,                ,                    ,             ,             ,
                                                                                                                                          0

                                          ,           ,                    ,
We know that                  0 and                                                0, so the sign of                    must be the
                                      ,                   ,                    ,              ,             ,
opposite of the sign of                                                                                          . When a parameter
makes the high skill option relatively more attractive, the fertility given low skill must rise,
which means that the share of skilled parents investing in lower skills must fall.

                                  ,           ,                        ,            ,             ,
When x=        then                                                                                       equals                      1

                                                                                                                              1

                                                              which must be positive since                                            1

                                                                                                                is strictly increasing

with H and             1
          1                                                                                 . Hence the number of parents of
more skilled children choosing            must decline with                    .

                                  ,           ,                        ,            ,             ,
When x=        then                                                                                       equals
                                           which must be negative. Hence the number of parents of
more skilled children choosing            must increase with .

Proof of Proposition 4: The proof of this proposition follows exactly the logic of Proposition 3a
and 3b. If             , then it is impossible to have a pooling equilibrium at any value of H less
than or equal to , because the parents who know that women are skilled will choose                 . It
is impossible to have a pooling equilibrium at any value of H greater than because the parents
who thought women were less skilled will deviate downwards to a point where they will benefit
given a lower fertility rate than the fertility needed to generate deviation for parents who know
that women are more skilled. As such only separating equilibria are possible, and the parents
who know that daughters are more capable will always choose                 in a separating equilibrium.
If          , then it is impossible to have a pure separating equilibrium, because at any value of
         , the skilled would prefer imitating the less skilled to choosing          . It is however,
possible to have a semi-pooling or pure pooling equilibrium, where enough of the skilled choose
    to make them indifferent (or strictly prefer) choosing that quantity to choosing             or any
other level of H. Any upwards deviation in H will benefit the parents who know that women are
skilled more than the parents who think that women are less capable, given the same fertility

                                                              48
response, as such upward deviations are thought to come from the skilled, and this ensure that
both types of agents are optimally choosing .

Proof of Proposition 5: For notational convenience we let B(N) denote
                     NG

If they have                 daughters and         sons, then parents will be choosing                    to maximize.

                         1                                 1                                     1

 1                                                              1
 1                              . This produces the first order condition

         ′           1                     1       ′                               G              ′

 1                                                 G                1          ′                      1                  0.

The problem as a whole can be written as       , where           ,     0, at a maximum.
Assuming that second order conditions hold, the impact of any parameter Z on    depends on
                 ,   . The function                    depends on            , and     , but not on ,      ,   or   and hence
we will concentrate on these latter parameters, especially since changes in these parameters will
have no direct impact on the beliefs of the children.

The children’s assessment of their ability level satisfies
                                                               , which will be the inverse of

1            ′                                 G                ′                        1

G                    1           ′                         1                  which is greater than one. Hence,
daughters and sons alike will underestimate the ability of women. For parameters that do not
directly impact        , changes in beliefs reflect only changes in , with reductions in
causing reductions in beliefs of women’s competence.

The cross-partial                        equals


     ′                               G                 ′                       1

G                    1           ′                         1                       0 . The cross-partial            equals



                                                                        49
                              G                1               ′                                 1                0, and the cross-

partial         equals                                                      G                1           ′
 1                  0.

If            and                 and hence                                then the derivative with respect to             is
     ′                ′                                                G        1           , which is positive if and only if
          .



Proof of Proposition 6: The welfare from having children immediately equals,
            1                    , where     satisfies                  ′    .

The expected welfare from waiting to have children is                                            1                         1

                                                                   1            1                                    , where
                          ′           , and        1                                         ′       .

When           1, then waiting to have children is clearly preferable, as 1                                                         1

                                                           1                1                                                   1
                      . When                  ∞, then welfare is                                             0   which is less than
                                                                                                                       ∗
               1                                . Moreover                          1                            1
                                                                   ∗
                                          1            1                                             , is monotonically and
continuously decreasing with , and as a result, there must exist a crossing point denoted ∗
between zero and k at which mothers are indifferent between waiting or not. For all lower levels
of ∗ , mothers prefer waiting and for all higher levels of ∗ , mothers prefer early fertility.


If                  , then                ∗                            ,                ∗                        and

                    , so with a bit of algebra, the crossing point is defined by 1                                              1


                                  ∗
          1                           .




                                                                           50
                                                  Figure 1:
        1      .8              Men Should Work, Women Should Not (Multiple Years)
Share Agreeing
   .4    .6
        .2
        0




                    1900               1920                1940           1960                   1980             2000
                                                              year of birth

                         Men Should Work, Women Not, M                        Men Should Work, Women Not, W
                     Source: General Social Survey
                     Text: A husband's job is to earn money; a wife's job is to look after the home and family.




                                                 Figure 2:
                             Women Working Does Not Harm Children (Multiple Years)
         1     .8
Share Agreeing
   .4    .6
         .2
         0




                    1900               1920                1940           1960                   1980             2000
                                                              year of birth

                            Mother's Work OK for Kids, M                      Mother's Work OK for Kids, W
                     Source: General Social Survey
                     Text: A pre-school child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works.




                                                                             51
                                                     Figure 3:
       .6
       .5                            Men are Better at Politics (Multiple Years)
Share Agreeing
   .3  .2
       .1 .4




                 1900                        1920                          1940                         1960
                                                          year of birth
                  Source: General Social Survey
                  Text: Would you say that most men are better suited emotionally for politics than are most women,
                  that men and women are equally suited, or that women are better suited than men in this area?




                                            Figure 4:
                     Men Earn More Than Women Because They Work Harder (1996)
        1
        .8
Share Agreeing
  .4    .2
        0 .6




                 1900                  1920                   1940                    1960                    1980
                                                           year of birth
                  Source: General Social Survey
                  Text: Men work harder on the job than women do.
                  How important do you think this reason is for explaining why women earn less?




                                                                      52
