NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO STIMULANT MEDICATIONS IMPROVE EDUCATIONAL AND BEHAVIORAL
OUTCOMES FOR CHILDREN WITH ADHD?
Janet Currie
Mark Stabile
Lauren E. Jones
Working Paper 19105
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19105
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

We are grateful to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for financial support and to seminar
participants at the Aarhus Workshop on Children’s Human Capital, Uppsala University, Sciences-Po,
McGill, UCLA and Columbia for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Janet Currie, Mark Stabile, and Lauren E. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Stimulant Medications Improve Educational and Behavioral Outcomes for Children with
ADHD?
Janet Currie, Mark Stabile, and Lauren E. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 19105
June 2013, Revised January 2014
JEL No. I0
ABSTRACT
We examine the effects of a policy change in the province of Quebec, Canada which greatly expanded
insurance coverage for prescription medications. We show that the change was associated with a sharp
increase in the use of stimulant medications commonly prescribed for ADHD in Quebec relative to
the rest of Canada. We ask whether this increase in medication use was associated with improvements
in emotional functioning or academic outcomes among children with ADHD. We find little evidence
of improvement in either the medium or the long run. Our results are silent on the effects on optimal
use of medication for ADHD, but suggest that expanding medication in a community setting had little
positive benefit and may have had harmful effects given the average way these drugs are used in the
community.
Janet Currie
Princeton University
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
Mark Stabile
University of Toronto
14 Queen's Park Cres. W.
Toronto, ON M5S 3K9
CANADA
and NBER
mark.stabile@utoronto.ca

An online appendix is available at:
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w19105

Lauren E. Jones
Cornell University
lej39@cornell.edu

Introduction
Over the past twenty years, mental disabilities have overtaken physical disabilities as
the leading cause of activity limitations in children. Today, ADHD is three times more
likely than asthma to be contributing to childhood disability in the United States (Currie
and Kahn, 2011). Recent research indicates that children with ADHD have lower
standardized test scores than others (including their own siblings) and are more likely to
be placed in special education, to repeat grades, and to be delinquent (Miech et al., 1999;
Nagin and Tremblay, 1999; Currie and Stabile, 2006, 2007; Fletcher and Wolfe, 2008,
2009). Moreover, untreated children with ADHD impose significant costs on their
classmates by disrupting learning and/or diverting teacher resources (Aizer, 2009).
According to the most recent data from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, approximately eleven percent of U.S. children aged 4 to 17 have ever been
diagnosed with ADHD and more than half of them are taking stimulant medications such
as Ritalin for their condition (Schwarz and Cohen, 2013; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2005).1 Both diagnosis and treatment rates are lower outside the U.S., but
have been rapidly increasing (Polanczyk et al, 2007).
Despite, or perhaps because of the millions of children taking stimulants, drug
treatment for ADHD remains controversial. The National Institute of Mental Health
recommends treatment with stimulants and says that they are safe if used under medical
supervision (U.S. NIMH, 2012). However, concerns continue to surface about both
short term side effects, and possible side effects due to long-term use. For example, the
Schwarz and Cohen tabulate data from the 2011‐2012 wave of the National Survey of Children’s
Health. Methylphenidate (sold under the trade names Ritalin, Biphentin, and Concerta) is the most
commonly used central nervous system stimulant for ADHD. Others include: dextroamphetamine
(Dexedrine); and mixed amphetamine salts (Adderall) (Therapeutics Initiative, 2010).

1

3

U.S. Food and Drug Administration voted in 2006 to recommend a warning label
describing the cardiovascular risks of stimulant drugs for ADHD (Nissen, 2006). Other
side effects can include decreased appetite, insomnia, headache, stomach ache, dizziness
and mood changes including anxiety and depression (Schachter et al., 2001, NIMH,
2012). Some studies have also found growth deficits in treated children (Joshi and
Adam, 2002). Aside from the possibility of physical side effects, inappropriate use of
stimulant medication could also harm children by stigmatizing them or by crowding out
other interventions that might be more helpful.
Lack of evidence regarding long-term benefits of stimulant medications is a key
element of this controversy. Drugs are often prescribed with the goal of helping children
to be successful in school. If the drugs do not actually lead to scholastic benefits in the
medium and long run, then the case for subjecting children to even a small risk of side
effects is weakened. The main problems involved in assessing the long-run efficacy of
stimulant medication are first, that most drug trials follow children only for a short time –
between one and two months after treatment (Griffin et al., 2008) – and second, that
families (and children) choose whether or not to seek treatment for ADHD, and whether
to take medication if it is prescribed.
Our paper assesses the medium and long run benefits of treatment for ADHD with
stimulant medication using longitudinal data from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Canadian Youth (NLSCY), and a unique policy experiment which expanded insurance
coverage for drugs in Quebec in 1997. Our study improves on the previous literature in
many respects. First, we have a large sample of children who have been followed from
1994 to 2008. We are able to observe medium term outcomes such as grade repetition

2

and math scores, as well as long term outcomes like graduation from high school and
whether children ever attended college. Moreover, we know whether children were
taking stimulant medication as of each wave. An important feature of the NLSCY is that
all children were assessed for ADHD symptoms, so we do not have to deal with selection
into diagnosis. A third innovation is that we are able to exploit exogenous variation in
the availability of drugs due to the policy experiment. Fourth, in our analysis of medium
term outcomes we are able to use individual fixed effects to control for unobservable
differences between children that might influence both treatment and outcomes.
We find that the introduction of the prescription drug insurance program increased the
use of stimulants in Quebec relative to the rest of Canada. However, we find no evidence
that the performance of children with ADHD improved. In fact, the increase in
medication use among children with ADHD is associated with increases in the
probability of grade repetition, lower math scores, and a deterioration in relationships
with parents. When we turn to an examination of long-term outcomes, we find that
increases in medication use are associated with increases in the probability that a child
has ever suffered from depression and decreases in the probability of post secondary
education among girls.
The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. Section 1 reviews the previous literature
about the consequences of ADHD for child outcomes and the controversy surrounding
ADHD medications. Section 2 discusses our data and Section 3 discusses methods. The
results appear in Section 4 and Section 5 concludes.

3

Background
In view of the importance of ADHD and the fact that stimulant medications have
been used for many years, it is perhaps surprising that most of the evidence regarding
their efficacy relates to short time horizons. Controlled studies suggest that medication
improves attention, short-term memory, performance on quizzes, homework completion,
and note-taking (Douglas, 1999; Bedard et al, 2007; Pelham et al. 1993; Evans et al,
2001). It is often assumed that these improvements will translate into future academic
gains, but few studies actually track children longer than a few months. Moreover
Schachter et al. (2001) argue that the positive short-run effects on attention and behavior
may be over-estimated given publication bias towards positive findings. An additional
concern is that the doses that yield the most desirable behavior may not be calibrated to
achieve the greatest possible improvement in cognitive functioning (Wigal et al., 1999).
One of the most widely known longer term studies of the effects of medication for
ADHD is based on the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health 14 month Multimodal
Treatment study (MTA). It is important to note that this study did not compare
medication to non-treatment, instead, the MTA compared different types of treatment.
Specifically, the MTA randomized 579 children with ADHD into four arms: Stimulants
alone; behavioral therapy alone; stimulants plus behavioral therapy; or usual community
care, which involved treatment with stimulants but with possibly less than optimal
dosages. Blinded classroom observations did not find any significant differences in
behavior between the four groups. At the end of 14 months, 49.8% of children reported
mild side effects, 11.4% reported moderate side effects, and 2.9% reported severe side
effects (The MTA Cooperation Group, 1999).

4

Molina et al. (2009) discuss a long-term follow up of children from the MTA
study which included 436 of the original study children and 261 “controls” who were
randomly selected from the same schools and grades 24 months after the original study
began and matched with treatment children by age and gender. They find that 6 to 8
years following the initial intervention, there were still no differences between the
children in the four treatment groups. They also find that the treatment children were
worse off than the “controls” on virtually every measure but it is important to note that
these controls were not part of the original randomized design so this comparison does
not constitute an experimental evaluation of the long term benefits of drug treatment
compared to non-treatment. Of those originally assigned to take medications, 62% had
stopped taking them by the time of the follow up which is remarkable in itself since it
suggests dissatisfaction with the drug regimen. However, adjusting for this attrition did
not affect the differences between treated children and control children.
Barbaresi et al. (2007) follow 370 children with ADHD from a 1976-1982 birth
cohort study. They obtained the complete school record, as well as medical records with
information about stimulant use for each child. They found that in this sample of
children with ADHD diagnoses, longer duration of stimulant use was associated with
reductions in absences and retention in grade but had no effect on school dropout.
However, endogeneity of stimulant use makes these results difficult to interpret. If the
children with the worst attention difficulties were most likely to take medication, then
any positive effects of medication would be biased towards zero. Alternatively, if
children from the best backgrounds were most likely to take stimulants properly, then this
might bias the analysis towards finding a positive effect.

5

Zoega et al. (2009) use registry data from Iceland, which has a measured
prevalence of ADHD and a usage of stimulant medication that is similar to the U.S.
They linked information from medical records to a data base of national scholastic
examinations for children born between 1994 and 1996 who took standardized tests at
fourth and seventh grade. In order to deal with the endogeneity of treatment, they
include only children who were “ever treated” between the ages of 9 to 12, and focus on
whether they were treated sooner or later. They find that children with ADHD suffered
declines in test taking relative to other children, but that ADHD children who started
medication earlier experienced slower declines than those who started medication later.
Again, this design suffers from endogeneity, this time in terms of the choice of when
treatment was started. It is possible, for instance, that children start medication in
response to some crisis, and then experience reversion to their mean performance.2
Scheffler et al. (2009) use data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study—
Kindergarten Class of 1998-1999 to examine the effect of medication use on standardized
math and reading test scores for 594 children with ADHD. They estimate first
differenced models in order to control for constant aspects of the child’s background. A
limitation of their data is that questions about medications were asked only in fifth grade,
so it was assumed that children who were not taking medication at fifth grade had never
taken it. They find that children with ADHD who took medication had higher
mathematics and reading scores than other children with ADHD, though they still lagged
behind their non-ADHD peers. However, if children with ADHD are on different

2 Another issue is that the authors define the start of therapy to be the first prescription after a
period of at least 11 months without previous prescriptions for ADHD. This suggests that some of the
“later starters” may in fact have started ADHD drugs earlier and then stopped them again.

6

trajectories then their non-ADHD peers, then it is not clear that estimating the model in
first differences will adequately control for the endogeneity of medication use.
Dalsgaard et al. (2013) use Danish registry data and variations in the prescription
patterns of physicians to identify the effect of ADHD medication on hospital contacts,
criminal activity and a limited set of school performance measures. They find that
physician treatment patterns vary significantly, and that among children who receive
treatment, hospital contacts decrease as do the number of interactions with police. While
they find little difference in test scores for treated versus non-treated children, they note
that treated children are less likely to take the exam. One limitation of their study is that
higher income children were significantly more likely to go to doctors who prescribed
medication more frequently which suggests that the probability of receiving a
prescription was correlated with economic status.
Our study provides new evidence regarding the medium- and long-term effects of
stimulants use for ADHD in a nationally representative sample of Canadian children by
taking advantage of a policy experiment that expanded access to these drugs.3 In 1997,
the Canadian province of Quebec adopted a mandatory prescription drug insurance law.4
Before 1997, many residents of Quebec received private prescription drug insurance from
their employers while others went without drug insurance. The new law stipulated that
all Quebecers had to be insured. Those who did not have insurance through their
employer were required to participate in a new provincial public plan (Morgan, 1998).
3 Cuellar and Markowitz (2007) adopt a somewhat similar identification strategy, examining the
effects of increases in access to medication that occurred as a result of expansions of Medicaid
coverage on rates of suicide, injury, and crime in eligible populations.
4 Quebec implemented a subsidized day care program in September of that same year. In the first few
years the program focused on older children (4‐6) and expanded to include younger children later on
(Baker et al 2008). To ensure that our instrument is not conflating the two programs we replicate our
estimates focusing on children who are older than the day care ranges by the time the daycare
program took place. Our main results are quite similar in this specification.

7

Premiums and deductibles were scaled according to income and some segments of the
population received coverage for free including children whose parents were covered.
Premiums were collected along with the filing of the Quebec tax return to ensure
compliance with the law (Pomey et al 2007). Details on the premiums, deductibles and
co-insurance rates over time are presented in the data appendix.
As a result of the insurance mandate and public plan, drug insurance rates rose
quickly in Quebec. Using data from the National Population Health Survey and
Community Health and Social Survey, both of which contain information on whether or
not individuals hold prescription drug insurance, 5 we calculate coverage rates in both
Quebec and in the rest of Canada. Whereas the rate of drug insurance coverage prereform in 1996 was 55%, it jumped to 84% in 1998 and continued to rise to 89% by 2003.
Drug coverage rates in the rest of Canada averaged 65% in 1996 and rose slowly over
time to an average of 76% by 2003 (Table 1). Overall the jump in Quebec far exceeds the
rise in coverage taking place in the rest of the country as Quebec was the only province
that instituted a universal coverage mandate.
Our identification strategy, then, is to first explore the increase in the use of
stimulants that accompanied the increase in drug coverage6 and then to relate the
increase in drug use to medium and long-run child outcomes. Since it is possible that
there were divergent trends in outcomes in Quebec and Canada which were independent
of the introduction of the prescription drug law, we focus on the effects of the law on
children who had high levels of ADHD symptoms prior to the passage of the law. The
5 The NPHS (1994, 1996 and 1998) and CCHS (2002, 2003) are both publicly available data sets that
ask questions about prescription drug coverage. The NLSCY, the main source of data for our analysis
does not ask questions on prescription drug coverage.
6 Quebec’s public plan formulary explicitly lists Ritalin as covered. The reimbursement for the drug
the price for 100 20mg tablets was $53.06.

8

overall argument is that if an expansion in drug use is beneficial, then we should see an
improvement in the performance of children with ADHD in Quebec relative to the rest of
Canada.

Data
We use data from the NLSCY, a national longitudinal data set which began with
an initial sample of children ages 0 to 11 and their families in 1994. In the second wave
of data collection in 1996, 15,871 of these children were surveyed (a reduced sample due
to budget restrictions). We use the children born in 1985 or later who appear in both the
1994 and 1996 surveys as the base sample for this study. Follow-up surveys were
conducted biannually up to 2008, producing up to 8 potential survey responses for each
child. For responses pertaining to children under age 16, the survey collected information
from the person most knowledgeable (PMK) about the child, while older children (16 and
older) were responsible for completing the survey themselves.
We employ distinct approaches to evaluating the medium and long-term effects of
stimulant use, and our sample depends on the approach in question. To investigate
medium-term outcomes, we exploit the panel nature of the NLSCY and restrict the
sample to observations collected at ages 0 through 16. For the oldest children in the
sample – those born in 1985 or 1986 – we are able to observe up to 3 observations per
child, while we use up to 7 survey responses for the youngest children. Our medium-term
outcomes are not collected for all ages, however, and we further restrict our medium-term

9

base sample as data availability requires.7 The data appendix provides information about
the maximum number of observations potentially available for each measure, and the
number actually available given attrition.
For the long-term analysis we focus on outcomes that are reported by the youths
themselves at ages 16 and later. For the most part, these are measured only once for each
child, like high school graduation. With the exception of the self-assessed depression
score – which we construct by averaging all available scores for each child in order to
better capture whether the child was ever depressed and the persistence of depression –
variables are defined according to their last observed value. Our long-term outcomes
sample therefore consists of children aged 0-9 in 1994 who remain in the sample until at
least age 16, tracked through 2008, with one observation per child. Due mostly to
attrition, the base long-term sample is composed of 8,643 children born in 1985 or later,
surveyed in both 1994 and 1996, and followed thereafter.
We measure ADHD using questions that are asked to parents about symptoms of
ADHD. ADHD is always diagnosed through the use of questions similar to those
included in the survey. Parents are asked to rate on a scale of 0 to 2 how often their child
demonstrates five behaviors common among those who suffer from ADHD. Answers to
these five questions are summed to produce an ADHD score that ranges between 0 and
10, where higher scores indicate a higher level of ADHD symptoms. The questions used
are listed in the data appendix, along with the questions used to construct all outcome
variables. One of the strengths of the NLSCY data for this analysis is that these screener
questions are administered to all children aged 2 to 11 years old, rather than to only
Most of the short‐term behavioral outcomes are only collected at ages 2 to 11 years. The
educational outcomes are only available for school‐aged children, and thus are collected starting at
age 6. The question assessing the quality of the child’s relationships are asked for children aged 4‐9.
7

10

diagnosed cases. Previous research has shown that diagnosis can depend on a number of
factors including age-for-grade and socioeconomic status (Evans et al 2010). We use the
ADHD screener score collected in 1996 as our measure of the child’s ADHD symptoms.
Using the 1996 measurement allows us to obtain a pre-policy measurement of the
severity of any child’s ADHD symptoms.
Our information on stimulant use for both the medium- and long-term analyses is
derived from a survey question that asks whether the child takes, “any of the following
prescribed medication on a regular basis: Ritalin or other similar medication.” This
question is asked about all children age 15 and younger. Approximately 9 percent of
sample children in Quebec, and 5 percent of sample children in the rest of Canada report
ever having used stimulants. Stimulant use has increased slowly in Canada from less
than 2 percent in 1994 to around 4 percent in 2008. Figure 1 shows that in Quebec,
stimulant use tracked the rest of Canada closely prior to the policy change, but began to
increase significantly following the policy change in 1997.
Figure 2 provides additional evidence that the policy change led to significant
increases in stimulant use. For all respondents who indicate ever using stimulants, we
plot the fraction that commenced use in each cycle. If stimulant use is unrelated to
outside factors, then uptake rates across survey cycles should exhibit a more-or-less
smooth trend, with approximately equal proportions commencing use in any one year,
peaking when the sample has the most children at peak diagnosis ages (6-10) and
declining as the sample ages and diagnosis becomes less frequent. This is the pattern we
see for children living outside of Quebec. For children in Quebec, however, there is a
distinct spike in uptake rates in 2000 and 2002, following the policy change.

11

The NLSCY also asks about other chronic conditions, some of which could also
have been affected by increased drug coverage. Specifically, the survey asks whether, “a
health professional has ever diagnosed any of the following long-term conditions…”
where the listed conditions include: any type of allergy, bronchitis, heart conditions,
epilepsy, cerebral palsy, kidney conditions, mental handicaps, learning disabilities,
attention deficit disorder, emotional or psychological difficulties, eating disorders, autism,
migraines, or any other chronic condition. We use these questions to test the robustness
of our findings in two ways. First, we exclude children who had other (physical) chronic
conditions from the sample and repeat our analyses.
Second, we examine children with asthma who may have gained access to,
“Ventolin, inhalers or puffers for asthma” with expanded drug coverage. The increase in
stimulant use was particularly pronounced relative to other medications such as the use of
inhalers for asthma which did not increase disproportionately in Quebec relative to the
rest of Canada (Figure 3). Thus, although the law was intended to increase access to all
types of necessary medications, it seems to have had a disproportionate impact on
prescriptions for stimulants.
We focus on outcomes that are intended to capture the child’s behaviour,
emotional state, and human capital accumulation in both the medium and longer run. The
analysis of our medium-term outcomes involves a panel analysis of repeated observations
over time for the same child They include: an unhappiness score, a rating of the child’s
relationship with his or her parents over the past 6 months8, whether the child repeated a

8

The relationship questions are indicators that equal 1 if the PMK has reported that the child has
gotten along with the person in question “quite well” or “very well” over the previous six month
period.

12

grade in the past two years and a mathematics score which is age-standardized to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Mathematics tests were administered in
schools to children in grades two through ten and are based on the Canadian
Achievement Tests.9
While the medium-term analysis is conducted using multiple outcome values for
each child collected over time, the long-term analysis only employs one observation for
each child. The long-term outcomes we consider include: an indicator for high school
graduation, and indicator for having attended or graduated from a post-secondary
institution, and a self-assessed depression score composed of six questions asked of all
respondents aged 16 and older. In the case of the self-assessed depression score, we
average all available self-assessed scores collected as of 2008 in order to construct an
overall measure of the child’s adolescent depression symptoms. The educational
outcomes measure, by wave 8, whether the child had graduated from high school and
whether he or she ever attended any post-secondary education.
Descriptive statistics for stimulant use, the outcome variables, and key
independent variables for both the medium and long-term samples are shown in Table 2
(referred to as Samples 1 and 2, respectively). The table shows means separately for
Quebec and the rest of Canada. The increase in stimulant use in Quebec vs. the rest of
Canada is apparent in the first half of the table, and the second half of the table shows that
a much larger number of children had ever used stimulants in Quebec by the end of the
sample period. It is apparent that there are some differences in mean outcomes in Quebec

The NLSCY began collecting a reading test score in its first three cycles but dropped this measure in
subsequent cycles.

9

13

vs. the rest of Canada, though the baseline child and family characteristics are fairly
similar.

Methods
We begin by estimating the effect of the policy change on the use of stimulants in
a difference-in-difference framework. The estimating equation takes the form:

Stimit    Postit 1  Queit 1  Postit 1 * Queit 1  X it    t  pi   it

(1)

where Stimit is a dichotomous variable equal to one if the PMK reports that child i is
currently taking stimulant medication in year t, τ are survey year fixed effects and p are
province fixed effects. Postit is a variable that identifies those survey responses collected
from children after 1996, Queit identifies responses from children in Quebec, and their
interaction indicates the treatment group. In this specification, we compare children in
Quebec to children in other provinces, before and after the policy change. The vector X
includes family income, whether the person most knowledgeable about the child is an
immigrant, whether the person most knowledgeable about the child (the survey
respondent) is male or female, the sex of the child, birth order, family size, whether there
are two parents present in the family, the mother’s age at birth, whether the mother had a
teen birth, and child-age dummies. To allow for delayed uptake in medication treatment,
as well as time for the medication to take effect, we lag the policy change variable by one
period (both the province of residence and the indicator for being post policy change).We

14

expect a positive coefficient estimate on the Postit * Queit interaction term, implying that
increased access in post-reform Quebec led to expanded use of stimulant medication.
A limitation of the difference-in-differences approach is that there may be post
2007 differences in outcomes between Quebec and the rest of Canada for other reasons.
Therefore, we focus on a triple difference specification that focuses on those children
most likely to benefit from increased stimulant use in response to the policy change:
Those with the worst initial ADHD symptoms. These models add an additional level of
interaction terms to equation (1) – the ADHD score for the child between the ages of 2 to
11, measured in 1996 (pre policy change) – in order to estimate a difference-indifference-in-difference (DDD) model, comparing children with worse underlying
ADHD symptoms (measured before the reform) in post-reform Quebec to other children.
This model is specified as:

96
∗

96
∗

∗
∗

∗
Π

96

(2)

,

where ADHD96i is the child’s 1996 ADHD symptom score.10 Using this approach, we are
able to isolate the effect of the reform on stimulant use among children with worse
ADHD symptoms, net of any pre-existing differences in stimulant use across time,

10 Currie and Stabile (2007) show non‐parametric Lowess plots which indicate that short‐
term test scores and grade repetition vary approximately linearly with ADHD scores, and that the
90th percentile of the ADHD score (which corresponds approximately to a threshold for diagnosis) is
similar in Canada and the U.S . We therefore use linear average ADHD scores in our analysis.

15

geography, and severity of symptoms. In this specification, we expect that the estimate
of θ should be positive.
When we examine medium term outcomes, we focus on versions of equations (1)
and (2) that include child specific fixed effects. In these models, the effects are identified
through changes in stimulant use for the same child before and after the policy change.
The ability to control for child fixed effects obviates concerns about possible changes in
the sample of children over time.
We use the same DDD framework (equation (2)) to examine the effect of the
policy change on outcomes: if stimulant use improves outcomes, and children with worse
symptoms are more likely to be treated post reform, then children with worse ADHD
symptoms in post-reform Quebec – should demonstrate post-reform improvements in
outcomes relative to their peers.
In order to examine the longer-term effects of an increase in stimulant use, we
next use the sample with one long-term observation per child and estimate a quasi-first
stage regression where the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 for children
who ever reported using stimulant medication between ages 0 and 15 (EverRit). We
construct a policy exposure variable intended to capture the number of years the child
was eligible for the new prescription drug regime: The total number of under age 16
survey responses for the child that occurred post 1996 (PostYrs). We then interact this
lifetime exposure window variable with a Quebec indicator and the 1996 ADHD
symptom score to create a parallel to (2):
94
94 ∗

96

∗

94

96
∗

96

(3)

16

∗

∗

94 Π

94

Equation (3) is estimated using one observation per child and includes measures
that are constructed at different periods in the child’s life. Here the vector X includes
controls measured as of 1994. The maximum number of years that a child can be treated
depends on his or her age in year 1 of the survey (1994). We include age/cohort
dummies to control for the fact that different children will be observed for different
lengths of time. After estimating the relationship between lifetime stimulant use and
exposure to the policy, we use equation (3) to examine the relationship between stimulant
use and long term outcomes.
We perform a number of robustness checks to control for other health and
learning disabilities that the child may have, as well as to specifically control for other
contemporaneous policy changes that occurred in Quebec over this period. We discuss
these checks following the presentation of our main results.

Results
We first examine the effect of the policy change on the probability of stimulant use in
our sample as well as the relationship between exposure to the policy change and the
number of years that a child used stimulants. Table 3 presents the results. Columns 1 and
2 report the difference-in-differences results without and with child fixed effects. In both
cases we see an increase in the probability of using stimulants of approximately 2.5
percentage points for children in Quebec after the policy change. Columns three and
four of Table 3 report the triple difference estimates (the D-D interacted with the child’s

17

1996 ADHD score). Here the preferred fixed effect estimate suggests an increase of
approximately 0.43 percentage points with each one unit increase in ADHD scores,
which is quite similar to the OLS estimates without fixed effects of 0.48 percentage
points. At the average ADHD score, this is a 1.15 percentage point change in stimulant
use compared to the average baseline number of children on stimulants of 2 percent.
We also estimate a similar “first stage” model for our longer-term analysis by
examining the relationship between exposure to the policy change and ever taking
stimulants, as described in equation (3). These results are presented in columns 5 and 6
of Table 3. The DDD estimate suggests a 0.56 percentage point increase in the
probability of ever taking stimulants on a baseline of 4 percent, however, the coefficient
is imprecisely estimated and is significant only at the 90 percent level of confidence.
Again, while this is a fairly small overall change in stimulant use it reflects a large change
relative to baseline.
Having established that the policy change resulted in a reasonably large change in
the use of stimulants we now turn to examining both the medium and longer term
consequences of this change. Table 4 presents the estimates for medium term outcomes.
All columns include child specific fixed-effects. The difference-in-differences estimates
suggest consistently worse outcomes post policy change in Quebec though, even with the
inclusion of child fixed effects, these differences could possibly reflect divergent trends
in Quebec and the rest of Canada. Therefore, we prefer to focus on the DDD estimates.
These also suggest a significant negative effect of the policy change in terms of grade
repetition, math scores, and relationships with parents. For example, the coefficient on
the triple interaction in the “Did not repeat grade” model suggests that for each one unit

18

increase in ADHD scores, the probability that a child progressed normally through school
between waves fell post policy change by 1.28 percentage points on a baseline 93 percent
progression rate.
Turning to the long term outcomes, Table 5 shows estimates of equation (3). In
the triple difference framework, the estimates suggest that the only long term effect is on
unhappiness – there is no statistically significant effect of exposure to the policy on high
school completion or post-secondary schooling among those with higher ADHD scores.
These estimates cast doubt on the idea that the diffusion of stimulant use
improved academic outcomes among those with ADHD, and raise the possibility that
children were actually harmed. There are several possible mechanisms that could be at
work. First, many of the known side effects of stimulant use have to do with children’s
emotional wellbeing; direct effects on unhappiness or depression may therefore not be
surprising. It is also possible that stimulants have direct effects on children’s cognitive
abilities, particularly if dosages are not optimized for the individual child. A second
possible mechanism is that stimulant use might crowd-out other therapies or learning
strategies that could be more beneficial to the child. A third possibility is that stigma
associated with an ADHD diagnosis and stimulant use is harmful to the child. In order to
further assess these possibilities we turn to a separate analysis by gender.

Estimates by Gender
There are well-documented differences in ADHD prevalence and in the use of
stimulants between boys and girls: For example, Schwarz and Cohen (2013) find that
15% of U.S. boys and only 7% of U.S. girls have ever been diagnosed with ADHD.

19

Figure 4 plots stimulant use rates for Quebec versus the rest of Canada separately for
boys and girls. Due to NLSCY data release rules, we have pooled observations by twosurvey year time periods. Thus, the first point in the graphs shows the rate of stimulant
use indicated in 1994 and 1996 survey responses and it is our pre-policy observation; the
remaining points represent stimulant use rates for post-policy years. What is clear is that
while both boys and girls increased stimulant use substantially after the policy change,
the effect is much larger among boys.
Table 6 shows our estimates of the effect of the policy change on take up of
stimulants by gender. Column (1) shows that among boys, there was a strong increase in
the use of stimulants in Quebec post policy change. However, column (2) shows that
there was no differential impact among children with higher ADHD scores. In other
words boys with low levels of ADHD symptoms were just as likely to take up stimulants
as those with high ADHD scores post policy change, suggesting that the marginal boy
taking stimulants had lower levels of ADHD symptoms post policy change. Columns (3)
and (4) show the comparable estimates for girls. The story for girls is quite different,
suggesting that the increase in stimulant use post policy change was concentrated among
girls with high ADHD scores, and that there was no increase in usage among girls with
low ADHD scores.
Table 7 shows estimates of the medium-term impacts of the policy on boys and
girls. The estimates for girls suggest that the negative effects of the policy change are
confined to girls who had initially high ADHD scores, which makes sense, since these are
the only girls who increased stimulant use as a result of the policy change. Among these

20

girls, there are increases in unhappiness, deteriorations in relations with parents, and
reductions in math scores.
For boys, the DD coefficient estimates on the Quebec post-policy indicator suggest
that the policy change is associated with an increase in grade repetition among all boys;
however, this result could be part of a general trend towards greater use of grade
repetition among boys in Quebec. Among boys with higher ADHD scores, there are
deteriorations in relations with parents and an even larger increase in grade repetition post
policy change. These estimates suggest that the upswing in stimulant use following the
policy change had larger negative effects on boys with ADHD than on those without,
even though stimulant use increased for boys with and without ADHD symptoms. It is
possible that the negative effects of increased stimulant use – for example the crowding
out of other types of intervention –were greater for boys with more severe ADHD
symptoms since they had greater need for these interventions.
Turning to the results for long-term outcomes which are shown in Table 8, the
estimates suggest that the policy impacted girls with ADHD but not boys. Specifically
girls with higher initial ADHD scores were more likely to have suffered from depression,
and less likely to have any post-secondary education, the more they were exposed to the
post-policy change regime.

Robustness checks
We performed a number of specification checks to test the robustness of our
findings. First we re-estimated the triple difference models excluding children with
physical chronic conditions. These children may have benefited from increased access to

21

other medications, which could have affected outcomes as well. However, the estimates
are quite similar in this sub-sample. Estimates are shown in Appendix Table 4. Since
asthma is the most common physical chronic condition among the children in our sample,
we also asked whether there was an increase in ventilator use following the policy change.
Such an improvement in the treatment of asthma could have had independent effects on
children’s outcomes. We find insignificant coefficients on the DDD estimates for an
increase in ventilator use, unlike our estimates for increases in the use of stimulants.11
The results are reported in Appendix Table 4.
A second possible concern is that our triple difference, despite focusing on the
children who were most likely to benefit from stimulant use, could be picking up the
effect of contemporaneous policy changes. One important policy change that happened
around the same time was the introduction of subsidized day care in Quebec. Baker et al
(2008) find negative effects of exposure to subsidized day care programs in Quebec on a
number of child outcomes. To make sure that we are not confounding these two policy
changes, we re-estimated our models limiting the sample to children born in 1991 or
earlier – that is, to those unaffected by the childcare policy change. Although this
restriction greatly reduces the sample size, we continue to find negative effects on math
scores and grade repetition. These estimates are reported in Appendix Table 4.
We have focused above on unhappiness and depression given that these are the
most prevalent mental health conditions (besides ADHD) in our sample. However, given
that other measures of mental health are available, we also created a composite mental
health measure. Using the unhappiness score, along with similarly constructed scores
measuring anxiety and physical aggression, we standardized and then averaged the scores
11

We use an indicator for asthma diagnoses as the third difference in this robustness check.

22

to construct an overall composite mood score. We continued to find positive and
significant coefficient estimates (reflecting an increase in mood and behavioral problems)
for girls. These results are also reported in Appendix Table 4.
Finally we conduct a series of placebo tests using data excluding observations
from Quebec. We define placebo policy change dates every two years, from 1995 to
2005, and policy change regions in Ontario, British Columbia, the prairie provinces
(Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba), and the maritime provinces (Newfoundland,
Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island). We then estimate equations (2)
and (3) for each placebo year-region combination, resulting in a total of 24 placebo DDD
coefficient estimates for each model. We plot the distributions of these estimates in
Appendix Figures 1 and 2; in both cases, the vertical line denotes the DDD coefficient
estimate derived from the model estimation using the true policy change in Quebec in
1997. The figures reveal that the true coefficient estimates fall in the tails of the placebo
distributions, suggesting that if the policy had been ineffective – as the placebo changes
are by definition – we would be very unlikely to have generated estimates as large in
magnitude as those that we find. The lack of any systematic or robust relationship
between the experiment and the stimulant use outcomes in the placebo context provides
some confidence that we are not picking up a spurious correlation in the true policy
experiment setting.

Discussion and Conclusions
This paper examines the effect of a “natural experiment” in Quebec that greatly
expanded access to stimulant medication, and the take up of stimulants among children
with ADHD. One might have anticipated that increases in access to medication would be
23

associated with improved outcomes among these children. Instead, we actually find
some evidence of negative effects. Some of these negative effects are consistent with
known possible side effects of stimulant medication, especially depression.
We find little evidence of positive effects on academic outcomes or schooling
attainment. In fact, we find deterioration in important academic outcomes including
grade repetition and math scores. When we examine the effects of the policy by gender,
we find that stimulant use among boys increased greatly, but that it increased equally
among boys with high and low levels of initial ADHD symptoms. Among girls, the
increase in stimulant use was more concentrated among children with initially high levels
of ADHD symptoms. However, the increase in stimulant use among girls with ADHD
was associated with increases in unhappiness and the probability that a girl had
depression, decreases in math scores, and a decline in the probability of having any postsecondary education.
Our findings of potentially negative effects associated with the increase in
stimulant medications use raise the question of mechanisms. How is it possible that an
increase in the utilization of medication for ADHD could be associated with worse
academic performance?
One possibility is that an increase in the availability of stimulants makes it more
likely that a child will be treated for ADHD and that treatment triggers harmful social
stigma or other consequences, such as being placed in special education.12 A second
possibility is that medication is a substitute for other types of cognitive and behavioral

12

The NLSCY dataset does not include information on special education.

24

interventions that might be necessary to help the child learn. By making children less
disruptive, ADHD medication could decrease the attention that they receive in the
average classroom and reduce the probability that the child receives other needed services.
A third possibility is that the medication itself, particularly if the dosage is not
appropriately tailored, could have negative effects on emotional wellbeing and learning.
It is important to acknowledge that this is an ecological study which does not shed
light on the question of whether optimal medication use could be beneficial. It is clear
that many children use stimulant medication in a haphazard manner. For example, on
average, among those who ever report using stimulants in our data, children use
stimulants for about 30% of the survey years we observe them. Moreover, the average
child who is ever reported to use stimulants switches twice over the observation period
(between the time they are ages 4-7 and age 15, depending on how old they were in 1994).
While it is possible that some of this churning is measurement error, recall that in the
MTA most children had stopped taking medications 6 to 8 years after follow up. In
addition, while we have no information about dosage, it seems likely that many children
are taking doses of ADHD that are not calibrated to achieve optimal results, even in terms
of short-term behavioral effects.
What our results do speak to, is the effect of a large increase in the use of ADHD
medications in a community, given the usual standard of care available to Quebec
children. In Quebec, as in the U.S., any doctor can prescribe stimulants, and it is not
necessary to have expertise treating ADHD in order to do so. Hence, it is not surprising
that some use is sub-optimal. Our results suggest that observers of the large increases in

25

the use of medication for ADHD in Canada, the U.S., and other countries are right to be
concerned.

References
Aizer, A. “Peer Effects, Institutions, and Human Capital Accumulation: The
Externalities of ADD,” NBER Working Paper # 14354, 2009.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 4th Ed. 1994.
Baker, Michael, Jonathan Gruber and Kevin Milligan. "Universal Child Care, Maternal
Labor Supply, and Family Well-Being," Journal of Political Economy, University of
Chicago Press, 2008, vol. 116(4), pages 709-745.
Barbaresi W.J., S.K. Katusic, R.C. Colligan, A.L. Weaver, S.J. Jacobsen. “Modifiers of
Long-Term School Outcomes for Children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder: Does Treatment with Stimulant Medication Make a Difference? Results from a
Population Based Study,” J Dev Behav Pediatr, 28 #4, 2007: 274-287.
Bedard, A, U. Jain, S.H. Johnson, R. Tannock. “Effects of Methylphenidate on Working
Memory Components: Influence of Measurement,” J Child Psychol Psychiatry, 28 #9,
2007: 872-880.
Cuellar, Alison and Sara Markowitz. “Medicaid Policy Changes in Mental Health Care
and Their Effect on Mental Health Outcomes,” Health Economics, Policy and Law, 2 #1,
2007: 23-49.
Currie, Janet and Robert Kahn. “Children with Disabilities: Introducing the Issue,” in
Children with Disabilities (Princeton: The Future of Children) 22 #1, 2012.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital Accumulation:
The Case of ADHD,” Journal of Health Economics, 25 #6, Nov. 2006, 1094-1118.
Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. “Mental Health in Childhood and Human Capital,” in
Perspectives on the Problems of Disadvantaged Youth, Jonathan Gruber (ed.) (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press for NBER) 2009.

26

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Mental Health in the United States:
Prevalence of Diagnosis and Medication Treatmetn for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder: United States, 2003,” MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 54 #34, 2005: 842-847,
Dalsgaard, S., Skyt Nielson, H., and Simonsen, M., “Long-term Consequences of ADHD
Medication Use for Children’s Human Capital Devleopment,” Aarhus University
Working Paper, 2013.
Douglas, V.I. “Cognitive Control Processes in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,”
in H.C. Quay and A.E. Hogan (eds.) Handbook of Disruptive Behavior Disorders (New
York, NY: Plenum Press) 1999.
Evans, S.W., W.E. Pelahm, B.H. Smith et al. “Dose-Response Effects of
Methylphenidate on Ecologically Valid Measures of Academic Performance and
Classroom Behavior in Adolescents with ADHD,” Exp Clin Psychopharmacol, 9 #2,
2001: 163-175.
Evans, W.N., Morrill, M.S and Parente, S.T., “Measuring inappropriate medical
diagnosis and treatment in survey data: The case of ADHD among school-age children.”
Journal of Health Economics, 29(5), 2010: 657-73.
Fletcher, Jason and Barbara Wolfe. “Child Mental Health and Human Capital
Accumulation: The Case of ADHD Revisited,” Journal of Health Economics, 27 #3,
2008: 794-800.
Fletcher, Jason and Barbara Wolfe. “Long-Term Consequences of Childhood ADHD on
Criminal Activities,” The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 12, 2009: 119138.
Gouvernment du Quebec, La Politique du Medicament, Gouvernment du Quebec, 2007,
www.msss.gouv.qc.ca.
Griffin, Susan, Helen Weatherly, Gerry Richardson and Mike Drummond.
“Methodlogical Issues in Undertaking Independent Cost-Effectiveness Analysis for
NICE: The Case of Therapies for ADHD,” The European Journal of Health Economics, 9
#2, 2008: 137-145.
Joshi, S.V., H.M. Adam. “ADHD, Growth Deficits, and Relationships to Psychostimulant
Use,” Pediatr Rev, 23 #2, 2002: 67-68.
Miech, Richard, Avshalom Caspi, Terrie Moffitt, Bradley Entner Wright, and Phil Silva.
“Low Socioeconomic Status and Mental Disorders: A Longitudinal Study of Selection
and Causation During Young Adulthood,” American Journal of Sociology, 104, 1999,
1096-1131.
Molina, B.S., S.P. Hinshaw, J.M. Swanson et al. “The MTA at 8 Years: Prospective
Follow-Up of Children Treated for Combined Type ADHD in a Multisite Study,” J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry, 48 #5, 2009: 484-500.

27

Morgan, Steve, “Quebec’s Drug Insurance Plan: A Prescription for Canada?” Centre for
Health Services and Policy Research, University of British Columbia, Working Paper
HPRU:98:2D, February 1998.
The MTA Cooperative Group. “A 14-Month Randomized Clinical Trial of Treatment
Strategies for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.” Arch Gen Psychiatry, 56, 1999:
1073-1086.
Nagin, Daniel and Richard E. Tremblay. “Trajectories of Boys’ Physical Aggression,
Opposition, and Hyperactivity on the Path to Physically Violent and Nonviolent Juvenile
Delinquency,” Child Development, 70, 1999, 1181-1196.
Nissen, S.E. “ADHD Drugs and Cardiovascular Risk,” N Engl J Med, 354 #14, 2006:
1445-1448.
Pelham, W.E., C. Carlson, S.E. Sams, G. Vallano, M.J. Dixon, B. Hoza. “Separate and
Combined Effects of Methylphenidate and Behavior Modification on Boys with
Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder in the Classroom,” J Consult Clin Psychol 61 #1,
1993: 506-515.
Polanczyk, G. M.S. De Lima, B.L. Horta, J. Biederman, L.A. Rohde. “TheWorldwide
Prevalence of ADHD: A Systematic Review and Metaregression Analysis,” American
Journal of Psychiatry, 164 #6, 2007: 942-948.
Pomey, Marie Pascale, Forest, P.G., Palley, H., and Elisabeth Martin, “Public/Private
Partnerships for Prescription Drug Coverage: Policy Formulation and Outcomes in
Quebec’s Universal Drug Insurance Program, with Comparisons to the Medicare
Prescription Drug Program in the United States,” The Millbank Quarterly, 85(3), 2007,
pp. 469-498.
Schachter, H.M., B. Pahm, J. King et al. “How Efficacious and Safe is Short-Acting
Methylphenidate for the Treatment of Attention-Deficit Disorder in Children and
Adolescents? A Meta-Analysis,” CMAJ, 165, 2001: 1475-1488.
Scheffler, Richard M., Timothy Brown, Brent Fulton, Stephen Hinshaw, Peter Levine and
Susan Stone. “Positive Association Between Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Medication Use and Academic Achievement During Elementary School,” Pediatrics, 123,
2009: 1273-1279.
Schwarz, Alan and Sarah Cohen, “ADHD Seen in 11 percent of U.S. Children as
Diagnoses Rise,” New York Times, March 31, 2013.
Therapeutics Initiative, “What is the Evidence for Using CNS Stimulants to Treat ADHD
in Children?” Therapeutics Letter, 69, March-May 2008.
U.S. National Institute of Mental Health, “Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder,”
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/attention-deficit-hyperactivitydisorder/medications.shtml, accessed August 2012.

28

Wigal, Tim, James Swanson, Roland Regino, Marc Lerner, Ihab Soliman, Ken Steinhoff,
Suresh Gurbani, and Sharon Wigal. “Stimulant Medications for the Treatment of ADHD:
Efficacy and Limitations,” Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities Research
Reviews, 5, 1999, 215-224.
Zoega, Helga, Kenneth Rothman, Krista Huybrechts, Orn Olafsson, Gisli Baldursson,
Anna Almarsdottir, Solveig Jonsdottir, Matthias Haldorsson, Sonia Hernandez-Diaz,
Unnur Valdimarsdottir. “A Population Based Study of Stimulant Drug Treatment of
ADHD and Academic Progress in Children,” Pediatrics, 130 #1, July 2012: e53-e62.

29

Figure 1: Stimulant use by survey year for Quebec versus the rest of Canada

Source: Authors’ calculations using NLSCY 1994-2008

Figure 2: Stimulant uptake patterns in Quebec versus rest of Canada

Source: Authors’ calculations using NLSCY 1994-2008

30

Figure 3: Ventilator use by survey year for Quebec versus the rest of Canada

Source: Authors’ calculations using NLSCY 1994-2008

Figure 4: Trends in Stimulant Use By Gender, Quebec vs. Rest of Canada

Source: Authors’ calculations using NLSCY 1994-2008

31

Table 1: Changes over time in prescription drug insurance rates in Canada versus the rest of
Canada
PreReform
Year
Quebec
Rest of
Canada

Post -Reform

1996
55%

1998
84%

2002
86%

2003
89%

65%

72%

74%

76%

Source: Authors’ calculations using the National Population Health Survey and Canadian Community Health
Survey.

Table 2: Stimulant use, ADHD symptoms, and child and family characteristics

Variable

Sample 1 - Outcomes observed before age 16
Quebec
Rest of Canada

ADHD score in 1996
Stimulants, waves 1 and 2
Stimulants, waves 3 and up

2.83 (2.42)
0.016
0.049

2.65 (2.31)
0.014
0.023

0.47 (0.80)
0.93 (0.26)
10.02 (4.49)
0.07

0.53 (0.89)
0.85 (0.36)
8.27 (4.37)
0.02

Child is male
Child is first born
Permanent Household income
Two-parent household
Family size
Mother age at birth
Mother high school grad
Mother is working
PMK is an immigrant

0.51
0.55
$58,958(33087)
0.82
3.99 (0.93)
27.98 (4.78)
0.85
0.71
0.04

0.51
0.50
$64,518(36938)
0.84
4.12 (0.93)
28.14 (5.13)
0.90
0.75
0.09

Number of children in sample 1
Number of obs. In sample 1

2,478
10,622

10,471
44,617

Medium-term Outcomes
Unhappiness Score (6 pt)
Parent relationship
Standardized Math Score
Repeat a grade since last interview

Child and Family Characteristics

Table 2, cont.

Variable

Sample 2 - Outcomes observed after age 16
Lives in Quebec
Rest of Canada
(cycle 1)
(cycle 1)

ADHD score in 1996
Ever Stimulants
# Surveys used Stimulants, given ever used
Post-1997 Years used Stim., given ever
used

2.80(2.44)
0.09
2.21(1.26)

2.54(2.32)
0.05
2.06(1.26)

1.91(1.30)

1.56(1.22)

5.84(4.73)
0.85
0.77

6.53(4.99)
0.90
0.65

Child is male
Child is first born
Permanent household income
Two-parent household in 1994
Family size in 1994
Mother age at birth
Mother high school grad in 1994
PMK is an immigrant

0.50
0.53
$58,711 (34,333)
0.89
3.93 (0.89)
27.77 (4.59)
0.82
0.07

0.50
0.46
$64,669 (37,075)
0.88
4.06 (0.90)
27.96 (5.09)
0.87
0.05

Number of children in sample 2

1,654

6,989

Long-term outcomes
Self-assessed depression score (36 pt)
High school grad
Some post-secondary

Child and Family Characteristics

Standard errors of continuous variables in parentheses.

Table 3. Effects of law change on stimulant use
Outcome: Uses Stimulants

Outcome: Ever Used Stimulants

(1)
DD - FE
-0.0072**
(0.0027)

(2)
DD - No FE
-0.0092**
(0.0036)

(3)
DDD - FE
-0.0172**
(0.0031)

(4)
DDD - No FE
-0.0133**
(0.0040)

Quebec

-0.0118
(0.0209)

0.0154**
(0.0027)

-0.0256
(0.0243)

0.0101**
(0.0039)

After 1997 * Quebec

0.0247**
(0.0046)

0.0287**
(0.0062)

0.0123**
(0.0030)

1996 ADHD Score

-

-

After 1997*1996 ADHD Score

-

Quebec*1996 ADHD Score

Aft. 1997*Que.*ADHD Sc.

After 1997

N
Age Range

(5)
DD
0.0003
(0.0036)

(6)
DDD
0.0078**
(0.0033)

Quebec in 1994

-0.0120
(0.0121)

0.0181
(0.0253)

0.0159**
(0.0052)

Elig Yrs * Quebec

0.0196**
(0.0034)

0.0073
(0.0085)

-

0.0105**
(0.0006)

1996 ADHD Score

-

0.0403**
(0.0047)

-

0.0039**
(0.0008)

0.0014
(0.0010)

Elig Yrs*1996 ADHD Score

-

-0.0038**
(0.0012)

-

-

0.0051
(0.0083)

0.0004
(0.0009)

Quebec*1996 ADHD Score

-

-0.0201**
(0.0098)

-

-

0.0043**
(0.0021)

0.0048**
(0.0018)

EligYrs*Que.94*96 ADHD Sc.

-

0.0056
(0.0032)

55,239

55,239

55,239

55,239

8,643

8,643

2-15

2-15

2-15

2-15

0-9 in 1994

0-9 in 1994

U16 Survey years after 1997
(Elig Yrs)

N
Age Range

Notes: Controls include: Year-of-birth fixed effect, age fixed effect, province fixed effect, family permanent income, indicator of pmk immigrant, male, first born, log family
size, indicator for two-parent family, mother's age at birth, mother teen birth, indicator if pmk is male. Controls measured in each survey wave in columns 1-4, and in 1994 in
columns 5 and 6. Standard errors in columns 1-4 are in brackets and are clustered at the province-year level. Standard errors in columns 5 and 6 are clustered at the cohortprovince level. ** indicates significant at 95%.

Table 4: Child Fixed Effects Estimate of Exposure to Policy on Contemporaneous Outcomes
Dependant Variable:
After 1997

Did Not Repeat Grade
(1)
(2)
0.0247**
0.0207**
(0.0063)
(0.0061)

Math score
(3)
(4)
-0.3179**
-0.2836**
(0.1072)
(0.1129)

Unhappiness
(5)
(6)
-0.2846**
-0.1977**
(0.0176)
(0.0285)

Relationship w Parents
(7)
(8)
0.0227**
-0.0015
(0.0094)
(0.0109)

Quebec

0.0578**
(0.0282)

0.0225
(0.0388)

0.2730
(0.2410)

-0.1511
(0.2828)

-0.0023
(0.1133)

0.2054
(0.1280)

0.0480
(0.1157)

-0.0665
(0.1330)

After 1997 * Quebec

-0.0581**
(0.0068)

-0.0228**
(0.0076)

-0.1883
(0.1927)

-0.0694
(0.1929)

0.1232**
(0.0152)

0.0769
(0.0475)

-0.0353**
(0.0073)

-0.0014
(0.0099)

After 1997*1996 ADHD Score

-

0.0016
(0.0009)

-

-0.0141**
(0.0056)

-

-0.0326**
(0.0076)

-

0.0088**
(0.0021)

Quebec*1996 ADHD Score

-

0.0117
(0.0141)

-

0.1369**
(0.0557)

-

-0.0894**
(0.0366)

-

0.0789**
(0.0348)

Aft. 1997*Que.*ADHD Sc.

-

-0.0128**
(0.0016)

-

-0.0403**
(0.0062)

-

0.0172
(0.0145)

-

-0.0124**
(0.0033)

44,968

44,968

32,515

32,515

36,458

36,458

22,554

22,554

4-15

4-15

5-15

5-15

2-11

2-11

4-9

4-9

N
Age Range

Notes: See Table 3. Models include child fixed effect. Standard errors clustered at the province-year level. ** indicates significance at the 95% level.

Table 5: Effects of Exposure to the Policy on Long-Term Outcomes
Dependant Variable:
U17 Survey years after 1996
(Elig Yrs)

Depression Score
(1)
(2)
0.3696**
0.4226**
(0.0793)
(0.1149)

High School grad
(3)
(4)
-0.0028
-0.0066
(0.0047)
(0.0061)

Some Post-sec
(5)
(6)
-0.0005
-0.0096
(0.0096)
(0.0122)

Quebec in 1994

0.6756
(0.3817)

1.6972**
(0.4795)

-0.2191**
(0.0307)

-0.2430**
(0.0448)

-0.1265**
(0.0377)

-0.2068**
(0.0662)

Elig Yrs * Quebec

-0.0876
(0.0883)

-0.3073**
(0.1413)

0.0498**
(0.0097)

0.0675**
(0.0164)

0.0666**
(0.0142)

0.0868**
(0.0219)

1996 ADHD Score

-

0.3414**
(0.0923)

-

-0.0206**
(0.0062)

-

-0.0447**
(0.0089)

Elig Yrs*1996 ADHD Score

-

-0.0288
(0.0274)

-

0.0019
(0.0018)

-

0.0046
(0.0026)

Quebec*1996 ADHD Score

-

-0.4340**
(0.1242)

-

0.0125
(0.0133)

-

0.0382**
(0.0163)

EligYrs*Que.94*96 ADHD Sc.

-

0.0867**
(0.0402)

-

-0.0067
(0.0043)

-

-0.0084
(0.0048)

6,493

6,493

4,676

4,676

4,676

4,676

N

Notes: Sample includes children 0-9 in 1994. See Table 3 notes. Standard errors clustered at the province-cohort level.
** indicates significance at the 95% level.

Table 6: Effects of the Law Change on Stimulant Use By Gender
Outcome: Uses Stimulants
(1)
Boys

(2)
Girls

Outcome: Ever Used Stimulants
(3)
Boys

(4)
Girls

After 1997
-0.0255**
(0.0052)

-0.0077**
(0.0022)

U16 Survey years after 1997
(Elig Yrs)

0.0107**
(0.0052)

0.0032
(0.0038)

0.0070
(0.0325)

-0.0651
(0.0391)

Quebec in 1994

-0.0499
(0.0513)

0.0580**
(0.0182)

0.0299**
(0.0058)

-0.0031
(0.0042)

Elig Yrs * Quebec

0.0254
(0.0160)

-0.0043
(0.0040)

-

-

1996 ADHD Score

0.0525**
(0.0061)

0.0228**
(0.0071)

After 1997*1996 ADHD Sc.

0.0049**
(0.0012)

0.0022**
(0.0009)

Elig Yrs*1996 ADHD Score

-0.0050**
(0.0015)

-0.0018
(0.0016)

Quebec*1996 ADHD Score

0.0009
(0.0117)

0.0154
(0.0105)

Quebec*1996 ADHD Score

-0.0057
(0.0178)

-0.0293**
(0.0092)

Aft. 1997*Que.*ADHD Sc.

0.0004
(0.0025)

0.0078**
(0.0021)

EligYrs*Que.94*96 ADHD Sc.

0.0021
(0.0056)

0.0076**
(0.0021)

27,971

27,268

4,333

4,310

2-15

2-15

0-9 in 1994

0-9 in 1994

Quebec

After 1997 * Quebec

1996 ADHD Score

N
Age Range

Notes: See Table 3. Columns 1 and 2 include child fixed effect and standard errors clustered at the year-province level are reported in parentheses.
Standard errors in columns 3 and 4 are clustered at the cohort-province level. ** indicates significance at the 95% level.

Table 7: Child Fixed Effects Estimate of Exposure to Policy on Contemporaneous Outcomes, by Gender
Dependant Variable:
Boys
After 1997 * Quebec

Aft. 1997*Que.*ADHD Sc.

N
Girls
After 1997 * Quebec

Aft. 1997*Que.*ADHD Sc.

N
Age Range

(1)
0.1300*
(0.0666)

Rel. w.
Parents
(2)
-0.0106
(0.0136)

Did Not Rep.
Gr.
(3)
-0.0439**
(0.0091)

-0.0047
(0.0203)

-0.0120**
(0.0057)

-0.0142**
(0.0018)

-0.0257
(0.0134)

18,484

11,457

22,719

16,191

0.0258
(0.0344)

0.0090
(0.0152)

-0.0124
(0.0128)

-0.0063
(0.2027)

0.0430**
(0.0120)

-0.0127**
(0.0060)

-0.0058
(0.0031)

-0.0588**
(0.0210)

19,974

11,097

22,249

16,324

2-11

4-9

4-15

5-15

Unhappiness

Math Sc.
(4)
-0.1299
(0.1712)

Notes: See Table 4. Models include child fixed effect. Standard errors clustered at the province-year level.
** indicates significance at the 95% level.

Table 8: Effects of Exposure to the Policy on Long-Term Outcomes
Dependant Variable:
Boys
Elig Yrs * Quebec

EligYrs*Que.94*96 ADHD Sc.

N
Girls
Elig Yrs * Quebec

EligYrs*Que.94*96 ADHD Sc.

N

Depression Score
(1)
(2)
-0.0223
0.1049
(0.0841)
(0.1932)

High School grad
(3)
(4)
0.0591**
0.0836**
(0.0171)
(0.0242)

Some Post-sec
(5)
(6)
0.0735**
0.0744**
(0.0187)
(0.0271)

-

-0.0317
(0.0630)

-

-0.0091
(0.0047)

-

-0.0017
(0.0058)

3,213

3,280

2,259

2,259

2,259

2,259

-0.1428
(0.1450)

-0.6068**
(0.2221)

0.0439**
(0.0137)

0.0549**
(0.0210)

0.0619**
(0.0195)

0.0942**
(0.0237)

-

0.2025**
(0.0541)

-

-0.0041
(0.0049)

-

-0.0150**
(0.0050)

3,280

3,280

2,417

2,417

2,417

2,417

Notes: See Table 5. Standard errors clustered at the province-cohort level. ** indicates significance at the 95% level.

Data Appendix
Sample and Attrition
Base Sample: Children who were between the ages of 0 and 9 in Cycle 1 (1994). These
children were between the ages of 14 and 23 in Cycle 8 (2008). Table 1 of the appendix
shows the number of children in our base sample surveyed in each cycle of data collection.
Cycle-to-Cycle loss of respondents is due to attrition, with the exception of the large decline in
sample size after the initial year of data collection; the sample size was purposefully reduced
after Cycle 1 due to budgetary restrictions.
Appendix Table 1. Number of children surveyed in each Cycle of data collection
Cycle

Number of children

1

19,397

2

13,189

3

12,793

4

11,321

5

10,753

6

9,848

7

9,581

8

8,861

Children who stayed in the survey sample until Cycle 8 – whom we call “stayers” – did not
exhibit different ADHD symptoms than attriters, as measured by the ADHD screener
questions in Cycle 1 of data collection. However, attriters were more likely to report being on
Ritalin in Cycle 1 than stayers. Attriters were also more likely than stayers to be male, to
come from lower income households, to come from single parent homes and to have mothers
with a high school education or less. Appendix Table 2 compares the number of observations
we would have in the case of no attrition with the actual numbers, for each outcome.

Appendix Table 2: Effects of attrition for each outcome

Outcome
Medium-term outcomes
On stimulants (age 2-15)
Repeat Grade (age 4-15)
Unhappiness Score (age 2-11)
Relationship with Parent (age 4-9)
Math Score (age 5-15)
Long-term outcomes
Ever took stimulants
Depression Score
Completed High School
Some Post-Secondary

Expected
number of
Observations

Actual
number of
observations

72,084
68,278
44,858
27,379
64,788

55,239
44,968
36,458
22,554
32,515

9,747
9,747
6,819
6,819

8,643
6,493
4,676
4,676

Variable Construction
Mental Health Variables
The mental health score variables are all constructed from questions that ask the respondent to
rate the frequency of certain behaviors on a scale from 0 to 2. Scores are constructed by
summing the frequency values for appropriate questions. Higher scores imply more severe
behavior. The section below indicates which questions were combined to create each behavior
score.
1. Short-term Hyperactivity Score:
a) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Can't sit still, is restless or
hyperactive?
b)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is distractible, has trouble
sticking to any activity?

c)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Can't concentrate, can't pay
attention for long?

d)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Cannot settle to anything for
more than a few moments?

e) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is inattentive?
2. Short-term Anxiety and Depression Score:

a)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Seems to be unhappy, sad or
depressed?**

b)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is not as happy as other
c)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is worried?

d)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is nervous, high-strung or
tense?
e)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Has trouble enjoying
him/herself?**

f) HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Is too fearful or anxious?

** Questions marked with asterisks were used to construct the depression score, while
non-marked questions were used to construct the anxiety score.

3. Short-term Physical Aggression Score:
a)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Gets into many fights?

b)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: When another child
accidentally hurts %him/her% (such as by bumping into %him/her%), assumes
that the other child meant to do it, and then reacts with anger and fighting?

c)HOW OFTEN WOULD YOU SAY THAT %FNAME%: Kicks, bites, hits other children?
4. Self-assessed over-16 Anxiety and Depression Score:
How often have you felt or behaved this way during the past week (7 days)?

(a) I did not feel like eating; my appetite was poor.
(b) I felt I could not shake off the blues even with help from my family or friends.

(c) I had trouble keeping my mind on what I was doing.
(d) I felt depressed.
(e) I felt that everything I did was an effort.
(f) I felt hopeful about the future. **
(g) My sleep was restless.
(h) I was happy. **
(i) I felt lonely.
(j) I enjoyed life. **
(k) I had crying spells
(l) I felt people disliked me.
** 0 to 2 scales for the marked questions were reversed when calculating the overall score.
5. Ever Diagnosed with a Mental or Psychological Disorder: We construct this indicator
from a question asked of all youths age 16 and over: “Has a health professional ever diagnosed
you with an emotional, psychological or nervous disorder?” Youths who indicated ever
having a diagnosed disorder were given a 1 for this indicator variable.

EDUCATION VARIABLES
1. Standardized Math Score: The mathematics test was administered in school to children
in grade 2 or higher and was composed of 15questions drawn from the Canadian Achievement
Test (CAT2). The difficulty of the questions increased as the child advanced in school,
meaning that the age-specific average score did not differ substantially from the overall
average score. We therefore standardized the score irrespective of age.
2. Repeated Grade: Parents of all children up to age 15 were asked whether the child had
repeated a grade since the previous interview 2 years prior. We used the answers to these
questions to create an indicator that equals 1 if the child has not repeated a grade in the
previous 2 years.
4. Age-15 Standardized Math Score: Using the same mathematics test score that we employ
in the short-term analysis, we identify the final math score recorded for each child, which is
recorded at age 15.

7. Completed High School, Some Post-Secondary: These variables are constructed from the
NLSCY education status variables. We begin with Cycle 8 data and observe whether the
youth has graduated high school, begun post-secondary education or completed postsecondary education. High school graduates and those pursuing or having completed postsecondary education receive a 1 for the High School Graduation variable, while those who
indicate not having completed high school receive a 0. Similarly, those pursuing or having
completed post-secondary education get a 1 for the Some Post-Secondary indicator, while

high school drop outs and high school graduates who did not continue their education receive
a 0.
If the Cycle 8 education status variable is missing, we look back to the most recent Cycle of
data collection with a non-missing education status variable. We assign missing values for
both indicator variables for youths who, at last contact, were still in high school or whose
education status is unknown and have never reported completing high school.

Quebec Insurance Program Detail
Costs of the Basic Public Plan for people 18-64 not covered by Private Insurance
Appendix Table 3: Quebec insurance rates

Year

1997
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006

CoYearly
Insurance
Premium
Rate %
175
422
460
494
521
538

Monthly
Deductible

25
27.4
28
28.5
28.5
29

8.33
9.13
9.6
10.25
11.90
12.10

Maximum
Yearly Out
of Pocket
Contribution
750
822
839
857
857
857

Children up to age 17 of people insurance under the public plan are eligible for free
prescription medication.
Source: Gouvernment du Quebec, 2007

Appendix Table 4: Robustness Checks
Robustness Check

Dependent Variable
On Ventilator
Ages 0-15
N
On Ritalin
Ages 0-15
N
Unhappiness Score
Ages 2-11
N
Relationship With Parent
Ages 4-9
N
No repeated grade
Ages 4-16
N
Math Score
Ages 4-16
N
Mood Score
Age 2-11
N

Ventilator
Use

Kids w/o
other
chronic

Kids born
1985-1991

DDD

DDD

DDD

(1)
0.001
(0.001)
55,239
-

(2)
-

(3)
-

0.007**
(0.003)
38,314
0.027
(0.017)
26,011
-0.021**
(0.005)
16,192
-0.008**
(0.002)
30,368
-0.034**
(0.014)
21,692
-

0.002
(0.002)
28,819
-0.027
(0.019)
16,765
0.016
(0.016)
16,765
-0.011**
(0.002)
27,158
-0.037**
(0.007)
19,238
-

-

-

-

-

-

Composite Mood Score
Boys DDD
(4)
-

Girls DDD
(5)
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-0.0126
(0.0228)
18,484

0.0353**
(0.0156)
17,974

Appendix Figure 1: Placebo test results for contemporaneous stimulant use

Appendix Figure 2: Placebo test results for ever used stimulants

