                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         JUVENILE INCARCERATION, HUMAN CAPITAL AND FUTURE CRIME:
                EVIDENCE FROM RANDOMLY-ASSIGNED JUDGES

                                              Anna Aizer
                                          Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.

                                        Working Paper 19102
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19102


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We would like to thank David Autor, Janet Currie, Pedro Dal Bo, Lawrence Grazian, Lawrence Katz,
Roberto Rigobon, Tom Stoker, Tavneet Suri, Heidi Williams and seminar participants at Aarhus University,
Harvard University, MIT, NBER Childrens/Labor Studies Summer Institute, and the University of
Maryland. We would like to acknowledge the Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of
Chicago for the creation of the Integrated Database on Child and Family Programs in Illinois (IDB)
that was used in this study. All findings, interpretations and conclusions based on the use of the IDB
are solely our responsibility and do not necessarily represent the views of the Chapin Hall Center for
Children or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Anna Aizer and Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Juvenile Incarceration, Human Capital and Future Crime: Evidence from Randomly-Assigned
Judges
Anna Aizer and Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 19102
June 2013
JEL No. H76,K42

                                               ABSTRACT

Over 130,000 juveniles are detained in the US each year with 70,000 in detention on any given day,
yet little is known whether such a penalty deters future crime or interrupts social and human capital
formation in a way that increases the likelihood of later criminal behavior. This paper uses the incarceration
tendency of randomly-assigned judges as an instrumental variable to estimate causal effects of juvenile
incarceration on high school completion and adult recidivism. Estimates based on over 35,000 juvenile
offenders over a ten-year period from a large urban county in the US suggest that juvenile incarceration
results in large decreases in the likelihood of high school completion and large increases in the likelihood
of adult incarceration. These results are in stark contrast to the small effects typically found for adult
incarceration, but consistent with larger impacts of policies aimed at adolescents.


Anna Aizer
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
anna_aizer@brown.edu

Joseph J. Doyle, Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-515
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu
1       Introduction

Crime is a social problem with enormous costs. At the end of 2011, over 2.2 million people were

incarcerated in the US, and an additional 4.8 million were under supervision of correctional

systems (Glaze and Parks, 2012). Federal, state, and local expenditures on corrections exceed

$82 billion annually, with the direct expenditures on the wider justice system totalling over $250

billion (Kennelman, 2012). Meanwhile, private expenditures that aim to prevent the externalities

associated with crime are thought to be of a similar magnitude.1

        A growing body of empirical research has sought to better understand the consequences of

punitive policies by estimating the impact of incarceration on future employment, earnings and

criminal activity. In general, researchers have found that incarceration has a minimal impact on

future employment and earnings and mixed results with respect to recidivism.

        Most of the existing work focuses on adult offenders, however, and estimated effects of

incarceration may not apply to juveniles whose incarceration rates have increased even faster

than those of adults over the last 20 years. In 2010, the stock of detainees stood at 70,792 juveniles

in the US, a rate of 2.3 per 1,000 aged 10-19 (OJJDP, 2011). Including those under correctional

supervision, the US has a juvenile corrections rate that is five times higher than the next highest

country (Hazel, 2008). In a life-cycle context, incarceration during adolescence may interrupt

human and social capital accumulation at a critical moment leading to reduced future wages in

the legal sector and greater criminal activity. More generally, interventions during childhood are

thought to have greater impacts compared to interventions for young adults due to propagation

effects (see, for example, Cunha et al., 2006), and criminal activity is a particularly important

context to consider such effects due to the negative externalities associated with it.2

        This paper aims to estimate causal effects of juvenile incarceration on human capital accumu-

lation, as measured by high school completion, and recidivism as an adult. Estimation of such
    1
     Criminal activity has received considerable attention from economists following Becker (1968). Papers and re-
views include Levitt (1998, 2004); Freeman (1996); Glaeser and Sacerdote (1999); Jacob and Lefgren (2003); Di Tella
and Schargrodsky , forthcoming; Lee and McCrary (2005); Lochner and Moretti (2004), among others.
   2
     When considering the determinants of criminal activity dominated by young adults, large effects of juvenile
interventions are plausible. See, for example, Currie and Tekin (2006).




                                                        1
relationships is complicated by the fact that juveniles who are incarcerated differ from those

who are not. They have likely committed more serious crimes and their underlying propensity

to drop out of school and commit a crime in the future may be higher than that of juveniles

who were not committed: this would bias OLS estimates of the relationship between juvenile

incarceration and both high school completion and adult incarceration upwards (in absolute

magnitude). A second complicating factor is that effects for juveniles on the margin of juve-

nile incarceration may differ from the average juvenile, and it is the former group that is most

likely to be affected by policy changes. A third complicating factor is the dearth of data that in-

cludes information on juvenile incarceration and long-term outcomes. Survey data is generally

insufficient to estimate the impact of juvenile incarceration on future outcomes due to a lack of

sufficient sample sizes given low rates of juvenile incarceration in the general population and

underreporting of criminal activity and incarceration.

       Our estimation strategy addresses each of these complicating factors. First, our identifica-

tion strategy exploits plausibly exogenous variation in juvenile detention stemming from the

random assignment of cases to judges who vary in their sentencing. With this strategy we ad-

dress the issue of negative selection into juvenile incarceration and estimate effects for those at

the margin of incarceration where the judge assignment matters for the incarceration decision.

This strategy is similar to that used by Kling (2006) and Di Tella and Schargrodsky (forthcoming)

to estimate the impact of length of sentence on labor market outcomes and recidivism, respec-

tively, among adults.3 But unlike previous work, we use it in a context of juvenile offending

where human capital accumulation may still be in its formative stages, and thus the long term

effects may well be greater.

       Second, we do not use survey data, but rather a unique source of linked administrative data

for over 35,000 juveniles over 10 years who came before a juvenile court in Chicago, Illinois.

These data were linked to both public school data for the same city and adult incarceration data

for the same state to investigate effects of juvenile incarceration on high school completion and
   3
     Chang and Schoar (2008) and Dobbie and Song (2013) employ a similar strategy using judges assigned to
bankruptcy cases, Maestas, Mullen and Strand (forthcoming) use disability examiner propensities to approve dis-
ability claims, and Doyle (2008) uses case worker propensities to place children in foster care.



                                                      2
adult imprisonment.

   We find that juvenile incarceration reduces the probability of high school completion and

increases the probability of incarceration later in life. While some of this relationship reflects

omitted variables, even when we control for potential omitted variables using IV techniques,

the relationships remain strong. In OLS regressions with minimal controls, those incarcerated

as a juvenile are 39 percentage points less likely to graduate from high school and are 41 per-

centage points more likely to have entered adult prison by age 25 compared with other public

school students from the same neighborhood. Once we include demographic controls, limit our

comparison group to juveniles charged with a crime in court but not incarcerated, and instru-

ment for incarceration, juvenile incarceration is estimated to decrease high school graduation by

13 percentage points and increase adult incarceration by 22 percentage points. The IV results,

while smaller than the initial OLS results, remain large and suggest substantial negative effects

of juvenile incarceration on long term outcomes.

   The main IV estimates and subgroup analyses suggest that marginal cases are at particu-

larly low (high) risk of high school completion (adult incarceration) as a result of juvenile cus-

tody. The results are also consistent with the idea that the timing of incarceration matters: the

strongest results are for juveniles aged 15 and 16 – a critical period of adolescence when incar-

ceration is most likely to end one’s high school education.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in section 2 we summarize the existing theo-

retical and empirical literature on the relationship between incarceration and future outcomes

and provide background information on judge assignment in our context; in section 3 we de-

scribe the data; in section 4 we describe the empirical strategy; section 5 presents the results;

and section 6 offers interpretation and conclusions.




                                                3
2       Background

2.1       A Theory of Crime

In the economic model of crime originally developed by Becker (1968), criminal activity and

participation in the legitimate market are substitutes. In deciding whether to commit a crime,

individuals weigh the net gains of criminal versus legal labor market activity on the basis of the

expected utility to be gained from each. The net gains of criminal activity are a function of the

monetary rewards, the probability of being caught, and the severity of sentence. Net gains of

participation in the legal sector are a function of wages which are largely determined by one’s

human capital.4 According to this model, the probability of incarceration serves as a deterrent

to criminal activity. To the extent that juvenile incarceration makes the cost of later incarceration

more salient, such detention may reduce the likelihood of future criminal activity, all else equal.

However, the standard model of crime takes human capital as given, which is justified if we

consider adults only, for whom years of schooling and other measures of human capital are

already largely determined.5

        In contrast, in a model of juvenile behavior, incarceration can negatively influence human

capital and increase the likelihood future criminal activity through two potential channels. The

first is by encouraging the accumulation of ”criminal capital” (see Bayer, Hjalmarsson, and

Pozen, 2011) and hindering the accumulation of social capital that can aid in job search, lowering

the probability of employment (Granovetter, 1995).6 While these mechanisms are likely more

acute for juveniles, they are also relevant to adults. The second way in which juvenile incar-

ceration can negatively affect human capital accumulation is by interrupting high school com-

pletion and reducing years of schooling, thereby greatly reducing future labor market wages

and increasing future criminal activity (as suggested by Samson and Laub, 1993, 1997). Indeed,
    4
     Freeman (1996) argues that the steady rise in crime witnessed over the 1980s and 90’s (despite the rise in incar-
ceration) reflected the severe depression of the labor market for less skilled men over this period.
   5
     Incarceration can potentially increase the probability of GED receipt among HS drop outs. However, having a
GED is associated with much lower earnings than a high school diploma (Cameron and Heckman, 1993). Moreover,
the existing studies suggest that once one controls for potential selection into GED programs, earning a GED in
prison is not associated with lower recidivism or higher earnings (Wilson et al, 2000; Kling and Tyler, 2007).
   6
     In the criminology literature this is often referred to as deviant labeling (see Bernberg and Krohn, 2003).



                                                          4
there is already an established causal link between dropping out of high school and future crim-

inal activity. Previous work exploiting policy changes that increased the school leaving age in

the US and the UK for identification, shows that fewer years of schooling results in increased

criminal activity (Lochner and Moretti, 2004; Machin, Marie and Vujic, 2011). A more recent

study by Cook and Kang (2013) exploits the discontinuity created by school enrollment cutoff

dates to estimate the impact of schooling on juvenile delinquency. They find that being born

after the cutoff date increases the probability of dropping out of high school, decreases juvenile

delinquency but increases the probability of adult conviction at age 19. Interestingly, these re-

sults hold for girls, but not boys. Our work differs from the existing work in that we directly

investigate whether juvenile incarceration reduces the likelihood of high school graduation and

increases the probability of adult crime.7

       In sum, once one incorporates juveniles in the canonical model of crime, the impact of incar-

ceration on recidivism becomes ambiguous: potentially reducing it (via deterrence) but also po-

tentially increasing it by negatively influencing the formation of social networks, accumulation

of human capital and other factors that might increase the probability of future crime. In this

paper, we test which of the two potential effects of juvenile incarceration dominates by exam-

ining empirically how incarceration as a juvenile influences high school completion – a partial

measure of social and human capital formation – and the likelihood of incarceration later in life.


2.2      Previous Empirical Work

There is very little empirical work examining the impact of incarceration (juvenile or otherwise)

on human capital accumulation.8 Rather, existing empirical research focuses mostly on adults

and falls into two general categories: 1) the relationship between incarceration and recidivism

and 2) the relationship between incarceration and future labor market outcomes. According to
   7
      Lochner (2004) develops a lifecycle model of education, work and crime that considers how a shock to crime
while a teenager can result in dropping out of school and affect subsequent decisions about crime through differences
in accumulated human capital. While this is related to the present work, it does not specifically consider the impact
of an increase in juvenile incarceration.
    8
      A notable exception is Bayer, Hjalmarsson, and Pozen, (2011), already mentioned, who examine the impact of
incarceration on the development of criminal human capital.




                                                         5
the economic model of crime, these two questions are related given the substitutability of labor

market participation and criminal activity.

   The main challenge inherent in estimating the causal impact of incarceration on outcomes

such as high school completion, recidivism or labor market outcomes is to control or other-

wise account for the influence of individual characteristics that may jointly influence incarcera-

tion and future human capital accumulation, criminal activity and labor market outcomes (e.g.,

greater disadvantage including lower levels of cognitive achievement and less self control). The

existing research on recidivism conducted by criminologists yields mixed results. Some work

finds that incarceration increases recidivism (Spohn and Holleran, 2002; Bernburg, Krohn and

Rivera, 2006), others find that it has no effect (Gottfredson, 1999; Smith and Akers, 1993), and

still other work finds that it reduces recidivism (Murray and Cox, 1979 and Brennan and Med-

nick, 1994). However, the work referenced above attempts to address the potential endogeneity

of incarceration by controlling for a limited set of observable characteristics. More recent work

by Di Tella and Schargrodsky (forthcoming) exploits plausibly exogenous variation in assign-

ment to a judge more or less likely to use electronic monitoring/home confinement as opposed

to incarceration for pre-trial detainees as an instrument for incarceration. This approach implic-

itly controls for all unobservables (fixed and changing) that might bias estimates because judges

are randomly assigned to cases. They find that those assigned to incarceration are more likely

to recidivate.

   The existing literature on the impact of male adult incarceration on labor market outcomes,

summarized by Western, Kling and Weiman (2001), generally makes greater attempts to deal

with the potential endogeneity of incarceration. This literature often relies on either compar-

isons between those who have and have not been to jail and including extensive background

controls or panel datasets that enable one to compare earnings before and after a spell of incar-

ceration. Examples of the former include Freeman (1992) and Western and Beckett (1999). Both

find that men who have been incarcerated have lower levels of employment compared with

those who have not been incarcerated, controlling for an extensive set of observable character-

istics. This ”selection on observables” strategy is subject to the criticism that individuals who


                                                6
have been incarcerated may differ on unobservable characteristics that might bias the estimates.

       Examples of research on the impact of male adult incarceration on earnings and employ-

ment following the latter strategy (panel data with fixed effects) include Lott (1992a, 1992b),

Waldfogel (1994), Grogger (1995). These results, all based on US data, generally suggest that

incarceration has a small causal impact on the labor market earnings and employment of adult

men.9 The fixed effect approach, however, cannot be used to study the impact of juvenile incar-

ceration as juveniles have not yet entered the labor market. Moreover, this approach assumes

that the timing of incarceration is exogenous, and that it is not correlated with changing life cir-

cumstances that might also affect labor market outcomes. A shock to labor market productivity,

for example, could lead to criminal behavior rather than the opposite.

       A third approach proposed by Kling (2006) is to instrument for sentence length using an

index of each judge’s sentencing severity. Kling (2006) shows that incarceration length has pos-

itive effects on employment outcomes in the short term and negligible effects on income and

employment up to 9 years after sentencing.

       Despite the extensive research on the economic effects of incarcerating adult men, little is

known about the consequences of incarcerating juveniles on future outcomes. The handful of

fairly recent studies that examine the effect of juvenile criminal activity on education and labor

market outcomes generally find a negative correlation. However, much like the adult incar-

ceration literature, it is difficult to isolate the effect of juvenile criminal activity from the many

confounding factors.

       Most of the existing studies attempt to identify the causal link by controlling for observed

individual characteristics (De Li, 1999; Tanner et al., 1999; Kerley et al., 2004) and unobserved

household fixed characteristics (Hjalmarsson, 2008). Although controlling for household fixed

effects may account for differences in family background or neighborhood characteristics among
   9
     In contrast to results based on US and UK data, Landerso (2012) , exploiting an exogenous increase in length of
incarceration for violent offenders in Denmark, finds that longer sentence lengths (from 1 month to 2 months) result
in greater probabilities of future employment and higher wages. He attributes the results to the positive impact of
rehabilitation services available in Danish prisons. These results are likely not generalizable to the US as prisoners
in the US have access to few rehabilitative services. For example, according to a 2012 GAO report, 31,000 prisoners
are enrolled in drug rehabilitation programs, while another 51,000 remain on waiting lists.




                                                          7
juvenile offenders, the small number of siblings in the sample limits identification and general-

izability of the results.10

       Our study attempts to avoid the limitations of most of the existing research on juveniles by

applying instrumental variable techniques to a large dataset from a very large urban area in the

US. The data and strategy are described in greater detail in the next section.


2.3      Our Context: The Juvenile Justice System & Judge Assignment

In Chicago, juvenile offenders of minor crimes are often dealt with directly by police. Only

after a number of smaller infractions, or a major infraction, will a child enter the juvenile court

system.11

       When juveniles are charged with a crime in juvenile court, they are assigned to a calendar

which corresponds to the youth’s neighborhood of residence. Calendars generally have one or

two judges that usually preside over cases assigned to them. Further, there are a large number of

cases that are heard by judges that cover the calendar when the main judge(s) are not available.

These judges are known as ”swing judges.” Given the frequency with which these judges hear

cases, they are a large part of the structure in this court system.

       Within a calendar, the judge assignment is a function of the sequence with which cases hap-

pen to enter into the system and the judge availability which is set in advance. In particular,

there does not appear to be scope for influencing the first judge seen. It is at the first court hear-

ing, for example, that juveniles meet their public defenders (who are also assigned based on day

of hearing) and learn who the judge will be. Conversations with court administrators confirm

that these assignments should be effectively random, and we will test the relationship between

observable characteristics and judge assignment below.

       One exception to calendar assignment based on residence of the juvenile is youths charged
  10
      Hjalmarsson (2008) identifies the effect of juvenile incarceration on high school completion using only 9 house-
holds. This is because the sample only contains 9 households that have at least one family member who is convicted
while the other is incarcerated.
   11
      Every juvenile arrest is reviewed two times before proceeding to juvenile court: first, by the police and a second
time by the prosecutor’s office. At each review the juvenile’s case can be disposed. Only those cases not dismissed
by the police or the prosecutor proceed to juvenile court.




                                                           8
with a weapons offense. Over our time period, these youths can be assigned to a separate cal-

endar that oversees such offenses, but assignment to a judge within the ”weapons” calendar is

still based on the sequence of court cases being heard. We account for this differential treatment

of weapons charges in our analysis, as described in the section on empirical strategy.

       In terms of sentencing, judges have a number of options available to them. We focus on the

decision to place a child in custody, usually in the Cook County Juvenile Temporary Detention

Center which is available for children aged 10-16 – the ages applicable for juvenile offenses in

Illinois. These sentences are indeterminate in length, but typically last 1 to 2 months including

pre-trial detention. Though rare, juveniles may also be sentenced to a juvenile facility run by the

Department of Corrections where typical stays are between 6 months and 2 years. If not placed

in custody, nearly all juveniles are placed on probation (Peters et al., 2002). Some are placed

in home monitoring and curfew programs. Given the ubiquity of probation among those not

placed in custody, we have found that the distinguishing characteristic across judges is whether

or not the child is placed in custody. As a result, our empirical approach necessarily estimates

the effects of incarceration rather than the number of weeks or months in detention. Further, it

appears that the juvenile incarceration rate in this state is similar to the average for the US as a

whole, which is important if we wish to apply the results to other jurisdictions.12

       While the child is in custody, he or she can continue attending a school located in the facility

and run by the Chicago Public Schools. In this way, truancy may fall when a child is placed

in custody. This could improve a juvenile’s likelihood of completing school. At the same time,

the incarceration interrupts the time they spend at their usual school outside of custody, which

could result in a greater likelihood of dropping out of school once released.
  12
     Juvenile incarceration rates per 100,000 range from 53 to 440 across the 50 US states with an average 225. In
Illinois , the rate (178) is similar to the average for the US, suggesting that the state is not an outlier in its juvenile
incarceration tendencies.




                                                            9
3         Data Description

3.1        Data Sources

The data come from three primary sources: Chicago Public Schools (1990-2006), the Juvenile

Court of Cook County (1991-2006), and the Illinois Department of Corrections (1993-2008). The

data were linked using identifiers including name, date of birth, and address information,

by the Chapin Hall Center for Children, a child welfare research institute - and a leader in

administrative-data linkage - located at the University of Chicago (Goerge, Van Voorhis, and

Lee, 1994).

         Our baseline population are all children found in the Chicago Public School (CPS) data who

are at least 13 years old. The CPS data come from a system that characterizes each child by his or

her age, race, sex, birth year, measures of special education needs, as well as the US Census tract

of residence. We have aggregated each student's residence to one of 76 long-standing neighbor-

hoods in Chicago, 67 of which are included in our analysis dataset.13 Results controlling for the

tract itself will be reported in the robustness section.

         The raw Juvenile Court data are at the hearing level. These data include the date, a judge

identifier, the offense, and the disposition, which we use to observe if the child was ever placed

in custody. Unfortunately, the length of time in a juvenile facility is not part of the disposition

- rather, the sentences tend to be indeterminate subject to future hearings. For this reason, we

can only partially calculate the length of time in a facility. As noted above, we found that nearly

all of the variation in the length of time in custody that we can measure stemmed from the

extensive margin: the decision to place a child in custody rather than the time the child spends

in custody.

         The Illinois Department of Corrections data describe each adult prisoner's spell and allow

us to observe whether or not these juveniles are found in adult prison in Illinois later in life.

Further, the data list the offense for which the individuals are incarcerated, and we test the

effects of juvenile incarceration on adult incarceration for different types of offenses.
   On average, a community comprises 14 Census tracts. We use the definitions of community as defined by the
    13

University of Chicago and which can be found here: http://www.lib.uchicago.edu/e/collections/maps/ssrc/


                                                    10
3.2     Sample Construction

One of our main outcomes of interest is adult incarceration by age 25, and to measure this

outcome without censoring, we restrict the sample to those who are at least 25 by 2008 – the

last year of our incarceration data. This also ensures that we do not have censoring with respect

to the high school graduation outcome. There are 440,797 children who meet these criteria and

were in Chicago Public Schools at the age of 13 during our timeframe.

      For those who came before the juvenile court system, we consider each juvenile’s first case in

our data. We restrict the sample to the 98.8% of the cases that included the identifiers necessary

to link across the administrative datasets. An additional 0.35% of the cases did not have a valid

judge code and were dropped given that our identification stems from the judge assignment.

Further, given that we start with Chicago Public School students, we do not consider the 8.0%

of cases that are outside of the Chicago Public School system. We excluded 1,027 cases that

were under the age of 10 or over the age of 16, 226 cases where the judge had fewer than 10

observations, and 6 cases that we observe in our data but were tried as adults (others in that

situation did not enter the juvenile court system at all). Finally, the baseline regressions employ

fixed effects defined at the community x year x weapons offense level (for reasons explained

in the empirical strategy below), and we drop 3,032 cases where the cell defined in this way

contained fewer than 10 observations. This results in 37,692 observations in the juvenile court

data.

      Table A1 reports sample means for the entire Chicago Public School sample and the juvenile

court sample. Both groups have similar birth years, with most of the mass in the 1974-1982 birth

cohorts, but differ along other dimensions. The juvenile court sample is more likely to be male

and African American, less likely to graduate high school and more likely to be incarcerated by

age 25. The graduation rate for the full sample is only 40%, defining transfers as not completing

high school.

      One drawback of the data is that they include school completion (incarceration) outcomes

in the same city (state) as the juvenile court. If individuals move away, we do not observe their



                                                  11
high school completion or their recidivism. Regarding high school completion, among juve-

niles charged with a crime, 3.4% transfer to private school and 10% transfer out of the district,

suggesting that we can accurately measure high school completion for the vast majority of juve-

niles. For the main specification, we code this 13.4% of the sample as non-graduates, but in the

robustness section we present specifications that drop these individuals from the sample alto-

gether and the results remain unchanged. Another 18% of the sample transfer from the Chicago

Public Schools to an adult correctional facility without completing high school. These individ-

uals are also coded as non-high school graduates.14 Again, in the robustness section we present

results that drop these transfers with little impact on the results and also present results using

this measure as an outcome in and of itself (since it indicates adult criminal activity). Regarding

our measure of adult recidivism, data from the 2000 Census show that among those born in

Illinois between 1970 and 1982, by the year 2000 (when they range in age from 18 to 30), three

quarters remain in Illinois, and the rate of migration is lower for those with less education. We

anticipate little bias to be introduced by this form of sample selection.



4        Empirical Framework

4.1        Set Up

Consider a model that relates an outcome such as adult recidivism to juvenile incarceration (JI)

for juvenile i:



                                       Yi = β0 + β1 JIi + β2 Xi + i                                       (1)

         Any assessment of the impact of juvenile incarceration on high school completion and adult

incarceration must address the problem posed by the positive correlation between juvenile in-

carceration and factors such as severity of the crime, criminal history and characteristics of the

juvenile that are also likely to be correlated with the outcomes. In our analysis, we take several
    14
   These individuals can earn a GED in prison, but we do not have that information. Even if they did complete a
GED, a GED confers much lower wages than a high school diploma.



                                                      12
steps to address this. First, we focus the analysis on the first juvenile offense, thereby limit-

ing the sample to those with no history with the juvenile court system, eliminating a potential

source of bias. Second, we present several different specifications that incrementally control

for confounding factors so that we can observe the extent to which omitted variables may be

driving the observed correlations between juvenile incarceration and the outcomes. Initially, we

compare juveniles incarcerated with other children in the public school system from the same

neighborhood. We then present specifications that 1) add controls for multiple demographic

characteristics including race, sex, birth year, and an indicator of special education need, 2) em-

ploy propensity score techniques using these same geographic and demographic controls in an

attempt to further control for omitted variables, and 3) limit the analysis to all juveniles charged

with a crime and brought before the juvenile court, though not necessarily incarcerated, further

controlling for the type of crime (10 categories) and a risk assessment index which is a check-

list of criteria that is applied by the Department of Probation to rate each juvenile for specific

detention-related risks.15

       However, despite the inclusion of an increasingly comprehensive set of controls, there may

still be unobservable characteristics of either the crime or the juvenile that are correlated with

both the probability of juvenile incarceration and future outcomes. In the case of high school

completion, it’s most likely that these unobservable characteristics are negatively correlated

with juvenile incarceration, biasing OLS estimates of the impact of JI downward, and in the

case of adult incarceration, its most likely that the unobservable characteristics are positively

correlated with JI, which would bias OLS estimates of the impact of JI upward.

       In addition, the effects of juvenile incarceration are likely to be heterogeneous, and we could

augment the above model to allow for a random coefficient on juvenile incarceration, which

would allow the effects to vary by juvenile. A concern in estimating such models is a correlated

random coefficient (Bjorklund and Moffitt, 1987), where the placement into custody may be

related to the effect on adult incarceration. That is, judges choose the sentence, and if they
  15
    The scale ranges from 1 to 15 with a higher number indicating greater risk and therefore stronger recommen-
dation for detention. We calculated the index from the charge information. In the models with the charge category
indicators, this index serves to further control for the severity of the charge among those with ”other offenses”.



                                                       13
tailor sentences with the idea of deterring future criminal activity, then a selection bias could

understate the causal effect of juvenile incarceration for cases on the margin of commitment:

those cases most likely affected by policy.

      Our empirical strategy uses a measure of the tendency of a randomly-assigned judge to or-

der a juvenile be placed in custody, Z, as an instrument for juvenile incarceration. Essentially, we

compare high school completion and adult incarceration rates for juveniles assigned to judges

that have different propensities to incarcerate, and interpret any difference as a causal effect of

the change in incarceration associated with the difference in these propensities. These can be

considered marginal cases where the judges may disagree about the custody decision, a mar-

gin of particular policy relevance. In the next subsection, we describe how we calculate the

instrument in greater detail.


4.2     Instrumental Variable Calculation

For each juvenile we assign an instrument that corresponds to the ”incarceration propensity”

of the initial judge. The instrument, which is defined for each juvenile i assigned to judge j is

simply a leave-out mean:

                                                                                
                                                            nj −1
                                                   1             X
                                Zij = dij                              JIk − JIi 
                                                nj − 1
                                                                 k6=i

      Here, dij is an indicator that the judge j corresponds to the one assigned to juvenile i; nj is

the total number of cases seen by judge j; k indexes the juvenile case seen by judge j where JIk

is equal to 1 if the juvenile was incarcerated during the juvenile’s first case. Thus the instrument

is the incarceration rate for the juvenile’s initial case for judge j based on all cases except the

juvenile’s own case. Algebraically, this is the judge fixed effect in a model of custody in the

initial case estimated in a ”leave-out” regression estimated over all years. The resulting two-

stage least squares estimator is a Jackknife Instrumental Variables estimator (JIVE), which is

recommended for models when the number of instruments (the judge fixed effects) is likely to

increase with sample size (Stock, Wright, and Yogo, 2002, Kolesar et al., 2011).


                                                         14
      Our analysis dataset includes 62 judges. The average number of initial cases per judge is

607. Further, more than one judge can hear each juvenile’s case over time.16 The instrument is

based on the incarceration propensity of the first judge assigned for the juvenile’s first offense.

While this may lead to a weaker estimated relationship between the judge’s propensity to in-

carcerate (the instrument) and an individual juvenile’s incarceration status, it has the advantage

of not capturing any (potential) non-random changing of judges. This initial-case incarceration

propensity has a mean of 0.097 with a standard deviation of 0.039. Results will be shown with

alternative measures of the instrument as checks on robustness as well.

      In both the first and second stages of the IV regressions, we also include a vector of commu-

nity x weapons-offense x year fixed effects. Recall that judge assignment is based on community

and whether a weapons charge. Including this fixed effect thus effectively limits the compari-

son to juveniles at risk of being assigned to the same set of judges. With the inclusion of these

controls, we can interpret the within-cell variation in the instrument, Zij , as variation in the

propensity of a randomly assigned judge to incarcerate a juvenile relative to the other juvenile

cases seen from the same neighborhood and with either a weapon or non- weapon offense in

the same year. Meanwhile, the instrumental variable calculation is not conditional on character-

istics of the juvenile or the crime in order to allow a direct examination of the sensitivity of the

results with and without controls.


4.3     Instrument Validity

While we cannot directly test the exclusion restriction, we argue that it is likely met for three

main reasons. First, the judges are assigned in a way that leads to a ”natural randomization” of

cases to judges. We can partially test this empirically in the data by comparing results when we

control for case characteristics and models when we do not. Second, while we do not believe

that judges request to hear particular types of cases, if they did they would use the observable
   16
      35% of the initial cases have the same initial and final judge across all of the hearings. If the initial judge is
missing in the data as it is in 17.8% of the cases, we assign the juvenile to the second judge of record. Over the
course of the criminal proceedings, which often involve multiple hearings, the judge may change either temporarily
or permanently.




                                                          15
characteristics we have in our data. The exclusion restriction conditional on these characteristics

should be as good as random. Last, if judges attempted to hear particular types of offenses

but are randomly assigned within offense type, a re-calculated instrument in the robustness

checks that uses the judge incarceration rate within offense types would itself be unconditionally

exogenous.17

      One concern would be that judges may affect juveniles in other ways besides the likelihood

of juvenile incarceration. For example, a lenient judge may be particularly good at encouraging

school completion and deterring future criminal activity with a stern lecture. It would seem

more plausible that the lenient judges would be less threatening to juveniles. Such a lack of

deterrence may lead juveniles who come before low-incarceration-rate judges to be less likely to

complete school and more likely to commit crimes as a juvenile and in the future. Given that we

find the opposite, such a concern would suggest that our estimates understate the effect of ju-

venile incarceration on adult outcomes. Alternatively, juveniles assigned to high incarceration-

rate judges may sense that the system has treated them unfairly, which may result in higher

recidivism later in life. This would suggest a different interpretation of the effects of juvenile

incarceration in an environment where relatively few are incarcerated.

      Another interpretation issue is that the juvenile incarceration could directly affect adult in-

carceration decisions for individuals in adult courts. While this is an effect we may want to

capture, it is unlikely to drive the adult incarceration results as the juvenile record is not ex-

pected to be used in adult courts: juvenile records can be expunged, unlike adult records.



5     Results

5.1     Instrument & Observable Characteristics

While it is not possible to test whether children with unobservably low (high) risks for high

school completion (incarceration as an adult) are assigned to particular types of judges, it is
  17
     The advantage of the more globally calculated instrument is that it incorporates more information to characterize
judge’s detention propensity.




                                                         16
possible to examine whether there are differences in observable characteristics of the juvenile.

We do this by testing whether the characteristics of juveniles differ based on whether assigned

to a judge with either a high or low propensity to incarcerate (defined by whether above or

below the median propensity to incarcerate). The results (Table 1) show that judges with high

and low propensities to incarcerate are assigned juveniles that are extremely similar in terms of

their gender, race, and special education needs and age at the time of the offense.18


5.2      First Stage: Judge Assignment and Juvenile Incarceration

To consider the first-stage relationship between initial-judge assignment and whether the ju-

venile is ever incarcerated as a juvenile (JI), we estimate the following equation for juvenile

i assigned to judge j in community x weapon-offense x year cell c using a linear probability

model:

                                   JIijc = α0 + α1 Zij + α2 Xi + δc + ijc

       The vector Xi represents demographic controls (indicators for age-at-offense, race, sex, and

special education status) and court measures (indicators for the offense, for each level of a risk-

assessment index, and an indicator that the judge identifier at the first hearing is missing). Sim-

ilar results are found for both the first stage and the instrumental variable results when probit

models are used, which is unsurprising given that the outcome variables are relatively far from

zero.19 Zij refers to the judge’s incarceration rate among juveniles’ initial cases. The mean initial

judge custody rate is 0.09, whereas the mean of the dependent variable in this first-stage model

– an indicator that the juvenile was ever-incarcerated – is 0.23. All standard errors are clustered

at the community level.

       The results of the first stage presented in Table 2 show that the judge’s incarceration rate is

highly predictive of whether an individual will ever be incarcerated as a juvenile. Including ad-

ditional controls in columns 2 and 3 does not change the estimated effect of being assigned to a
  18
     The other set of controls are determined by the court system, such as the offense type, which may be influenced
by the judge assigned to the case. Table 1 reports results for exogenous variables, whereas the results below will be
shown with and without controls for the potentially endogenous control variables determined by the court.
  19
     Results are in Table A5.


                                                         17
strict judge in one’s first court appearance, consistent with the randomness of judge assignment.

Column (3) which includes the full set of controls, reports a coefficient 1.06. The coefficient is

not statistically significantly different from 1, meaning that if a juvenile is assigned to a judge

that is 10% more likely to incarcerate other juveniles in their initial case, he is 10% more likely

to be incarcerated at any time as a juvenile.20 In particular, the estimate suggests that a two

standard deviation increase in the judge incarceration rate would imply an increase in the like-

lihood of juvenile incarceration of 8.5 percentage points – or 37% of the mean rate of juvenile

incarceration. Moreover, all first-stage estimates are precise, with t statistics around 11.


5.3      Juvenile Incarceration and High School Completion

We estimate the impact of incarceration at any time as a juvenile on the probability of graduating

from high school according to the equation below that echoes (1) above:



                                     Yic = β0 + β1 JIi + β2 Xi + ηc + ijc

       Where Yic is an indicator for whether juvenile i in community x weapons-offense x year cell c

graduated from high school, and JIi is an indicator for whether juvenile i was ever incarcerated

as a juvenile. We present both OLS regression results and results in which we instrument for JIi

using the judge incarceration rate of the initial judge j assigned to the juvenile for his first case,

Zij . As with the first stage, we present results both with and without controls (Xi ). When we re-

port results for the full Chicago Public School sample, the year-of-offense and weapons-offense

components of the fixed effects do not apply to those not part of the juvenile justice system. As

a result, those models include community fixed effects and the birth-cohort indicators are used

rather than year effects.

       Table 3 reports the results for high school completion. The table is organized such that with

each column we further control for potential omitted variables so that we can learn about the
  20
    A coefficient greater than one is possible because the incarceration rate (Zij) applies to whether the juvenile was
incarcerated in his first case, whereas the endogenous variable for which we instrument is whether the juvenile was
ever incarcerated as a youth - for his first case or any subsequent cases.




                                                          18
source(s) and size of any bias. In the first three columns, the sample includes all children in

the Chicago Public Schools. Therefore in the first three specifications we are comparing the

high school completion rates of children incarcerated as juveniles to a control group from the

same community that includes two groups: those without any juvenile court involvement and

those with juvenile court involvement but who were not incarcerated as juveniles. In the first

column which includes only community fixed effects as controls, we observe a strong negative

relationship: children incarcerated as juveniles are 39 percentage points less likely to complete

high school than other children from their neighborhood. In column 2 we include the following

demographic controls: sex, race/ethnicity, year of birth fixed effects, and an indicator for special

education status. When we do, the coefficient estimate falls by almost a fourth from -0.39 to -

0.30, which is still very large given an average rate of high school completion among this sample

of 43 percent.21

       We also present propensity score estimates to determine whether this method can further

limit the amount of omitted variable bias. We predict the probability of juvenile incarceration

using a probit regression with the demographic characteristics listed above as well as commu-

nity indicators and estimate the relationship between juvenile incarceration and high school

completion using inverse-propensity score weighting. The result (column 3) is an estimate of

the impact of incarceration on high school completion that is the same as the result obtained

when we excluded most of the controls, suggesting that this method does not effectively reduce

omitted variable bias in this particular context.

       In the next two columns (columns 4 and 5), we limit our sample to children with a criminal

case in juvenile court. By using this subsample, we are limiting our comparison or control

group to juveniles charged with a crime in court but not incarcerated. We argue that this sample

restriction is likely to further reduce potential omitted variable bias. Moreover, this limits the

control group to those at risk of incarceration. Our OLS estimate in column 4, which includes

only community x weapons-offense x year-of-offense fixed effects, supports this: the coefficient
  21
    As noted above, those that do not graduate include those who have transferred out of Chicago Public Schools
and it’s possible that they may have graduated from another school, though we do not observe this. We investigate
sensitivity to removing those that transfer as robustness checks.



                                                       19
on juvenile incarceration falls to -0.088 when we restrict the sample in this way, although this

is still large compared to the mean graduation rate in the sample of 9.9%. Adding additional

controls for the demographic characteristics listed above and the characteristics of the case (type

of charge, etc) in column 5 reduces the OLS estimate only slightly to -0.073. This suggests that

either we have adequately addressed most of the potential bias from omitted variables with our

sample selection and set of controls, or that the only way to improve upon these estimates is to

employ an identification strategy that exploits exogenous variation in juvenile incarceration.

    Our final set of estimates does just that by instrumenting for juvenile incarceration using

the propensity of an individual’s randomly assigned judge to incarcerate. The instrumental-

variable point estimates, -0.108 (column 6) excluding controls and -0.133 including controls

(column 7), are much smaller than the OLS estimates based on the entire sample of children

(columns 1-2), but larger than the OLS estimates based on the subsample of children with a ju-

venile court case (columns 4-5), although they are not statistically-significantly different from

the latter.

    How do we interpret the IV estimates which suggest that juveniles incarcerated for an of-

fense are thirteen percentage points less likely to complete high school? Taken at face value,

the instrumental-variable point estimate suggests that the children on the margin of incarcera-

tion – compliers where the judge assignment induces a change in the incarceration decision –

may experience slightly larger effects of juvenile incarceration on high school completion than

the average incarcerated juvenile. This pattern is seen in some of the subgroup analyses re-

ported below as well. That is, many juveniles may experience little causal effect of juvenile

incarceration on their high school completion – those with minor offenses are at lower risk of

not completing high school, or those charged with very serious crimes and certain incarceration

may be at such a disadvantage at school that high school completion is already extremely un-

likely. Rather, the cases on the margin, where judge assignment affects incarceration, may have

larger treatment effects than the average case. This local-average treatment effect can be even

larger than the OLS estimates.

    Moreover, the treatment of interest is binary: an indicator if the juvenile were ever incar-


                                                20
cerated. The instrumental-variable estimate extrapolates the change in the propensity to be

incarcerated to the actual change in the indicator for incarceration from zero to one. This extrap-

olation can lead to large point estimates, and this is usually summarized by the larger standard

error. Still, it seems worth reiterating that a two standard deviation increase in judge incarcera-

tion rates is only 8 percentage points, and so any relationship between the instrument and the

unobserved propensity to graduate high school will be magnified. In the end, we regard the

point estimate as evidence of large effects of juvenile incarceration on high school completion

for marginal cases but recognize that the larger standard errors suggests caution in the interpre-

tation especially in comparison to the magnitude of the OLS estimates.

      Our finding of a strong negative impact of juvenile incarceration on this measure of human

capital accumulation suggests that we may find negative effects on adult recidivism as well,

which we explore in the next section.


5.4     From Juvenile Incarceration to Adult Incarceration

We follow our analysis of the impact of juvenile incarceration on high school completion with an

analysis of its impact on the probability of adult incarceration in the same state where they were

a juvenile offender using the same empirical specifications. We define adult incarceration by

whether an individual was present at any point by the age of 25 in an adult correctional facility

anywhere in the state. Moreover, since we observe the types of crimes for which individuals are

assigned to adult correctional facilities, we can define adult recidivism by type or severity of the

adult crime.

      Table 4 reports results for any adult incarceration, regardless of crime type, by age 25. The

adult imprisonment rate, defined this way, is 6.7 percent in the larger CPS sample. The OLS

results show a strong relationship between juvenile incarceration and adult incarceration: those

who were in juvenile detention are 41 percentage points more likely than other children residing

in the same community to be found in an adult correctional facility by age 25 (column 1). Adding

demographic controls reduces this relationship to 35 percentage points (column 2), and inverse

propensity score weighting reduces the estimated effect further still to 22 percentage points,


                                                 21
(column 3).

       When we limit the control group to those who came before the court but were not committed

and include controls for demographic characteristics and the type and severity of the crime

(column 5), the estimate falls to 0.15. Note that the average adult incarceration rate for this group

is considerably higher (32.7%) so that the estimates represents an increase in adult recidivism

associated with juvenile incarceration of 67 percent compared to the mean.

       The instrumental-variable point estimates with and without controls (0.26 and 0.22, respec-

tively) are similar to each other but slightly larger than the most restrictive OLS estimates for

adult recidivism.22 However, the loss of precision in the IV estimates means that they are not

statistically-significantly different from these OLS estimates and both can be characterized as

large: incarceration as a juvenile increases the probability of recidivism as an adult by 22-26-

percentage points.

       Overall, the point estimates in the OLS and JIVE models represent very large effects and

suggest that of the two potential effects of juvenile incarceration on future criminal activity

(deterrence of future criminal activity vs. reductions in human capital accumulation, social

capital and networks, or other factors that might increase the probability of future crime), the

latter dominates.23

       We also estimate the impact of juvenile incarceration on adult recidivism by crime type,

given that some types of crime generate larger welfare costs. Specifically, we estimate the impact

of juvenile incarceration on adult recidivism for four types of crime: homicide, violent crime,

property crime and drug crimes. These categories are not exclusive and an individual might

have been incarcerated for more than one type of crime by age 25. For each crime type, we

present three sets of results: OLS based on the full CPS, OLS based on the juvenile subsample
  22
      While the point estimate declines somewhat with the addition of controls, the difference is not statistically sig-
nificant. Further, if the decline suggested that ”strict” judges hear ”tougher” cases, then we would expect a similar
change in magnitude when considering high-school completion. Instead, the magnitude increased when we added
controls to the model for high-school completion. Together, this suggests that any differences in the types of juveniles
who go before stricter judges are not systematically related to the outcomes.
   23
      We considered employment and earnings as well, although only 13% of juveniles that come before the court
are found in the official UI employment records by age 25. While we find negative point estimates of the effects of
juvenile incarceration on employment, the standard errors are not precise.




                                                          22
and IV based on the juvenile subsample. The results (Table 5) show that in the OLS for the full

CPS sample, those who are incarcerated as juveniles are much more likely to have recidivated for

each of the four types of crime. Limiting the sample to those with a juvenile court case reduces

the estimates considerably though they are still large: those incarcerated are 2.1 percentage

points more likely to be incarcerated for a homicide as an adult (mean= 4%), 6.0 percentage

points more likely to be incarcerated for violent crime (mean = 12%), 4.6 percentage points more

likely to be incarcerated for property crime (mean = 6%) and 7.8 percentage points more likely

to be incarcerated for a drug offense (mean =18%).

      The IV estimates in most cases are larger, increasing to 3.5 percentage points for homicide

(though not significant), 15 for a violent crime, 14 a property crime, and 10 percentage points

for drug-related crimes. It is important to note that even though the point estimates more than

double in some cases, the standard errors also increase by four to five times the OLS standard

errors. The results broken down by type suggest that children incarcerated as juveniles are not

only more likely to recidivate as adults, but that the recidivism is for types of crime that are both

serious and costly.


5.5     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Across Observable Characteristics

In this section we explore potential heterogeneity in the IV treatment effects. We present OLS

and JIVE estimates stratified by characteristics of the first juvenile offense and the juvenile (Table

6). Differences in the IV results are suggestive of differential impacts of incarceration on the

propensity to complete high school and adult recidivism. Given the data requirements of the

approach, differences across subgroups are rarely statistically significantly different and should

be regarded as suggestive only.

      The effects of juvenile incarceration on high school completion in particular exhibit consid-

erable heterogeneity. When we characterize juveniles by type of their first offense (violent vs.

non-violent), the OLS estimates of the impact of juvenile incarceration on high school comple-

tion are similar for the two types, but when we instrument, the negative impact of incarceration

increases in magnitude for the non-violent. For the non-violent, the IV estimate of the impact


                                                 23
of juvenile incarceration on high school completion is roughly double the estimate based on the

whole sample. In contrast, the IV estimate of high school completion for juveniles accused of

a violent crime are much smaller in magnitude and insignificant. One interpretation of these

results is that the effects of juvenile incarceration on high school completion are larger for those

at the margin of incarceration in contrast to those most surely to be incarcerated. There is less

heterogeneity with respect to the adult incarceration effects. Although the point estimates are

somewhat larger among juveniles being sentenced for violent crimes, the estimates are much

less precise for subsets.

       The impact of incarceration on high school completion and adult recidivism also varies with

juvenile characteristics such as age.24 The overall effects are largely coming from juveniles aged

15-16, perhaps because the incarceration occurs during a point in the life cycle when dropping

out of school is possible. Meanwhile, the impact of incarceration is qualitatively similar for those

with and without special-education needs.

       That stronger estimated effects of juvenile incarceration on high school completion for some

groups are not necessarily accompanied by stronger effects on adult incarceration suggests that

the impact of juvenile incarceration on adult incarceration is not working entirely through the

negative impact on high school completion. This is not surprising, as we expect incarceration

to affect a juvenile in many ways, including impacts on social capital and networks or ”deviant

labeling”, in addition to any effect on high school graduation. Still, to gauge the potential mag-

nitude of the high-school completion channel, consider that Lochner and Moretti (2004) found

that among African Americans, high school completion results in an 8 percentage point decline

in the likelihood of being in jail as an adult (the point estimates for whites are lower and less

precise, but not significantly different from the estimates for blacks). Based on this, we calculate

that of the 20 percentage point increase in adult incarceration, only 5 percent comes from the 13

percentage point decrease in high school completion.
  24
    We stratify by gender and race as well. Of the 37,692 juveniles in the sample, less than 6000 are female and the
results for females, while large in magnitude with respect to high school completion in particular, are very imprecise.
With respect to race, the main results are similar to those found for African Americans, the point estimates for
high school graduation are larger in magnitude for white and Hispanic juveniles. For adult incarceration, the point
estimate is particularly large (and imprecise) for Hispanic juveniles (Table A5).



                                                          24
      One caveat is that Lochner and Moretti (2004) base their analysis on the 1960, 70 and 80 Cen-

suses. Since then, the labor market return to high school completion has increased significantly.

Between 1980 and 2000, Deschenes (2006) estimates that the causal return to a year of single

year of schooling increased by as much as 40%. As such, it is likely that the causal impact of

education on crime has likewise increased over this period which would result in a larger role

for high school completion in explaining the impact of juvenile incarceration on adult crime. In

any event, the results suggest that for juveniles on the margin of incarceration, such detention

appears to negatively affect the human and social capital formation in more ways than we can

measure through high school completion and adult incarceration.

      In summary, the results suggest that across different groups of children, juvenile incarcera-

tion is associated with lower high school completion and higher adult recidivism. In general,

the high school completion results are more sensitive to analysis among different subsets of

the data, whereas the adult recidivism results tend to be found regardless of how the data are

divided.


5.6     Additional Tests of Robustness

When judge fixed effects are used as instruments, one concern in the interpretation of the re-

sults as local average treatment effects is that the monotonicity assumption may be violated:

assignment to a strict judge need not increase the likelihood of incarceration for each type of

offender.25 After discussions with court officials, our primary concern is that some judges could

be particularly strict for only a subset of offenses, such as violent crimes, and these judges could

be relatively lenient for, say, property crimes.

      To investigate this possibility, we categorized the offenses into four mutually exclusive groups:
   25
      Juvenile incarceration is monotonically increasing in the leave-out mean of the judge’s incarceration rate, which
provides some evidence that the monotonicity assumption may be satisfied. Further, we investigated whether treat-
ment effects differed across judges in an effort to estimate marginal treatment effects (Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005,
Doyle 2008). We found that these estimates were too imprecise to explore variation across judges. The point esti-
mates suggested that the high-school completion results are due to variation within relatively strict judges, the adult
prison outcomes had a larger point estimate using variation among relatively lenient judges, and the adult prison
for a violent crime outcome had similar point estimates when estimated among relatively lenient or relatively strict
judges.




                                                          25
violent, property, drug, and other. First, we find that judges who are strict for violent crimes tend

to be strict for other offense types as well.26 Second, we re-calculated the instrument for each

judge x offense type. This relaxes the monotonicity assumption by allowing each judge to have

different levels of leniency depending on the offense category. The cost of this approach is that

there are fewer observations with which to characterize each judge-offense type, and the cells

within which the variation is exploited are necessarily smaller. Results that allow the cells to

vary at the community x offense level and add separate year indicators are reported as well, as

this allows the sample sizes to be larger within each cell.

       Table A2 shows results when we calculate the instrument for each judge for two categories

(weapon offense vs. non-weapon offense) and by judge but across the four main offense cate-

gories.27 The latter models now include community x offense type x year fixed effects. Similar,

and often slightly larger, impacts are found for high-school graduation when we calculate the

instrument using the four offense categories. Similar effects for adult incarceration, as well as

imprisonment for violent crimes, are also found across the two models. We take this as strong

evidence that this potential failure of the monotonicity assumption is not driving the main re-

sults.28

       As a second robustness check, we allow the fixed effects within which juveniles are com-

pared to vary. Specifically, we include fixed effects defined at the level of the community, com-

munity x year, community x weapon, Census tract, tract x year, tract x weapon, and finally tract

x weapon x year (Table A3). Note that the sample sizes change given the restriction that cells

include at least 10 observations. Even with changing sample sizes, the results are remarkably
  26
      The relationship is not 1-1, however, which is why it is useful to estimate effects using the re-calculated instru-
ment. In particular, in a regression of the judge’s violent-crime incarceration rate on the judge’s property-crime
incarceration rate within the usual fixed-effect cells, we find a coefficient of 0.84 (s.e.=0.10), for drug crimes the
coefficient is 0.68 (s.e.=0.11) and for other crimes the coefficient is 0.64 (s.e. = 0.09).
   27
      When we allow the instrument to be calculated by judge within 10 offense categories, similar results are found
in models with community x offense and year fixed effects; models with community x offense x year fixed effects
have much smaller samples due to the limitation that the cell size is at least 10 observations, and the estimates are
less precise.
   28
      Similar results are found when we calculate the instrument within judge by year cells as well, with a larger
point estimate for high-school graduation (-0.122, s.e.=0.041); for adult imprisonment the point estimate is 0.158
(s.e.=0.072). When we calculate the instrument within judge x weapons offense x year cells, the coefficient on ju-
venile incarceration predicting high-school graduation is -0.074 (s.e.=0.042), and for adult imprisonment it is 0.161
(s.e.=0.071).



                                                           26
stable across these different types of fixed effects.

       The third set of robustness checks relate to the high school completion results. As noted

previously, we define juveniles as high school graduates only if their records in the public school

data indicate that they graduated with certainty. In Table A4, Panel A, we define as the outcome

an indicator equal to one if the juvenile was coded in the public school data as having transferred

to an adult correctional facility after the age of 16 (14.6 percent of the sample). This is another

way of measuring adult incarceration in our data, though it captures less (and earlier) adult

crime than our original measure. Consistent with the adult incarceration by age 25 results, we

find a large positive effect of incarceration for juvenile offenses on subsequent transfers out of

Chicago Public Schools and into adult criminal facilities.29

       We also change the estimation sample for the high school completion results to account for

the fact that we do not know whether those who transferred out of the Chicago Public Schools

completed high school in their new setting. First, we remove from the sample those who trans-

ferred to any of the above three mentioned destinations (private, other public, correctional fa-

cility). The IV estimates are very similar to those based on the full sample (Table A4, Panel B).

Second, we remove only those who transferred to a private or other public school (coding trans-

fers to correctional facilities as non High School graduate). Again the results are very similar to

those based on the full sample (Table A4, Panel C) suggesting that little bias is introduced by

the fact that the high school completion status of 13 percent of the sample is not known.

       Finally in Table A5 we report a number of other robustness checks. Results were similar

when we restricted the sample to exclude cases that had a missing judge ID at the first hearing,

when we trim the instrument of extreme values, and when we calculate the estimates using a

probit model. Table A5 also includes results of regressions for additional subsamples defined by

gender, race, and risk index. The results show that the main results stem from male offenders,

whereas the results for female offenders (a much smaller subset of the data) are noisier.
  29
       If the juvenile enters the Temporary Juvenile Detention facility, they remain in the Chicago Public School system.




                                                            27
6        Conclusions

Juvenile incarceration is expensive, with expenditures on juvenile corrections totalling $6 billion

annually in the US, and the average (direct) cost of a incarcerating a juvenile is $88,000 for a 12

month stay (Mendel, 2011). If juvenile incarceration either enhanced human capital accumula-

tion or deterred future crime and incarceration, a tradeoff could be considered. Rather, we find

that for juveniles on the margin of incarceration, such detention leads to both a decrease in high

school completion and an increase in adult incarceration, and it appears welfare enhancing to

use alternatives to juvenile incarceration. Illinois has an array of such policies, including elec-

tronic monitoring and well-enforced curfews that serve as substitutes for juvenile incarceration.

Indeed, these substitutes have been growing in popularity. Since our results are found when

these alternatives were in use, this suggests that their continued expansion could increase high

school graduation rates and reduce the likelihood of adult crime still further.

         To consider the full set of costs and benefits of juvenile incarceration policies, one must also

consider the potential reduction in crime due to the incapacitation effect of incarceration as well

as the deterrent effects of strict punishment on the criminal activity of other youths. Regarding

incapacitation, to the extent that alternatives such as strict curfews or electronic monitoring also

serve to incapacitate, this should be less of a concern. Regarding deterrence, recent evidence

suggests that juveniles’ criminal propensity is particularly inelastic with respect to penalties

(Lee and McCrary, 2006), which implies that this may be of second order importance compared

to the large decrease in high school completion and increase in adult incarceration found here.30

If this is the case, then the results suggest that a continued move toward less restrictive juve-

nile sentencing would increase human capital accumulation and lower the propensity of these

juveniles to become incarcerated as adults without an increase in juvenile crime.




    30
    We also find that juvenile incarceration increases the likelihood of juvenile recidivism, although these estimates
are noisier.


                                                         28
7   References

    Bayer, Patrick,Hjalmarsson, Randi and David Pozen. 2009, “Building Criminal Capital Be-

hind Bars: Peer Effects in Juvenile Corrections.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(1): 105-47.

    Becker, Gary. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.” Journal of Political

Economy 76:169-217.

    Bernburg, Jon Gunnar, Marvin D. Krohn and Craig J. Rivera. 2006. “Official Labeling, Crim-

inal Embeddedness and Subsequent Delinquency: A Longitudinal Test of Labeling Theory.”

Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 43(1): 67- 88.

    Bjorklund, Anders and Robert Moffitt. 1987. ”The Estimation of Wage Gains and Welfare

Gains in Self-Selection Models.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 69(1): 42-49.

    Brennan, Patricia A. and Sarnoff A. Mednick. 1994. ”Learning Theory Approach to the

Deterrence of Criminal Recidivism.” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 103(3): 430-440.

    Cameron, Stephen and James J. Heckman, 1993. ”Determinants of Young Male Schooling

and Training Choices,” NBER Working Paper 4327.

    Chang, Tom and Antoinette Schoar. 2008. “Judge Specific Differences in Chapter 11 and

Firm Outcomes.” MIT Working Paper

    Cook, Philip and Songman Kang. 2013. “Birthdays, Schooling and Crime: New Evidence on

the Crime-Dropout Nexus” NBER Working Paper 18791.

    Cunha, Flavio Heckman, James J. and Lance Lochner. 2006. ”Interpreting the Evidence on

Life Cycle Skill Formation” Handbook of the Economics of Education Elsevier.

    Currie, Janet and Erdal Tekin. 2006. “Does Child Abuse Lead to Crime?” NBER Working

Paper. 12171.

    De Li, Spencer.1999. “Legal Sanctions and Youths’ Status Achievement: A Longitudinal

Study.” Justice Quarterly 16: 377-401.

    Deschenes, Olivier. 2006. “Unobserved Ability, Comparative Advantage, and the Rising

Return to Ability in the US.” Working Paper.

    Di Tella, Rafael and Ernesto Schargrodsky. forthcoming. “Criminal Recidivism after Prison



                                                 29
and Electronic Monitoring” Journal of Political Economy

   Dobbie, William and Jae Song. 2013 “Debt Relief and Debtor Outcomes: Measuring The

Effects of Consumer Bankruptcy Protection.” Harvard University mimeo.

   Doyle, Joseph. 2008.“Child Protection and Adult Crime.” Journal of Political Economy 116(4):

746-770.

   Freeman, R. B. 1992. “Crime and the Employment of Disadvantaged Youths,” in Urban Labor

Markets and Job Opportunities ed. by G. Peterson, and W. Vroman. The Urban Institutes Press,

Washington D.C.

   Freeman, Richard. 1996. “Why do so Many Young American Men Commit Crimes and What

Might We Do About It? Journal of Economic Perspectives 10(1): 25-42.

   General Accounting Office. 2012. Growing Inmate Crowding Negatively Affects Inmates Staff

and Infrastructure

   Glaze, Lauren E. and Erika Parks. 2012. ”Correctional Populations in the United States,

2011.” Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin NCJ 239972.

   Glaeser, Edward and Bruce Sacerdote. 1999. “Why is There More Crime in Cities?” Journal

of Political Economy 107(S6): s225-s258.

   Goerge, R. M., Van Voorhis, J. and B.J. Lee. “Illinois’s Longitudinal and Relational Child and

Family Research Database.” Social Science Computer Review 12(3). 1994: 351-65.

   Gottfredson, Don. 1999. Effects of Judges’ Sentencing Decisions on Criminal Careers Washington,

D.C. National Institute of Justice: Research in Brief.

   Granovetter, Mark. 1995. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers Chicago: University

of Chicago Press.

   Grogger, Jeffrey. 1995. ”The Effect of Arrests on the Employment and Earnings of Young

Men.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(1): 51-72.

   Hazel, Neal. 2008. Cross-National Comparison of Youth Justice. London: Youth Justice Board

for England and Wales.

   Heckman James J. and Edward Vytlacil. “Structural Equations, Treatment Effects, and Econo-

metric Policy Evaluation.” Econometrica 73(3). May 2005: 669-738.


                                                 30
   Hjalmarsson, Randi. 2008. “Criminal Justice Involvement and High School Completion.”

Journal of Urban Economics 63: 613-630.

   Jacob, B. A. and Lefgren, L. 2003. “Are Idle Hands the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation,

Concentration, and Juvenile Crime.” American Economic Review 93(5): 1560 -1577.

   Kerley, Kent R., Benson, Michael L., Lee, Matthew R., and Cullen, Francis T. 2004. “Race,

Criminal Justice Contact, and Adult Position in the Social Stratification System.” Social Problems

51(4): 549568.

   Kling, Jeffrey. 2006. “Incarceration Length, Employment, and Earnings.” American Economic

Review 96(3):863-876.

   Kling, Jeffrey and John Tyler. 2007. Barriers to Reentry? The Labor Market for Released Prisoners

in Post-Industrial America Edited by Shawn Bushway, Michael Stoll, and David Weiman (New

York: Russell Sage Foundation Press)

   Kolesar, Michal, Chetty, Raj, Friedman, John, Glaeser, Edward, and Guido Imbens. 2011.

”Identification and Inference with Many Invalid Instruments.” NBER Working Paper No. 17519.

   Kennelman, Tracey. 2012. Justice Expenditure and Employment Extracts 2009 (preliminary).

Bureau of Justice Statistics. NCJ 237913.

   Landerso, Rasmus. 2012. ”Does Incarceration Length Affect Labor Market Outcomes for

Violent Offenders?” The Rockwool Foundation Research Unit. Study Paper Number 39.

   Lee, David and Justin McCrary. 2005. “Crime Punishment and Myopia” NBER Working

Paper 11491.

   Levitt, Steven. 1998. “Juvenile Crime and Punishment” The Journal of Political Economy

106(6): 1156-1185.

   Levitt, Steven. 2004. “Understanding why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain

the Decline and Six that do Not.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1): 163-190.

   Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti. 2004. “The Effect of Education on Crime: Evidence from

Prison Inmates, Arrests and Self-Reports.” American Economic Review 94(1):, 155-189.

   Lochner, Lance. 2004: “Education, Work, and Crime: A Human Capital Approach,” Interna-

tional Economic Review 45(3), 811843.


                                                31
   Lott, JR. 1992a. "An Attempt at Measuring the Total Monetary Penalty from Drug Convic-
tions: the Importance of an Individual's Reputation." Journal of Legal Studies 21: 159-187.
   Lott, JR. 1992b. "Do We Punish High Income Criminals too Heavily?" Economic Inquiry
30:583-608.
   Machin, S., O. Marie, and S. Vujic. 2011. "The Crime Reducing Effect of Education." Eco-
nomic Journal 121(552), 463484.

   Maestas, Nicole, Mullen, Kathleen and Alexander Strand. forthcoming. "Does Disability
Insurance Receipt Discourage Work? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of
SSDI Receipt" American Economic Review

   Mendel, Richard A. 2011. No Place for Kids: The Case for Reducing Juvenile Incarceration. Balti-
more: The Annie E. Casey Foundation.
   Murray, Charles and Louis Cox. 1979. Beyond Probation: Juvenile Corrections and the Chronic
Delinquent Beverly Hills: Sage Publications.

   Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. 2011. Census of Juveniles in Residential
Placement 2010 Washington, D.C.: OJJDP.

   Peters, Clark, Haywood, Thomas, Lee, Bong Joo, and Ada Skyles. 2002. Case Processing
and Services to Children in the Juvenile Justice Division of the Cook County Juvenile Court Chicago:
Chapin Hall.
   Sampson, RJ and JH Laub. 1997. "A Life Course Theory of Cumulative Disadvantage and
the Stability of Delinquency." Advances in Criminological Theory 7:133-161.
   Smith, Linda. and Ronald Akers 1993. "A comparison of recidivism of Florida's Community
Control and Prison: A five-year Survival Analysis." Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency
30(3): 267-292.

   Spohn, Cassia, and David Holleran.2002 "The Effects of Imprisonment on Recidivism Rates
of Felony Offenders: A Focus on Drug Offenders." Criminology 40: 329-357.

   Stock, James, Wright, Jonathan H., and Motochiro Yogo. 2002. "A Survey of Weak Instru-
ments and Weak Identification in Generalized Method of Moments." Journal of Business and Eco-
nomic Statistics 20(4): 518-529.


                                                32
   Tanner, J., Davies, S., and O’Grady, B. 1999. “Whatever Happened to Yesterday’s Rebels?

Longitudinal Effects of Youth Delinquency on Education and Employment.” Social Forces 46:250-

274.

   Waldfogel, Joel. 1994. “The Effect of Criminal Conviction on Income and the Trust Reposes

in the Workmen.” Journal of Human Resources 29:62-81.

   Western, Bruce and Katherine Beckett. 1999. ”How Unregulated is the U.S. Labor Market?

The Penal System as a Labor Market Institution.” American Journal of Sociology 104(4): 1030-60.

   Western, Bruce, Kling, Jeffrey and David Weiman. 2001. “The Labor Market Consequences

of Incarceration.” Crime and Delinquency 47(3): 410-427.

   Wilson, David B, Catherine Gallagher and Doris MacKenzie. 2000. “A Meta Analysis of

Corrections-Based Education, Vocation and Work Programs for Adult Offenders.” Journal of

Research in Crime and Delinquency 37(4):347-368.




                                               33
                        Table 1: Instrument vs. Covariates

                                                Juvenile Court Sample

                                Z < Median            Z >= Median               p-value
Z: First Judge's Leave-out
Mean Incarceration Rate            0.072                  0.126                 <0.001

Male                               0.842                   0.84                  0.76
African American                   0.757                  0.755                  0.76
Hispanic                           0.165                  0.163                  0.60
White                              0.069                  0.073                  0.18
Other race/ethnicity               0.008                  0.008                  0.71
Special education                   0.24                  0.237                  0.54
Age at offense                     14.69                  14.69                  0.92

Observations                                                                       37692
p-values calculated from separate regression models of each characteristic on an indicator
that the judge's incarceration rate (Z) was greater than or equal to the median, with
community x weapon x year fixed effects and standard errors clustered at the community
level--the identifying variation used in the IV results.
                                         Table 2: First Stage

                               Dependent Variable: Juvenile Incarceration as a Youth

                                            Model:         OLS
                                                            (1)                (2)                (3)
First Judge's Leave-out Mean Incarceration Rate            1.103              1.082              1.060
among first cases                                         (0.102)            (0.095)            (0.097)

Demographic controls                                        No                 No                Yes
Court controls                                              No                 No                Yes

Observations                                                37692
Mean of Dependent Variable                                  0.227
All models include community x weapons-offense x year-of-offense fixed effects. Demographic controls
include indicators for 4 age-at-offense categories, 4 race/ethnicity categories, sex, and special education
status. Court controls include 9 offense categories, indictors for 7 risk-assessment index categories, and
whether the first judge assigned was missing. Standard errors are reported in the parentheses and are
clustered at the community level.
                                  Table 3: Juvenile Incarceration & High-School Graduation

                Dependent Variable: Graduated High School

                                                       Full CPS Sample                                     Juvenile Court Sample
                                                                   Inverse Propensity
                                           OLS            OLS                                  OLS            OLS          JIVE         JIVE
                               Model:                               Score Weighting
                                            (1)            (2)              (3)                 (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)
Juvenile Incarceration                    -0.389         -0.295           -0.391              -0.088         -0.073       -0.108       -0.133
                                          (0.007)        (0.006)         (0.005)             (0.004)        (0.004)      (0.044)       (0.043)
Demographic controls                        No             Yes             Yes                  No            Yes           No           Yes
Court controls                              N/A            N/A             N/A                  No            Yes           No           Yes
Observations                              440797        440797           429367               37692
Mean of Dependent Variable                 0.428          0.428           0.424                0.099
Columns (1)-(2) include community fixed effects, while Column (2) includes controls for race, sex, special education status and birth cohort.
Column (3) used the same controls and community indicators to calculate the propensity score. Columns (4)-(7) include community x
weapons-offense x year-of-offense fixed effects. Demographic controls include indicators for 4 age-at-offense categories, 4 race/ethnicity
categories, sex, and special education status. Court controls include 9 offense categories, indictors for 7 risk-assessment index categories, and
whether the first judge assigned was missing. JIVE models are estimated by 2SLS where the instrument is a leave-out mean. Standard errors
are reported in the parentheses and are clustered at the community level. The propensity score standard errors were calculated using 200
bootstrap replications.
                                             Table 4: Juvenile Incarceration & Adult Crime

                             Dependent Variable: Entered adult prison by age 25

                                                              Full CPS Sample                                  Juvenile Court Sample
                                                                                  Inverse
                                                                                Propensity
                                                       OLS          OLS                              OLS         OLS           JIVE          JIVE
                                                                                   Score
                                                                                Weighting
                                                        (1)          (2)             (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)
Juvenile Incarceration                                0.407         0.351          0.221            0.200        0.153         0.260         0.224
                                                     (0.008)       (0.006)        (0.014)          (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.073)       (0.075)
Demographic controls                                    No           Yes            Yes              No           Yes           No            Yes
Court controls                                         N/A           N/A            N/A              No           Yes           No            Yes
Observations                                         440797        440797         429367            37692
Mean of Dependent Variable                            0.067         0.067          0.066            0.327
Columns (1)-(2) include community fixed effects, while Column (2) includes controls for race, sex, special education status and birth cohort.
Column (3) used the same controls and community indicators to calculate the propensity score. Columns (4)-(7) include community x weapons-
offense x year-of-offense fixed effects. Demographic controls include indicators for 4 age-at-offense categories, 4 race/ethnicity categories, sex,
and special education status. Court controls include 9 offense categories, indictors for 7 risk-assessment index categories, and whether the first
judge assigned was missing. JIVE models are estimated by 2SLS where the instrument is a leave-out mean. Standard errors are reported in the
parentheses and are clustered at the community level. The propensity score standard errors were calculated using 200 bootstrap replications.
                                    Table 5: Juvenile Incarceration & Adult Crime Type

Dependent Variable: Entered adult prison by age 25 for crime type:

                                           Homicide                                                   Violent
                            OLS              OLS                JIVE                  OLS              OLS                JIVE

Juvenile                   0.051              0.021             0.035                0.138              0.060             0.149
Incarceration             (0.003)            (0.003)           (0.030)              (0.005)            (0.005)           (0.041)

Sample                   Full CPS        Juvenile Court    Juvenile Court          Full CPS        Juvenile Court    Juvenile Court

Mean of Dep. Var.          0.008             0.043             0.043                 0.024             0.121             0.121
Observations              440797             37692             37692                440797             37692             37692


                                            Property                                                    Drug
                            OLS               OLS               JIVE                  OLS               OLS               JIVE

Juvenile                   0.079              0.046             0.141                0.183              0.078             0.098
Incarceration             (0.004)            (0.004)           (0.045)              (0.011)            (0.007)           (0.052)

Sample                   Full CPS        Juvenile Court    Juvenile Court          Full CPS        Juvenile Court    Juvenile Court

Mean of Dep. Var.           0.013               0.060            0.060               0.034              0.176            0.176
Observations               440797              37692            37692               440797              37692            37692
All models include full controls listed in Table 2. Full CPS models include community fixed effects. Juvenile Court models include
community x weapons offense x year-of-offense fixed effects. Standard errors are reported in the parentheses and are clustered at the
community level.
                                       Table 6: Effects of Juvenile Incarceration By Case & Child Types

                                                                                                                            Entered adult prison by age 25 for
                                                        Graduated High School            Entered adult prison by age 25
                             Dependent Variable:                                                                                     violent offense

                                                        OLS                JIVE              OLS               JIVE               OLS               JIVE
Juvenile offense: violent
                            Juvenile Incarceration      -0.080            -0.045             0.140             0.275              0.055             0.218
                                                       (0.006)           (0.071)            (0.010)           (0.110)            (0.008)           (0.080)
                     Mean of dependent variable         0.118             0.118              0.295             0.295              0.121             0.121
                                  Observations          15561

Juvenile offense: non-violent
                         Juvenile Incarceration         -0.067            -0.157             0.165             0.202              0.065             0.108
                                                       (0.005)           (0.042)            (0.010)           (0.108)            (0.006)           (0.058)
                     Mean of dependent variable         0.085             0.085              0.349             0.349              0.122             0.122
                                  Observations          22131

Age = 13 or 14
                            Juvenile Incarceration      -0.070            -0.099             0.174             -0.189             0.066             0.016
                                                       (0.006)           (0.075)            (0.012)           (0.141)            (0.009)           (0.079)
                     Mean of dependent variable         0.082             0.082              0.343             0.343              0.134             0.134
                                  Observations          11404

Age = 15 or 16
                            Juvenile Incarceration      -0.072            -0.150             0.132             0.435              0.050             0.224
                                                       (0.005)           (0.056)            (0.010)           (0.098)            (0.006)           (0.064)
                     Mean of dependent variable         0.109             0.109              0.314             0.314              0.112             0.112
                                  Observations          23734

Special Education
                            Juvenile Incarceration      -0.055            -0.090             0.181             0.170              0.081             0.169
                                                       (0.005)           (0.055)            (0.012)           (0.125)            (0.009)           (0.098)
                     Mean of dependent variable         0.072             0.072              0.400             0.400              0.159             0.159
                                  Observations           8999

Not Special Education
                            Juvenile Incarceration     -0.079           -0.115             0.146                0.231            0.053               0.129
                                                      (0.005)          (0.055)            (0.008)              (0.103)          (0.005)             (0.061)
                     Mean of dependent variable        0.108            0.108              0.303                0.303            0.110               0.110
                                     Observations      28693
All models include community x weapons offense x year-of-offense fixed effects and full controls as listed in Table 2. Standard errors are reported in the
parentheses and are clustered at the community level.
                             Table A1: Sample Means

    Child Characteristics       Juvenile Court Sample   Full CPS Sample
Male                                     0.841                 0.51
African American                         0.757                 0.55
Hispanic                                 0.164                 0.27
White                                    0.071                 0.14
Other                                   0.0077                 0.04
Special education                       0.239                 0.124
Birth year                               1978                 1977
age at offense                          14.69                  N/A

          Charges
Aggravated Assault                     0.122                 N/A
Burglary                               0.114
Drug Law Violation                     0.201
Larceny Theft                          0.046
Car Theft                              0.106
Robbery                                0.064
Simple Assault                         0.087
Vandalism                              0.051
Weapons offense                        0.123
Other offense                          0.086

         Outcomes:
Incarcerated as a Juvenile             0.227                 0.021
Graduated High School                  0.099                  0.40
Incarcerated by Age 25                 0.327                 0.064

Sample Size                            37692                440797
          Table A2: Alternative Instrument Calculation: Judge x Offense Category

A. Models with Community x Offense Category x Year Fixed Effects (FE)

                      Instrument Calculated by Judge by Offense Category:

Offense Category:                    Weapon (0/1)                               4 Offense Categories
                                                   Imprisoned                                      Imprisoned
                                                  by Age 25 for                                  by Age 25 for
                     Graduated         Imprisoned    Violent            Graduated   Imprisoned       Violent
Dependent Variable: High School         by Age 25    Offense           High School by Age 25         Offense

Juvenile                   -0.051         0.262          0.136             -0.103         0.234           0.143
Incarceration             (0.039)        (0.066)        (0.042)           (0.046)        (0.076)         (0.057)

Mean of Dep.
Variable                  0.099           0.326          0.121            0.097           0.333           0.124
Observations              38094                                           34874

B. Models with Community x Offense Category FE & Separate Year FE

                      Instrument Calculated by Judge by Offense Category:

Offense Category:                    Weapon (0/1)                               4 Offense Categories
                                                   Imprisoned                                      Imprisoned
                                                  by Age 25 for                                  by Age 25 for
                     Graduated         Imprisoned    Violent            Graduated   Imprisoned       Violent
Dependent Variable: High School         by Age 25    Offense           High School by Age 25         Offense

Juvenile                   -0.054         0.123          0.119             -0.106         0.134           0.153
Incarceration             (0.025)        (0.040)        (0.031)           (0.028)        (0.044)         (0.039)

Mean of Dep.
Variable                   0.100           0.321          0.120              0.099          0.322          0.120
Observations               40233                                             40074
All models include full controls as described in Table 2. Sample sizes vary because each model is estimated
using a sample restricted to cells that comprise the fixed effects to at least 10 observations, and the data are
restricted to Judge-offense categories with at least 10 observations. The four offense categories are violent,
property, drug, and other.
                                                                Table A3: Alternative Fixed Effects


                         Community FE                         Community x Year FE                    Community x Weapon FE                Community x Weapon x Year FE
                                     Imprisoned                               Imprisoned                              Imprisoned                              Imprisoned
                Graduated             by Age 25          Graduated             by Age 25         Graduated             by Age 25         Graduated             by Age 25
  Dependent       High    Imprisoned for Violent           High    Imprisoned for Violent          High    Imprisoned for Violent          High    Imprisoned for Violent
  Variable:      School    by Age 25 Offense              School    by Age 25 Offense             School    by Age 25 Offense             School    by Age 25 Offense


Juvenile           -0.111       0.170       0.135          -0.116       0.239        0.134         -0.111       0.169        0.136          -0.133      0.224        0.149
Incarceration     (0.036)      (0.063)     (0.036)        (0.040)      (0.073)      (0.042)       (0.037)      (0.063)      (0.036)        (0.043)     (0.075)      (0.041)

Mean of Dep.
Variable          0.100         0.321       0.120          0.099        0.325        0.121         0.100        0.321        0.120         0.099        0.327        0.121
Observations      40346                                    39389                                   40303                                   37692

                              Tract FE                           Tract x Year FE                        Tract x Weapon FE                   Tract x Weapon x Year FE
                                     Imprisoned                                Imprisoned                              Imprisoned                              Imprisoned
                Graduated             by Age 25          Graduated              by Age 25        Graduated              by Age 25        Graduated              by Age 25
  Dependent       High    Imprisoned for Violent           High    Imprisoned for Violent          High     Imprisoned for Violent         High     Imprisoned for Violent
  Variable:      School    by Age 25 Offense              School    by Age 25 Offense             School     by Age 25 Offense            School     by Age 25 Offense


Juvenile           -0.102       0.155       0.134          -0.108       0.271        0.173         -0.124       0.144        0.131          -0.178      0.223        0.155
Incarceration     (0.038)      (0.066)     (0.038)        (0.049)      (0.092)      (0.052)       (0.041)      (0.071)      (0.041)        (0.054)     (0.100)      (0.058)

Mean of Dep.
Variable            0.100       0.323        0.120          0.097        0.351         0.130       0.099       0.324       0.120           0.095       0.353         0.129
Observations        39561                                   20983                                  37592                                  15242
All models include full controls as described in Table 2. Sample sizes vary because each model is estimated using a sample restricted to cells that comprise the fixed effects
to at least 10 observations. Standard errors are reported in parentheses, clustered at the community level.
           Table A4: Robustness Checks for Transfers from CPS, JIVE

A. Transferred from High School to Adult Correctional Facility

                           Dependent Variable: Transferred to Adult Correctional Facility

Juvenile Incarceration                                   0.250                   0.244
                                                        (0.059)                 (0.060)
Demographic and charge controls                           No                      Yes
Mean of Dep. Variable                                    0.175
Observations                                             37692

B. Restricted to Students Found to Graduate OR Dropout

                            Dependent Variable: Graduated High School

Juvenile Incarceration                                  -0.113                  -0.098
                                                        (0.006)                 (0.006)
Demographic and charge controls                           No                      Yes
Mean of Dep. Variable                                    0.149
Observations                                             25074

C. Restricted to Students Found to Graduate OR Dropout OR Transfer to Adult Prison

                            Dependent Variable: Graduated High School

Juvenile Incarceration                                  -0.104                   -0.086
                                                        (0.005)                 (0.005)
Demographic and charge controls                           No                      Yes
Mean of Dep. Variable                                    0.118
Observations                                             31652
All models include community x weapon offense x year fixed effects. Controls are the same as
those listed in Table 2.
                                             Table A5: Additional Robustness Checks and Heterogeneity


Dependent Variable:                                       Graduated High School                Entered adult prison by age 25     Entered adult prison by age 25 for
                                                                                                                                           violent offense

First judge not missing                                    OLS                   JIVE               OLS              JIVE               OLS              JIVE
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.073                -0.138             0.153             0.237             0.064             0.160
                                                         (0.005)               (0.041)            (0.007)           (0.077)           (0.005)           (0.043)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.098                 0.098             0.330             0.330             0.125             0.125
                                 Observations             29239                 29239              29239             29239             29239             29239

Trim 1% extremes of Z
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.072                -0.127             0.154             0.254             0.061             0.161
                                                         (0.004)               (0.041)            (0.007)           (0.075)           (0.005)           (0.041)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.098                 0.098             0.328             0.328             0.122             0.122
                                 Observations            36,802                36,802             36,802            36,802            36,802            36,802

Two-step probit IV
                          Juvenile Incarceration                                -0.104                               0.255                               0.157
                                                                               (0.021)                              (0.090)                             (0.056)
                    Mean of dependent variable                                   0.103                               0.328                               0.125
                                 Observations                                   36328                                37516                               36563

Risk Index: Bottom 3 categories
                        Juvenile Incarceration            -0.070                -0.197             0.170             0.179             0.071             0.077
                                                         (0.006)               (0.065)            (0.012)           (0.128)           (0.008)           (0.058)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.092                 0.092             0.333             0.333             0.121             0.121
                                 Observations            19,116                19,116             19,116            19,116            19,116            19,116

Risk Index: Top 3 categories
                        Juvenile Incarceration            -0.074                -0.012             0.133             0.303             0.052             0.218
                                                         (0.006)               (0.073)            (0.011)           (0.108)           (0.008)           (0.067)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.104                 0.104             0.327             0.327             0.124             0.124
                                 Observations            15,465                15,465             15,465            15,465            15,465            15,465

African American
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.072                -0.074             0.147             0.187             0.054             0.103
                                                         (0.005)               (0.050)            (0.009)           (0.271)           (0.005)           (0.928)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.099                 0.099             0.363             0.363             0.130             0.130
                                 Observations             28524                 28524              28524             28524             28524             28524

Hispanic
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.077                -0.179             0.170             0.380             0.087             -0.005
                                                         (0.007)               (0.144)            (0.015)           (0.191)           (0.011)           (0.137)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.099                 0.099             0.230             0.230             0.107              0.107
                                 Observations              6192                  6192              6192              6192              6192               6192

White
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.055                -0.352             0.183             0.151             0.082             0.225
                                                         (0.012)               (0.143)            (0.028)           (0.190)           (0.019)           (0.144)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.087                 0.087             0.186             0.186             0.071             0.071
                                 Observations              2686                  2686              2686              2686              2686              2686

Male
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.070                -0.095             0.158             0.239             0.064             0.162
                                                         (0.004)               (0.039)            (0.008)           (0.085)           (0.005)           (0.044)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.088                 0.088             0.378             0.378             0.141             0.141
                                 Observations             31702                 31702              31702             31702             31702             31702

Female
                          Juvenile Incarceration          -0.093                -0.677             0.081             0.010             0.016             -0.042
                                                         (0.014)               (0.346)            (0.023)           (0.216)           (0.010)           (0.128)
                    Mean of dependent variable             0.159                 0.159             0.053             0.053             0.017              0.017
                                 Observations              5990                  5990              5990              5990              5990               5990

All models include community x weapons offense x year fixed effects and full controls as listed in Table 2. Standard errors are reported in the parentheses and are
clustered at the community level. The probit model results are marginal effects calculated from a model that includes the residual from an OLS regression of juvenile
detention on the instrument and full controls; both steps also include community x weapons offense x year indicators, and the standard errors have not been corrected
for the additional noise introduced by the generated regressor.
