NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LIFE-CYCLE MODELS OF CONSUMPTION:
IS THE EVIDENCE CONSISTENT
WITH THE THEORY?

Angus Deaton

Working Paper No. 1910

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

Presented at the Fifth World Congress of the Econometric
Society,
Cambridge, MA, August 16th - 23rd, 1985. Without implicating
them, I should like to thank Alok Bhargava, Alan Blinder, Martin
Browning, John Campbell, David Card, Rob Engle, Mark Gersovitz,
Steve Goldfeld, Jerry Hausman, Fumio Hayashi, Tom McCurdy, John
Muellbauer, Whitney Newey, Adrian Pagan, Larry Summers, Mark
Watson, and Ken West, for helpful discussions during the preparation of this paper or for providing comments in response to the
first draft. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1910
April 1986

Life—Cycle Models of Consumption:
Is the Evidence Consistent with the Theory?

ABSTRACT

The paper considers a variety of evidence that casts light
on the
validity of the life-cycle model of consumer behavior.
In
first part of the paper, simple non-parametric tests are used the
to

examine representative agent models of consumption and labor
It seems extremely unlikely that post-war United States
evidence can usefully be explained by such a model, at least if
the assumption of intertemporal separability is maintained.
Changes in aggregate consumption bear little relationship to
after tax real interest rates, and consumption has tended to
grow
even during periods of negative real interest rates.
Joint
consideration of consumption and labor supply does nothing to
resolve the problems that arise when consumption is taken by
itself.
It is argued that these results cast doubt, not on
life-cycle theory itself, but on the representative agent
assumption; there is little reason to suppose that changes in
aggregate consumption should be related to the real interest
rate.
The second part of the paper is concerned with the
time-series representation of disposable income and with its
implications for the behavior of consumption under the assumptions of the life-cycle model.
real disposable income is
truly a first-order autoregressive If
process in first differences,
a process that fits the data well and is
popular in the macro time-series literature, becoming increasing
supply.

then the life-cycle
model implies that changes in consumption should be more variable

than innovations in income, a prediction that is manifestly
false.
Various possible resolutions of this problem are re-

viewed, including habit formation and alternative representations
of disposable income. The paper concludes with some evidence on

the excess sensitivity question, why it is that consumption
responds to anticipated changes in income. Monte Carlo evidence
supports the suggestion made by Mankiw and Shapiro that the
presence of time trends can cause severe problems of inference in
models containing variables with unit roots, but the results make
it seem unlikely that this is the cause of the widespread excess
sensitivity findings.

Angus Deaton,
311 Woodrow Wilson School,
Princeton University,
Princeton, N.J. 08540.

Introduction

In this --parer I discuss some empirical evidence that reflects on the

validity of life-cycle models of consumer behavior. I make no attempt to
provide a survey but rather focus on a number of specific issues that
seem to me to be important, or that seem to have been

unreasonably

neglected in the current literature. The paper has three sections. The
first looks at the stylized facts. In particular I look at the
non-parametric evidence with emphasis on both consumption and labor

supply and the interaction between them. I present some aggregate
time-series data from the U.S.; these suggest that simple representative

agent models of the life cycle are unlikely to be very helpful, at least

without substantial modification. it is particularly hard to come up
with one explanation that is consistent both with these data and
the wealth of evidence on consumption and labor supply from microeconomic

information. However, I argue that the main problem here is not so much
the theory as the aggregation; except under extremely implausible
assumptions, including the supposition that consumers are immortal, life
cycle theory does not predict the sort of aggregate relationships that

are implied by representative agent models. In particular, it makes
little sense to look for a simple relationship between the real rate of
interest and the rate of growth of aggregate consumption. Section 2 is
concerned with the estimation of parametric models on aggregate time
series data.

I review briefly the "excess sensitivity" issue, as well as

some of the econometric problems associated with the nonstationarity of
the income and consumption time series.

My main point, however, is to

-2-

argue that there are interactions between the time-series representation

of income and the life-cycle model that have not been adequately
recognized ifi the literature. In particular, if real disposable income
can be adequately represented as a first-order autoregressive process in
first differences, a formulation that is becoming increasingly popular in
the macro literature, then consumption, far from being excessively
sensitive, is not sensitive enough to innovations in current income.
Indeed, the representative agent version of the permanent income

hypothesis can be rejected because it fails to predict the fact that
consumption is smooth, the very fact that it was invented to explain in
the first place.

I consider a number of possible explanations, and offer

a menu of directions for escape: we can abandon the life-cycle theory, we
can abandon intertemporal additivity, or we can abandon our time series

description of income. There are attractions to both of the last two
routes. The section concludes with some summary empirical evidence on
the excess sensitivity issue as well as on the relevance of the
distinction between anticipated and unanticipated variables.

Some time

series estimation problems are reviewed, and though they complicate
inference, I nevertheless find convincing evidence for excess
sensitivity, and more surprisingly for the view that there is little cost
to ignoring the distinction between anticipated and unanticipated income.
Section 4 is a brief summary of the main conclusions.

Section 1: Some non-parametric evidence.

In this section I first follow the lead of Martin Browning (1984) and

discuss non-parametric tests of life-cycle behavior. Browning's work

-4-

-

W0=

wth

(2)

In these equations, c and ht are consumption and hours, Pt is the price

of goods in t, and w the wage rate. Superimposed tildes imply that the
price or wage is discounted back to period 0, so that W0 is the initial

wealth endowment at the beginning of life. Note that the subperiod
utility functions are not indexed on t, and that for the moment, I have
not allowed for a rate of time preference; this is more conveniently
introduced later.

The empirical evidence Consists of a finite set of pairs of observations
on consumption and hours together with their associated discounted prices
and wages. Browning shows that for these data to be consistent with the
theory, it is necessary and sufficient that they satisfy the condition of

"cyclical monotonicity", see also Green and Srivastava (1984). This is
that for any "cycle" of observation indices, s, t

v,

,

say, it

must be the case that

pc
vs + PC
st +

+pc
uv-wh
vs -whSt -

.. -wh
uv
(3)

pc
ss + pc
tt + ....+pc
vv -wh
ss -wh
tt - ... -wh
vv

-3-

follows that of Sydney Afriat, for example, (1967), (1981), and Hal
Varian, (1982),(1983), in seeking to confront a finite number of data
points with the underlying theory without the intermediation of an

arbitrarily chosen functional form. As we shall see, the tests are
particularly simple for the life-cycle model, so that they provide an attractive way of organizing the evidence before moving on to more

conventional analysis. The starting point is the (absurdly) extreme
hypothesis that the evolution of aggregate behavior over time is simply
the unfolding of the predetermined life-cycle plan of a single

representative agent. This prescient individual, having returned from
World War II, or let us say Korea, established a clear and subsequently

correct view of the rest of the post-war period. This hypothesis is of
interest only because, if it cannot be rejected, there is little point in
testing weaker forms, like intertemporal choice under uncertainty.

And

Browning presents evidence from the U.S., the U.K., and Canada that
suggests that there are in fact few obvious discrepancies. Let us see.

The theory begins with the assumption that preferences can be represented
by the intertemporally additive utility function

u = v(c,h)

(1)

subject to a budget constraint, which under certainty, can be written

-6-

decrease as the growth of real wages is greater than or less than the

real rate of interest. If the latter exceeds the former, hours should be
higher now than later in spite of the fact that wages are increasing; in
terms of-tomorrow's goods, the return on today's work is higher than that

on tomorrow's work when the positive real rate of interest is taken into

account. The reader can check that the addition of a rate of time preference to the utility function, so that each period's subutility is
multiplied by the discount factor l/(l+c5) to the power of t, leaves these

predictions unchanged except that the real rate of interest is simply
replaced by the real rate of interest minus the rate of time preference.

Note that if the data fail the conditions (5) and (6), i.e. if the
schedules appear not to be monotone, then recourse can be had to the

weaker condition (4). Provided labor supply behaves as it should, then
there is some scope for a violation by consumption, and vice versa.

However, note that some sign patterns are clearly inconsistent with both

(4) on the one hand, and (5) and (6) on the other. In particular, if the

real rate of interest is pgative and consumption is increasing, then
hours and discounted wages must move in the same direction.

Table 1 presents some data on annual changes in the aggregates for the

U.S. from 1954 through 1984. Definitions of the series are shown at the
foot of the Table. I have followed standard practice in excluding
durable goods from the consumption concept. Note the importance of
calculating real interest rates on an after tax basis; not only is there
a prolonged period of negative rates through the 1970's, but there is

also similar period from 1955 to 1959. The tax adjustment is made by
comparing the yields on (tax-free) AAA municipal bonds with those on

-5-

Since I shall be attempting only to disprove this condition, I work with
one of its implications. For any pair of indices, s and t, cyclical

monotonicity implies that

-

p).(ct

-

c)

(w -

w).(ht

-

h)

(4)

This condition can usefully be contrasted with those that are required if
the utility function (1) is simultaneously intra- as well as
inter—temporally additive, so that life-time utility is the sum of two
sums, one involving hours alone, the other involving only consumption. In
this case, cyclical consistency is equivalent to, for all t and s,

-

(w -

p).(c c)

0

h)

0

-

w).(ht

-

(5)

(6)

i.e. to the (obvious) requirement that the consumption demand function

slope down and that the labor supply function slope up. Note that if t
and s are successive observations in time, then the discounted price is
falling if the real after-tax rate of interest is positive, while the
discounted wage is rising if the proportional increase in real wages is

greater than the real rate of interest. Hence, under simultaneous
additivity, consumption should be increasing over periods when the real
rate of interest is positive, while hours worked should increase or

-8-

simultaneity, Kennan (1985), and so forth, but at this simple level there
is clear evidence against the hypothesis.

Consumption and hours can also be considered jointly. Figure 1 is a
scatter plot for the thirty-one years of real interest rates against the
growth of real wages less the interest rate. Using the series DH1, points
are marked as "1" for consumption growth and hours growth, tl2f

for

consumption growth and hours decline, "3" for consumption decline and
hours growth (one point, 1974), or "0" for 1963 when there was
essentially no change in average hours. (There are no years in which
consumption and hours both declined.) If we look at the second quadrant,

where there is (discounted) wage growth but negative real interest rates,
we know that increases in consumption must be associated with increases.
in hours for cyclical consistency to be satisfied. But of the 16 years

represented in the quadrant in which consumption increased, in 5 of them

hours declined. There are further problems in comparing the first and
fourth quadrants. In 1983 and 1984, by a miracle of supply-side
economics, hours increased (substantially) by both measures while

discounted real wages were falling. Since consumption increased, no
doubt in response to the unprecedented high real interest rates, such
events could be explained by a high degree of complementarity between

consumption and hours. However, in quadrant 1, where wage growth and
interest rates are both positive, there are several years in which hours

declined when consumption rose, presumably because hours and goods are

substitutes! Once again, the addition of a positive rate of time

preference is of little help. Subtracting 6>0 from the real rate r

—7—

similar (taxed) corporate bonds, and then applying the correction factor

to the treasury-bill rate. This may not be correct, but it is better
than making no correction at all.

Since consumption grows in every year except 1974, and since real
interest rates are negative from 1955-59, 68-9, and 71-80, it is
immediately clear that the simple monotonicity condition (5) is violated,

indeed it is only satisfied for 15 out of the 31 years. Allowing for a
positive rate of time preference is of little help in explaining why
consumption grows; a negative rate of time preference would do much
better.

The labor supply side is much more difficult to document, largely
because, with different wage rates for different individuals, the

aggregation makes even less sense. The series DH1 and DH2 are two of the
many possible series for changes in hours; their sign patterns are

similar but not identical. The real wage series is average hourly
earnings of production workers in manufacturing deflated by the implicit

price deflator of consumption. There is little relationship between the
sign pattern in this series and those in either of the two series for

changes in hours. This is what we would expect. The growth of real
wages is close to being a random walk with drift, Ashenfelter and Card
(1982),(1985), while hours move with the cycle, so that we can expect as

many contradictions as confirmations of the monotonicity condition (6).
Clearly, it is possible to take a more sophisticated view of these data,
to allow for aggregation bias, see e.g. Barro and King (1984), for

-10-

this, goods and hours have to be substitutes, which is inconsistent with
the latter period of the typical life-cycle where hours, consumption

the

and

wage rate decline together. One of the strengths of working on

consumptiorr

behavior is

the availability of many different types of data

on which the same hypotheses can be tested, but one of the weaknesses of
the theory is its inability to yield a simple explanation that appears to
work for them all.

11any of these problems go away as soon as the fiction of a representative

consumer is abandoned. In particular, imagine an economy with a
stationary population and no secular real income growth, where each
individual is a perfect life—cycle consumer.

Suppose also that each

consumer has the standard utility function, with identical

parameters,

-

and that the real rate of interest is
greater than the rate of time
preference. In consequence, the life-cycle consumption paths will be
identical (except possibly for scale) for all individuals, and each will
be characterized by a consumption stream that is rising over time.

Furthermore, if all these consumers were to be transported to another
economy with a higher real rate of interest, each of their

consumption

streams would be growing faster than in the original economy.
Nevertheless aggregate consumption in this economy is constant, or at
least it is so unless its inhabitants live for ever. Old people, whose
consumption has been growing steadily over their lives and is thus higher
than their permanent income, are continually dying off and being replaced

by young people whose consumption is much less than their permanent

income. In consequence, consumption in aggregate remains Constant over
time even though it is growing for each individual.

Comparing otherwise

-9—

simply moves the axes of Figure 1 down along the 45° line to the right;
this does nothing for the "bad" points in quadrant 2.

These resurts seem to me to be entirely consistent with, and indeed
almost an explanation for, the results that have been obtained in
parametric studies that have modeled hours and consumption simultaneously

in a life-cycle context. Mankiw, Rotemberg, and Summers (1985), using
quarterly data from the U.S. find violations of concavity in their

estimated utility function. With quite different data, a time series of
cross sectional household surveys from the U.K. ,

Browning, Deaton, and

Irish (1985) also found inconsistencies between theory and evidence, with

violations not only of concavity, but also of symmetry, so that goods and
hours want to be both substitutes and complements for one another, as that
appears to be the case in Figure 1. In this evidence, it is clear

the life-cycle model cannot provide a single unified explanation that

will cover both life-cycle and business cycle evidence. Data from other
sources suggest that the difficulties are quite widespread.

Information

on individual households typically shows hump shaped life-cycle profiles
of consumption, hours, and real wages, see Ghez and Becker (1975), Smith
(1977), Thurow (1969), Browning, Deaton, and Irish (1985). This can be
trivially explained by time varying preferences, and perhaps more
interestingly by variations in household size over the life cycle.

Alternatively, and since there is no obvious life-cycle shape to the real
interest rate, the hump is consistent with the supposition that hours and
goods are complements, as Heckman (1971), (1974) pointed out. However,
in long-run time-series data, consumption increases, hours decline, real

wages grow, and the real rate is (presumably) positive. To account for

-12-

rather a typically humped shape, with declines in consumption in old age.
Thirdly, casual evidence suggests that while children share much of their
parents wealth and standards of living, it is not true that they
immediately begin their life—cycle consumption paths at the same level as
their parents.

Aggregation does not explain all of the contradictions given above, but
it should teach us not to expect aggregate consumption to be growing or
declining as the real rate of interest is greater than or less than the

rate of time preference. Note that "Euler equation" models of
consumption under uncertainty are also guilty of this sin. The Euler
equation is the stochastic version of the first-order condition that
equates the marginal utility of money across periods taking into account
the real interest rate, and it is the equation that determines the rate

of growth of consumption in relation to the real interest rate. Even if
each consumer conforms to the Euler condition, there is no corresponding
aggregate version without some version of the immortality

assumption.

The aggregation assumptions are even more severe for labor supply than
for consumption. Comparing (5) and (6), it is clear that if all consumers
face the same prices and interest rates, and if the population of
consumers is indeed immortal and thus identical at all points in time,
then if each individual satisfies (5), so will the aggregate. However,

different consumers face different wage rates, so that it is very easy to
construct examples in which individual wages and hours move together, but
the averages move contrarily.

—11—

stationary economies with different real interest rates will reveal no
relationship between the real rates and the rate of growth of

consumptiOfl,SinCe the latter is always zero. It is only if there is
population -growth or growth in real income per capita that aggregate

consumption will grow, and the rate of growth will be related to
demographic factors on the one hand, and to a very long moving average of

incomes (i.e. a time trend) on the other. Only if the economy is
continuously on a "golden-age" growth path, with the real interest rate
equal to the real rate of growth, and if it is capable of instantaneously
jumping from one equilibrium growth path to another, only then will there
be a stable relationship between the real rate of interest and the rate

of growth of consumption. All of this was, of course, clearly worked out
and carefully explained thirty years ago in the original papers on the -

life—cycle

hypothesis by Nodigliani and Brumberg (1955), (1979). It is a

pity that the recent literature has lost sight of it.

One counter argument is that individuals may not live for ever, but that
their descendants do, so that in aggregate we have "as if" immortality.
This would require that as one consumer dies, his or her replacement,
grandchild or great-grandchild perhaps, picks up the dead progenitor's
consumption stream where it was momentarily interrupted, so that the

growth path can continue. I find this hard to believe. Firstly, the
discounted present value of future real incomes from here to eternity
would almost certainly yield an eternal stream of real income far in

excess of current income levels. If so, consumption ought to reflect it

now, and it does not. Secondly, evidence on individual life-cycle
consumption patterns does not show steady growth over the life-cycle, but

-14-

Section 2. Aggregate time series, sensitivity, and insensitivity.

2.0 Introduction

Compared with consumption function analysis of a decade or so ago, modern
work is characterized by much greater attention to the time-series

aspects of econometric analysis. This is partly because economists have
become much more aware of the special econometric problems that arise
with inference and estimation in time series models, but also because the
applications of rational expectations theory to the consumption function
has drawn attention to the essential part played by the time series
properties of income in determining the form of the consumption function.
This point was made in the context of the consumption function in Lucas's
original critique (1976), but the basis for much of the subsequent work
has been Hall's (1978) demonstration that, conditional on lagged

consumption, expected future consumption should be independent of other

lagged information. In his original paper, Hall found that such a
formulation was surprisingly difficult to reject.

Subsequent and more

detailed analysis has led to something close to a consensus view that,
contrary to the theory, aggregate consumption is responsive to
anticipated changes in income, see in particular Flavin (1981), Hayashi
(1982), and Hansen and Singleton (1982), though see also Campbell (1985),

Bean (1985) and Blinder and Deaton (1985). Both of the last two studies
find that as the consumption function is expanded to include a wider
range of variables, e.g government expenditure, leisure, and various

relative prices, it becomes more difficult to reject the theory. The

-13-

Before moving on to the more conventional parametric models, it is worth
noting some of the advantages and disadvantages of the non-parametric

technique. Jt will not have escaped the reader that the method shares
much with the journalistic approach to economic events; if variables once
move in the wrong direction relative to one another, a counter-example

has been established, and the theory must be false. We spend a good deal
of time, and for good reason, teaching undergraduates that this is not a

good way to make inferences. Nevertheless, in the present case, the
violations are more endemic than occasional, and an equally simple
parametric approach would undoubtedly yield the same results.
Additionally, it can be argued that since the parametric approach is more
restrictive than the non-parametric, imposing a possibly restrictive

functional form, then rejections of the theory can only get worse if

parametric

-

tests are carried out. However, there is an important sense

in which non-parametric tests are too strong. By their nature, they
focus on the relationship between two, possibly vector valued quantities.
In these models, quantities respond to prices, and to nothing else. It is

therefore straightforward to construct simple, exact models of
consumption and labor supply that contain variables in addition to
prices, and these simple models, though entirely consistent with the
theory, could easily be made to fail the non-parametric tests.

-16—

aggregation over agents is unlikely to be the explanation, though I have
so far been unable to rule out an explanation based on consumers' jointly
modelling consumption, income, and other variables, for example, interest

rates and unemployment. A simple model of habit formation is shown to be
consistent with the evidence.

(iii) It is also possible to make the life-cycle model true by

assumption, and to use its truth to infer backwards to the time series
properties of income.

I consider a number of possible time series

representations for income, and argue that it is unlikely to be possible

to discriminate between them on statistical

grounds, even though each has

very different implications, not only for the life-cycle model, but also
for the way in which we think about the economy as a whole. As a con-

sequence, and in contrast to the general promise of rational

expectations

models, time series analysis of income is unlikely to tell us very much
about how consumption should behave, nor to yield testable implications

for the consumption function. More concretely, the old problem of how
consumption should respond to transitory income is essentially not

resolvable since we cannot tell what are the implications of income
innovations for the future of income.

(iii) On the excess sensitivity issue, I discuss briefly the issue raised

by Mankiw and Shapiro (1984) of whether or not the non-stationarity of
the joint consumption income process implies that tests of excess

sensitivity are biased against the rational expectations model. I show
that the "excess sensitivity" results

on U.S. quarterly data cannot be

explained away by this phenomenon. Further, there is little evidence

-15-

"excess sensitivity" finding, which is usually attributed to the presence
of a significant fraction of liquidity-constrained consumers, was also
confirmed inThn excellent study of food expenditures using the PSID by

Hall and Mishkin (1982). Even so, there is much good work currently
being done on panel data, and the final results are by no means in. For
example, and again using the PSID, Altonji and Slow (1985) have found
that allowing for measurement error can make a large difference to the
results of tests of simple versus rational expectations type models.

Here I wish to discuss the following issues:

(i) I look at two standard time-series models for real disposable income.

In the first, income is taken to be stationary around a deterministic
trend, and the residuals after trend removal are modeled as a low order

ARNA, typically AR(2). In the second, income is made stationary by first
differencing, and the differences modeled as a low order ARNA, typically

an AR(1) with positive persistence. Both procedures fit the data well,
both have their determined adherents, and it is extremely difficult to

tell them apart. However, if the second procedure is correct, it turns
out that innovations to permanent income are more variable than
innovations to current income, so that life-cycle theory predicts that
changes in consumption should be larger than innovations in income. It
seems fairly clear that such a conclusion is false.

(ii) Since the difference model of income is a plausible and attractive
one, and since it is widely used, I consider some explanations for the
smoothness of consumption that are consistent with it.

I argue that

—18-

value, it can ultimately be expected to return to the baseline trend.
The differencing procedure may or may not imply that the effects of
shocks eventually die out, depending on what sort of time series process

is fitted to the differences. While the

in income is stationary

and has a(n unconditional) mean that remains constant through time, there
is in general nothing that acts to bring the level of income back to any

particular path. In the simplest example of a random walk with drift,
which turns out to be a good description of the growth of the real wage
in the U.S., previous changes are immediately consolidated into the

baseline, so that a good year with a large wage increase means that we
can expect wage levels to be permanently higher with no expectation that

at some future date, the good fortune will have to be paid for.

To compare the two approaches, I estimated simple representations using
seasonally adjusted quarterly U.S. data from 1954,1 to 1984,4.

I use two

income concepts, real disposable labor income, y, and total income,
including capital income, z. The latter concept is close to the published

NIPA figure, and the former was constructed from other published data,
see Blinder and Deaton (1985) for further details and for the series

itself. It is important to make some attempt to exclude capital income,
since it is the labor income concept that is the appropriate one for
life-cycle models, and there is no presumption that the two series have

the same time-series properties. The detrending procedure is best
carried out by estimating the autoregression with time variables

included. By the Frisch-Waugh theorem, the results are numerically
identical, but the standard errors allow us to assess the relative

—17—

that the distinction between anticipated and unanticipated income that is
required by rational expectations theory has any basis in the empirical
evidence.

2.1 The time-series processes of consumption and income

There is no clear consensus on how best to represent the process

generating real disposable income. Everyone agrees that real income is
not stationary, but that is far from enough to produce a consensus model.

One approach is to remove a time trend from income, and then to fit a

time—series representation to the residuals. On quarterly U.S. data, an
AR(2) seems to do the job. The other approach, more favored by
"professional" time-series analysts, see in particular Beveridge and

-

Nelson (1981), is to difference either income or its logarithm, and to
fit the time series model to the difference, rather than to the deviation

from trend. More recently, Doan, Litterman and Sims (1985) have
recommended first differencing the logarithms of virtually all trending
macroeconomic time-series as a prelude to fitting vector autoregressive

models. That it is rates of growth rather than levels that should be the
appropriate object of our attention is an idea that has much to commend
it.

At a conceptual level, these two procedures are quite different, and they
have different implications for the estimation and interpretation of the
relationship between consumption and income.

The detrending procedure

assumes that trend around which real income moves is fixed and deterministic; even if income is temporarily shocked above or below its trend

-20-

insufficient to induce stationarity. After

deleting insignificant terms,

including the time trends, the differenced models are

8.4 ÷ 0.435
(3.3)

R2=0.1918, Q(33)=37.7, ESE= 25.3

(5.4)
(9)

12.5 +

0.377

R2=0.1428, Q(33)=35.7, ESE= 27.7

(4.2) (4.5)
(10)

These are simple and parsimonious descriptions of two nonstationary time
series; the change in labor income is somewhat more autoregressive and
has a less variable innovation than does the change in total income and

this is what one would expect. The closeness of (9) and (10) to the

corresponding unrestricted forms (7) and (8) suggests that formal

-

tests

are unlikely to be able to separate them, and this is in fact the case.
Following Dickey and Fuller (1981), the adequacy of the unit-root models
(9) and (10) can be tested by calculating an "F-test" for these models

against the more general alternatives in which y (or z) is regressed on
its first lag, its lagged first-difference, and a time trend. The

calculated statistics are 1.97 for labor income and 3.95 for total income
compared with the critical values given by Dickey and Fuller of 6.49 at
5% and 5.47 at 10%.

—19—

contributions of both elements. For labor income, y, the regression
equation is

= 84.9

+1.39 y0.46 t-206 t-3°4 t-4063

(2.3) (15.2)

(-2.9)

(1.1)

(-1.5)

(2.1)
(7)

R2=0.9983, Q(33) =31.7, ESE =25.1

while, for total real disposable income, z, the regression is

z =139.7

(2.8)

+1.30 z_1-O.35 z_2+O.O8 z_3-0.09 _4+i.35 t
(14.7)

(—2.3)

(0.5)

(—1.0)

(2.8)

R20.9987, Q(33) =31.6, ESE =27.1.

(8)

Note that these time-series representations are broadly similar, though
the absolute values of the coefficients on the first and second lags are
larger for labor than for total income, while the standard deviation of
the innovation is about 20% larger for the broader concept.

The time

trends are both significant, though much less important than the
autoregressive components, and if the regressions are rerun in
logarithmic form, neither time trend is significant at conventional

levels. Note that at the parameter values shown, both autoregressions
are estimated to be stationary, but in each case by a very small margin.
Indeed, the estimated coefficients strongly suggest a differenced model

in which y is modelled as an AR(1). This would be the immediate reaction
of most time-series analysts; for example, Beveridge and Nelson (1981) do
not quote results like (7) and (8) but simply state that detrending is

-22-

is,

the estimated autoregressions suggest that, not only are shocks

permanent, but they are positively autoregressive, so that a better than
average change in any given quarter can be expected to lead to further

good fortune in subsequent quarters. This implies that the permanent
income value of an unanticipated change in income is greater than the

change itself. Clearly, the choice between the two time series processes
considered here, though almost impossible to make on statistical grounds,
is of considerable importance in calculating permanent income.

How then can we choose between, on the one hand, the (marginally)

stationary representation of the deviations of income from trend, and on

the other, the AR(1) representation of the differences? Since the data
cannot discriminate between them, the choice must be made on theoretical

grounds. For myself, I find it hard to believe that real per capita
income is centered round a deterministic trend. As emphasized in a
recent paper by Campbell and Mankiw (1986), such a representation tends

to assume that income shocks originate from the demand side rather than

from supply. If some particularly unpleasant negative "epsilon" was the
result, for example, of the destruction of part of the capital stock,

then I see no reason for believing that income will eventually get back

on the old trend. It is much more credible that it wouldbegin to grow
again from the new lower base, which is what the first difference model

says it will do. Of course, the AR(1) first-difference model is far from
being the only time-series representation of income that allows this sort
of shock persistence, but it is certainly one of the most parsimonious
and widely used.

-21-

Consider then a representative consumer who is calculating his or her
permanent income and whose representative income is generated by one of

these stochatic processes. For the general case, where income (or
deviations of income around a deterministic trend) are generated by an
ARMA(p,q) process, the change in permanent income from t-l to t is given,
see Flavin (1981), by

=

r[l

+(1 +r)n}

(11)

{l -(1 +r)5p}

where the n's are the MA coefficients, the p's the AR coefficients, u is
the current innovation, and r is the interest rate, here assumed to be
fixed to avoid complications that are irrelevant to my current concerns.

Equation (11) is valid whether or not the process is non-stationary, see

Hansen and Sargent (1981). If we re-estimate the stationary labor income
equation above excluding the longest two lags, the autoregressive
parameters are 1.41 and -0.45, so that, with a real rate of 1%, the
factor multiplying the innovation in the above equation is 0.22, a

sizeable but reasonable figure. However, if we move to equation (9),
which as we have seen cannot be rejected against the model with a time
trend, the corresponding parameters are 1.435 and -0.435,-so that the
response of consumption to a unit innovation is now 1.8, i.e. eight times
as large.

For the non-stationary model (9), such a result is intuitively obvious.

If income were a random walk, permanent and measured income would be the
same; an income shock is expected to be sustained indefinitely.

As it

-23-

If the arguments in favor of the differenced model are accepted, then the
permanent income model of the representative consumer is in some trouble.
Innovations in permanent income should be magnified versions of the
innovations— in measured income, so that if, to take the simplest case,

consumption is equal to permanent income, then the variance of the change
in consumption should be

than the variance of the innovation in

the income process. Equation (9) above gives the standard deviation of
the income innovation process as $25.27 per capita in 1972 prices. The

standard deviation of the change in aggregate consumption of goods and
services over the same period, 1954,1 to 1984,4 is $12.08. Even if it is

only required that consumption be proportional to permanent income,

identical problems arise. The standard deviation of the rate of growth
of consumption is still only a half of the standard deviation of the
innovation in the AR(1) process describing the first difference of the

logarithm of income. Even this understates the difficulties, since no
allowance has been made for any other shocks to consumption. The
addition of shocks that are independent àf innovations to income,
"transitory consumption," will further increase the expected variation in
consumption, and further deepen the puzzle.

Of course, the representative consumer may be able to predict income

changes better than can a simple autoregression. Indeed, if equation (9)
is supplemented by other variables, including several lags of
consumption, wealth, interest rates, and inflation rates, the multiple

correlation coefficient can be doubled from 0.20 to 0.40. But even if
the R2 were to be 0.50, the standard deviation of the innovation would
still be $20.2, which is still very much larger than the corresponding

-24-

figure for changes in consumption. However, this is not the relevant
comparison. If the consumer uses a number of other variables to predict
income, thenthose variables must themselves be predicted if they are to
be a gu±de to future values of incomes, so that the innovation in
permanent income will ultimately be a function, not only of the income
innovation, but also of the innovations in all of these other variables.
West (1985) has shown that, in spite of these complexities, expansion of
the information set cannot increase the variance of the innovations to
permanent income, at least provided that the discount rate is positive
and that permanent income is discounted over an infinite horizon.

Discounting is the key to this result. If, for example, today's
unemployment rate helps predict tomorrow's income, knowledge of the fact
can help shift some of today's uncertainty to tomorrow at which date
unemployment itself will have to be forecast in order to get the next

day's income. But, with a positive discount rate, the postponement of
shocks helps reduce the innovation variance in the estimate of permanent
income.

I have not made any progress in attempts to quantify the size of

this reduction, and remain doubtful the that more complex forecasting

equation can resolve the paradox. Even so, it remains an important
avenue for further research.

2.2

Why is consumption so smooth? Aggregation and separability.

One plausible explanation for the smoothness of consumption is that
individuals have a great deal of personal, idiosyncratic information
about the likely future course of their labor income, so that even if
their income path looked very noisy to an observer, it would contain few

-26-

sh

Et

=

h

ct =

sh

sh

u

+

eh
Ut

+C eh

+

(13)

(14)

sh
(15)

If, as seems reasonable, it is assumed that each sub-component of
averages to zero over the population, then aggregate average

consumption

Lc and income zy are given by

=

uS

(16)

Ut

(17)

so that consumption can be smoother than income if the variance of the
average surprise component of the common innovation is less than the

variance of the aggregate innovation. If u is genuinely unpredictable
at the aggregate level, it is hard to see why it should be predictable by

individuals; it is by definition an aggregate surprise. The ability of
individuals to anticipate a large component of their own incomes is
largely irrelevant to the relationship between aggregate (common) shocks
in income and consumption, at least in this simple model.

If not aggregation, then what? One simple possibility is to abandon the
intertemporal additivity assumption with which I began. I think that

—25—

surprises for the individual so that consumption would nevertheless be

very smooth. The question is whether this explanation can carry through
to the aggregate.

Unfortunately, relatively little is known for certain about the
relationship between individual and aggregate income fluctuations over

time. There is considerable and accumulating evidence that the income
changes observed in panel data such as the PSID are heavily contaminated

by errors of measurement. For example, by comparing two different wage
indicators in the PSID, Altonji (1985) estimates that 72.2 of the

observed variance of wages is measurement error, see also Abowd and Card
(1985) and Ashenfelter (1985) for other evidence that is consistent with

this finding. In consequence, I have no direct evidence to offer, only a
balance of argument.

Consider the simplest case where, for each consumer h, labor income as

perceived by an outsider follows a random walk. Write this as

=

where u is a common

idiosyncratic

u+
component across all agents, and

(12)

is the

component which averages to zero over the population as a

whole. Decompose each of these into their (by individual h) anticipated
and unanticipated components, with consumption responding only to the
latter

-28-

taking c =

c

-

c1

as instrents, and then shows how to

rewrite the budget constraint so as to define corresponding prices that
reflect not only market prices of the goods, but also the costs or

benefits of consumption now in terms of pleasure foregone later. Doing
this gives a budget constraint under certainty of

pc = W
Pt =

-

ac {l -/(1 +r)}

(1 +r)_t

{/(i +r)}k

(19)

(20)

where W is the usual discounted present value of human and

nonhuman wealth. If preferences are such that c is constant over time,
then the consumption function has the form

c =

c1+ B

[y -

arc

-

/(l

+r)}1 1

(21)

where 8 (1 +r -a)/(1+r) and permanent income is as conventionally

defined. If r is small enough, 13(1 - a) and the second term in square
brackets is small so that for the differenced version, we have

=

ac1+

(1 -

a)Ly

(22)

-27-

this

ought to be done with some reluctance, since almost any lag pattern

between income and consumption can be modeled by a insertion of suitable
lags of consumption and hours into the current period subutility

function; In consequence, the hypothesis loses much of its sharpness and
predictive power. Nevertheless, if the evidence is against additivity,

then alternatives must be explored. If lagged hours affects the
enjoyment of current leisure, and if current consumption and leisure are
not separable within the period, there is no problem in explaining the
"excess sensitivity" finding, that the changes in consumption depends on
last period's income, and there is a growing body of work that interprets
the evidence in this way, see e.g. Kydland and Prescott (1982),

Eichenbaum, Hansen, and Singleton (1984), and Singleton (1984). There is
also a long tradition of modeling "habit-formation" or "stock-effects" in
the demand analysis literature, see Phlips (1972), Houthakker and Taylor
(1970), and especially the elegant work of Spinnewyn (1979a), (1979b).

Such models can also explain the smoothness of consumption in relation to
income.

Consider the simplest model of non-separability recently discussed and

applied to British data by Muellbauer (1985). The utility function is

u =

(1+ôYtv(ct

-

ac1), >O

(18)

where a is a measure of habit formation. Spinnewyn suggests taking

-30-

hence the relationship between innovations to income and changes in

permanent income. Note also that the first difference of y is a
stationary process and can easily be seen to be a (restricted) ARMA(2,2).

Watson contrasts this unobserved components model with the AR(1) first
differences model as a description of the logarithm of real GDP, a
quantity that has very similar time series properties to those of real

disposable income. Not surprisingly, the AR(2) for the second component
looks very similar to the AR(2) implied by the ARINA(1,1,0) in the

differenced model, and the growth term g is the mean of y. Moreover,
both models perform about equally well over the sample (1949 through
1984), though the unobservable components model does somewhat better in

tests of longer-run forecasting ability. However, because the
-

unobservable components model attributes only a fraction of the current
innovation to shifts in the underlying trend, the effects of innovations
on present discounted values are much less than in the ARIMA, so that
such a model is entirely consistent with the change in permanent income

being substantially less than the innovation in income. Watson's
analysis therefore provides us with a model that allows permanent
supply-side shocks but is nevertheless consistent with consumption being
smoother than income.

In a very recent paper, Campbell and Mankiw (1986) have directly
addressed the question of the extent to which innovations in GDP are

permanent. They use exact maximum likelihood methods to estimate a wide
range of ARI'IA processes for the first differences of the logarithm of

GDP, and use the results to calculate the fraction of an innovation that

-29-

If we assume that 80% of permanent income eventually gets consumed as

non-durable goods and services, then the variance results given above

require an etimate of a of 0.78, so that current consumption exerts a
very high price in terms of future enjoyment.

2.3 Alternative specifications for the income process.

Each of the alternative income generation processes can be modified in a

number of different ways. The deterministic trend model is an example of
an unobserved components model, in which the time series is decomposed

into two or more components. A model that is very close to this has
recently been proposed by Watson (1986). In his model, the trend is not
deterministic but is modelled as a random walk with drift, but as in our
original model, there is a low order stationary process in addition to

the trend. The model can therefore be written in the form

z

x +
=

g

=

a1z1

(23)

÷

+
+

(24)

vlt

a2z2

+

v2

(25)

where v1 and v2 are two mutually orthogonal white noise processes. Note
that, if the variance of v1 is zero, Watson's model is exactly the same
as an AR(2) around a deterministic trend, but the addition of v1 permits

the trend itself to shift. In consequence, innovations in y will contain
innovations in both v1, which are permanent, and innovations in v2, which

are not. The ratio of the variances of the two types of innovations
determines the fraction of any given innovation that will persist and

-32-

unanticipated events is surely one that makes a great deal of sense. A
simple form of a "surprise" consumption function estimated on the same

U.S. quarterly data is shown in the first column of Table 2. Once again,
the

income -variable is

the Blinder and Deaton (1975) series for labor

income, not the conventional NIPA magnitude. The dependent variable is
the change in the logarithm of consumption of non-durable goods and

services. Lagged consumption is included in order to capture any
possible habit-formation effects, while lagged income is included largely

to test for "excess sensitivity". The change in income is decomposed
with reference to a supplementary equation (not shown) in which the
change is explained by two lags each of income and consumption together

with a quadratic time trend. Time is included to model the very long-run
moving average of income that is predicted by the aggregation theory of

Section 1 above. The econometric procedure is to first run the supplementary regression followed by the main regression with the expectations
and surprises replaced by their calculated values from the first stage.
The standard errors are calculated by a straightforward application of
Newey's (1984) method; for all the models shown here, the results of
Pagan (1984) and Bean (1985) apply, so that the procedure is
asymptotically fully efficient, and the standard errors are identical to
the raw OLS standard errors for the ?tsurprise?? terms, and to the

two-stage least squares standard errors for the others. All standard
errors and results could have been equivalently obtained by applying
three stage least squares to the system.

Column

(1) of Table 2 shows the

basic regression with only income and

consumption included. It shows little evidence that the rational

-31—

is expected to persist indefinitely. Their results, though not
inconsistent with the belief that such a question is hard to answer,

suggest thatinnovations are persistent, frequently with a long-run
effect that is larger than their immediate impact. If these results
survive further testing, we are back with the original paradox.

Life-cycle theory predicts that changes in consumption should be larger
than innovations in income, and the prediction is false.

At the present, it is probably safest to reserve judgment. It is clear
that the nature of real disposable income or of GDP is such that it is
extremely difficult to discriminate between a wide range of different
time series representations, all of which have similar short-run
properties, but which differ radically in the way in which they respond

in the long-run to short-run shocks. And not surprisingly, the data are
much more informative about short-run than about long-run properties.
Unfortunately however, the relationship between consumption and income
depends on the long-run properties of the income generation process, the

very properties about which we know very little. If further research
cannot modify this conclusion, then in the end, the study of the income
process will have told us very little about the structure of the

consumption function, and the promise that is held out bythe rational
expectations approach will remain unfulfilled.

2.4 Surprise consumption functions and excess sensitivity

Whatever the final verdict on rational expectations consumption
functions, the distinction that they recognize between anticipated and

-34-

surprises matter is resoundingly rejected, whether or not lagged
consumption is included in the regression, though now the coefficients on
the two wealth terms are sufficiently different to permit a rejection of
the traditi-onal formulation without the decomposition. Note also that if
the coefficients on lagged consumption and income are equal and opposite,
consumption has a long run unit elasticity with respect to income and the
model is of the partial adjustment variety that has recently been much
recommended in Britain by Hendry and his collaborators, Davidson, Hendry,

Srba and Yeo (1978), Davidson and Hendry (1981), and Hendry (1983). In
both models this restriction is rejected at the 0.5% level or less.

More and more detailed results of this kind can be found in Blinder and
Deaton (1985), and there are more elaborate models in which it is
-

possible

to reject the traditional in favor of the surprise version.

However, here I am more concerned with evaluating an objection to this
type of testing that has recently been raised by Mankiw and Shapiro

(1986). Mankiw and Shapiro note, as in Section 2.1 above, that real
income is non-stationary, and they model it by a random walk.

They point

out that if the random walk formulation is correct, permanent income and
measured income are identical, so that if consumption is equal to

permanent income, all three series are the same random walk. Hence, if
the change in consumption is regressed on lagged income to test for

excess sensitivity, the regression is essentially the regression of a
random walk on its own first lag so that the excess sensitivity test is a
t-test. for the unit root in a first-order autoregression.

But as can be

checked from the tables provided by Dickey and Fuller (1981) for this

situation, the t-distribution is a poor guide to the actual distribution

-33-

expectations model can help explain the data. The coefficient on the
unanticipated income term is almost identical with the coefficient on the
anticipated change in income, and the lagged value of income also

attractsa -statistically significant coefficient. The chi-squared test
for the joint exclusion of lagged and anticipated income has a p-value
that is less than one in 10,000, and even if the test is repeated with
lagged consumption excluded from the regression (so as to conform to
other tests such as that by Flavin), the 'surprises-only" hypothesis can
still be rejected at around the one percent level, the "variant" figure

in the table. However, the test against what I call the traditional
model, one in which there are no surprises, is accepted. The
decomposition of the change in income into its components has no
significant effect in the regression, and offers no improvement over

regressing

-

consumption on income, income lagged, consumption lagged, and

time. This "traditional" formulation has graced (or disgraced) standard
Keynesian macroeconometric models for decades, and has been widely

attacked on rational expectations grounds. And while it may be difficult
to defend from a theoretical perspective, it is entirely consistent with
the data.

Column two show the results of including wealth terms, again decomposed

into anticipated and unanticipated terms. As before, prediction
equations are fitted for these variables, and the VAR's are extended to

include two lags of wealth. The results for the wealth variable are much
more satisfactory, with anticipated changes in wealth having no
significant effect, while wealth surprises have a highly significant

positive effect on consumption. However, the hypothesis that 21Y

-36-

formulation, consumption responds one for one to the innovation in income
and has no other source of variation. The model that was estimated was

b0 +

b1logy i+ btime + error

(31)

In a hundred replications, errors were drawn from independent normal
distributions, and the income and consumption series calculated afresh
each time, with their actual value in 1953 serving as a base for the

calculations. The technical problem here is, as in Nankiw and Shapiro,
the non-stationarity of the income series in the regression, so that

standard results cannot be called on to derive the distribution of the
calculated t't-statistics.' We would expect the difficulties to be most

severe when the consumption series is most closely linked to the income

series, i.e. in the baseline case where t1 and there is no independent
innovation in consumption.

Table 3 presents the results. The baseline case, though for a different
model than that used by Mankiw and Shapiro, and one that is more like the

actual data, essentially reproduces their results. The mean value of
the absolute value of the t-statistjcs is 2.25 with a standard error of

0.075, and the true null hypothesis that lagged income isabsent from the

regression is rejected 62% of the time. The rest of the experiments
differ from the first in that by setting

= .003842, an independent

source of variation is introduced into the change of consumption. In the
case where t=0.3, this setting replicates the observed variance of the

change in log consumption. This makes little difference to the results

—35-

of the so-called t-statistic in this situation, even asymptotically.

Mankiw and Shapiro generate artificial series for income and consumption
on the assumption that consumption equals permanent income and that the

random wàlk model is true. They then find in a Monte Carlo experiment in
which the change in consumption is regressed on lagged income and a time
trend, that the median value of the t-statistic on the latter is -2.2
with a consequent "excess sensitivity" finding 61% of the time, even
though the rational expectations permanent income model is true.

Mankiw and Shapiro's procedures are somewhat different from those in
Table 2, and the time series analysis presented above does not suggest

that income is a pure random walk. However, the parallels are close
enough to be worrying, and it seemed worth discovering how sensitive the
Mankiw and Shapiro results would be to variations of their assumptions in
the directions of the models estimated here.

I work with the following

artificial model:

Alogc = a +tu2 +

1logy = p +

plogy

+

u1
u2

E(u4.) 0, Var(u,t)O

E(u2t) 0, Var(u2) a

(26)

(27)

Equation (27) replicates reality, and in all the experiments reported
below I use the estimated parameter values and variances to generate the

data. For equation (26), I always take a to be the sample mean of logc
over 1954,1 to 1984,4. Ny base case, corresponding as closely as

possible to that of Mankiw and Shapiro, is where t1 and

=0. In this

-38-

coefficients, particularly those on income and wealth, are more or Less

unchanged,

and the tests for the surprises only hypothesis and for the

traditional formulation give the same results as before. The test for
the long—run unit elasticity are, however, extremely sensitive to the

inclusion of the time trend. Of course, these results do not tell us
whether or not the time trend ought to be in the regression, but that
given the non-stationarity of income and consumption, it is very

difficult to tell. However, these time-series problems, although real
and potentially misleading, do not appear to be the source of the finding
of excess sensitivity.

Section 3.

Summary a.nd conclusions.

The argument in this paper may be briefly summarized as follows:

(1) Non—parametric tests using aggregate time series data suggest that

the representative consumer life-cycle model is likely to have difficulty
in explaining the evidence on the joint movement of the real after tax

interest rate and changes in consumption. Taking consumption and labor
supply jointly helps very little. This is hardly surprising since the
labor supply model does even worse at explaining the evidence on hours

and wages than does the consumption model at explaining consumption and

interest rates. These tests are very naive and hardly constitute a
convincing rejection of the life-cycle model. But the question arises as
to how much intellectual effort is worth expending in the attempt to
rescue a model that seems to be so blatantly at odds with the raw,
untreated data.

-37—

if

remains as high as unity. However, as is reduced, so that the

change in consumption varies less with the shock to income, the t-values

become smaller, though even in the (realistic) case where t=O.3, the mean
is stilF 1:46 and the null would be rejected in 26% of the cases. If the
t-values were normally distributed, the expected values would be
2/J(2Tt)=O.8O, and the rejection frequency would be 5%. Experiments 1-3b

reproduce the three previous ones but with the time trend excluded.

There is a remarkable improvement with the t-vaiues much closer to their
theoretical values and rejection frequencies of 8%, 7%, and 5%

respectively. Clearly, it is the presence of the time trend that causes
the greatest difficulty and without it there are no great difficulties in

making inferences in the usual way. The final experiment sets t=2.12
which is the theoretically correct value if the rational expectations

-

model is true given the process determining income. These results are
essentially the same as when 1=1; things do not get any worse, (Note that
these results do not suggest that a model of this kind could have
generated the actual data. If it had, we would indeed be likely to make
incorrect inferences, but the data would look very different, and in

particular changes in consumption would have a very much larger variance
than changes in income.)

The results of these experiments suggest that the results discussed above

should be recalculated without the time trends. The new results are
reported on the right hand side of Table 2, and the differences are not

as large as suggested by the Monte Carlo results. Here, the main
interaction is between the time trend and the lagged consumption term,

which does not figure in the excess sensitivity tests. Other

-40-

contain non-stationary variables. However, these difficulties do not
yield an adequate explanation of why consumption appears to respond to
information that is not previously unanticipated.

List of works cited:

Abowd, John M.,and David Card (1985),"The covariance structure of
earnings and hours changes in three panel data sets,' Princeton
University, processed.
Afriat, Sydney N. (1981),"On the constructability of consistent price
indices between several periods simultaneously", in Deaton, Angus
S.(ed), Essays in the theory and measurement f consumer behaviour
in honour of Sir Richard Stone, Cambridge. Cambridge University
Press,pp 133-61
Afriat, Sydney N. (1967),"The construction of a utility function from
expenditure data", International Economic Review, 8, 67-77.
Altonji, Joseph (1986),"Intertemporal substitution in labor
supply:evidence from micro data', Journal of Political
Economy (forthcoming)
Altonji, Joseph ,and Aloysius Slow (1985),"Testing the response of consumption to income changes with (noisy) panel data", Industrial
Relations Section Working Paper No.186, Princeton University,
processed
Ashenfelter, Orley (1984),"Macroeconomjc analyses and microeconomic
analyses of labor supply", presented to Carnegie—Rochester
Conference, Bal Harbor, Florida, November 1983.
Ashenfelter, Orley,and David Card (l985),"Why have unemployment rates in
Canada and the U.S. diverged?" Industrial Relations Section,
Princeton University, processed.
Barro, Robert J., and Robert G.King (1984),"Time-separable preferences
and intertemporal-substitution models of business
cycles", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99, 817-39
Bean, Charles R. (1986),"The estimation of surprise models and the
surprise consumption function", Review of Economic Studies,
forthcoming.

—39-

(ii) Unless consumers are immortal, or unless their children simply pick
up the eternal dynastic consumption track where their parents left off,
the life-cycle model does not predict that aggregate data should be

explicable by a representative consumer model. In particular, the rate
of growth of average consumption should not be directly related to the

real rate of interest. This casts doubt on the rationale for "Euler
equation" type consumption models which rest heavily on the relationship
between these two variables.

(iii) The evolution of real disposable income over time, whether
including or excluding capital income, is well described by an AR(l) in

the first difference with a positive autoregressive term. Given this,
changes in aggregate consumption ought to have a variance that is greater

than the variance of the innovation in the income process. This
prediction is falsified by the evidence, and it seems unlikely that
inappropriate aggregation can explain this conflict with life cycle

theory. The finding can be explained by habit formation, and/or by the
adoption of different time-series processes for income, though the
question of whether these last are appropriate is very far from being
settled.

(iv) Surprise consumption functions estimated on quarterly U.S.
aggregate time-series show clear evidence of excess sensitivity of

consumption to predictable events. This excess sensitivity is consistent
with a simple minded traditional view in which the distinction between

anticipated and unanticipated income terms is ignored. There are very
real problems associated with inference in models such as these which

-42-

Green, R.C.,and S. Srivastava (1984),"Expected utility maximization and
observable demand behavior", Graduate School of Industrial
Administration, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, processed.

Hall, RobertE. (1978),"Stochastic implications of the life cycle-permaaent-income hypothesis: theory and evidence, Journal
of Political Economy, 86, 971-87
Hall, Robert E.,and Frederic S.Mishkin (1982),"The sensitivity of
consumption to transitory income: estimates from panel data on
households", Econometrica, 50, 461-81
Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth J.Singleton (1982),"Generalized
instrumental variables estimation of non-linear rational
expectations models", Econornetrica, 50, 1269-86
Hayashi, Fumio (1982),"The permanent income hypothesis: estimation and
testing by instrumental variables", Journal of Political Economy,
90, 895-916
Hecknian, James J. (1971),"Three essays on the supply of labor and the
demand for goods", unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Princeton University.

Heckman, James J. (1974),"Life cycle consumption and labor supply: an
explanation of the relationship between consumption and income over
the life cycle", American Economic Review, 64 188-99.
Hendry, David F. (1983),"Econometrjc modelling: the consumption function
in retrospect", Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 30, 193-220.
Houthakker, Hendrik S.,and Lance D. Taylor (1970), Consumer demand
in the United States: Analysis and projections, Cambridge. Harvard
University Press.
Kennan, John (1985),"An econometric analysis of aggregate fluctuations in
labor supply and demand", Department of Economics, University of
Iowa, processed.
Kydland, Finn E.,and Edward C.Prescott (1982),"Time to build and
aggregate fluctuations", Ecotiometrica, 50, 1345-70.
Lucas, Robert E. (1976), "Econometric policy evaluation: a critique", in
Brunner, Karl & Alan Meltzer, eds, The Phillips
curve and labor markets, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, 1, Amsterdam, North-Holland. pp 19-46
Mankiw, N.Greg, Julio J.Rotemberg, & Lawrence H.Sunimers
(1985) ,"Intertemporal substitution in macroeconomics",
Quarterly Journal of Economics,

Mankiw, N.Greg,and Matthew Shapiro (1986),"Trends, random walks, and
tests of the permanent income hypothesis", Economics Letters,
forthcoming.

-41-

Beveridge, S.,and Charles R.Nelson (1981),"A new approach to decomposition of economic time series into permanent and transitory
components", Journal of Monetary Economics, 7,151-74

Blinder, AlaiiS.,and Angus Deaton (1985),"The time-series consumption
function revisited", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,2, pp
465-521.
Browning, Martin J.(1984) "A non-parametric test of the life-cycle
rational expectations hypothesis", Department of Economics, McNaster
University, processed
Browning, Martin J., Deaton, Angus S.,and Margaret J.Irish (1985),'A
profitable approach to labor supply and commodity demands over the
life cycle", Econometrica, 53, 503-43.
Campbell, John Y.,(1985),"Does saving anticipate declining labor income?
An alternative test of the permanent income hypothesis," Princeton
University, Department of Economics, processed.
Campbell, John Y.,and N.Greg Mankiw,(1986),"Are output fluctuations
transitory?" Princeton University, Department of Economics,
processed.

Davidson, James E.H.,and David F.Hendry (1981),"Interpreting econometric
evidence: consumers expenditure in the U.K. European
Economic Review, 16, 177-92
Davidson, James E.H.,et al. (1978),"Econometric modelling of the
aggregate time-series relationship between consumers expenditure and
income in the United Kingdom", Economic Journal, 88, 661-92
Dickey, David A.,and Wayne A.Fuller (1981),"Likelihood ratio statistics
for autoregressive time series with a unit root", Econometrica, 49,
105 7—72

Doan, Thomas, Robert Litterman,and Christopher A. Sims, (1985),
"Forecasting and conditional projection using realistic prior
distributions," Econometric Reviews, 3, 1-100

Eichenbaum, Martin S., Lars Peter Hansen, & Kenneth J. Singleton
(1984),"A time series analysis of representative agent models of
consumption and leisure choice under uncertainty", Graduate School
of Industrial Administration, Carnegie-Mellon University,Pittsburgh,
processed.
Flavin, Marjorie (1981),"The adjustment of consumption to changing
expectations about future income", Journal of Political Economy, 89,
974-1009
Ghez, Gilbert, and Gary S.Becker (1975), The allocation of time and
goods over the life-cycle, New York. Columbia University Press.

—44-

TABLE

1

Changes in consumption, hours, wages, and real
after tax interest rates

Date

DC

DLNC

0.41
2.85

1954

T.57

1955

53.0

1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963

43.9
18.6
9.82
53.5
18.2
27.8
43.6
38.5

2 . 30

0.96
0.50

2.69
0.90
1.36
2.10
1.82

1964

74.2

3.41

1965
1966

78.4
77.2

1967

58.5

1968

83.3

1969

72.6

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978

60.6
35.2
88.0
56.0

3.48
3.31
2.44
3.37
2.85

—3.51

RR

0.22
-0.19
-0.38
-0.97
-0. 12
-0.06

0.80
0.88
0.34
0.45

1.03

DH 1

DH2

-5. 1

-2. 1

1.8

0.6
-2.5

—1.5

2.4

2.8

2.3

-4.4
1.2

-0.5

-2.2
0.2
0.0
0.5

-1.6
-1.4
0.3

1.4

0.3

1.9

0.5
1.2

0.85

1.0

0.4

0.6
0.7

—1.9
0.4

-0.41

0.9

-0.2

2 . 32
1.32
3.23
2.00
-0.12

0.80
-0.29
—0.73
-2.09
-4.57

-1.2

-2.0

40.5
100.0
92.3
78.0

1.42
3.44
3.07

-2.46

1979

61.9

1.96

1980
1981
1982

0.73

,an#.LO.)

23.3
15.8
20.9
.,fl

1984

79.4

IO.J

2.52

0.49
0.65
2.38
2.36

-1.14
-2.46
-2.99
-3.50
-3.15
0.04
3.82

1.0

2.6
-0.7

0.80
0.16

-0.80

DLNW-RR

-0.8
2.5
2.6
0.3
—3.0
2.6

0.1
1.7

0.3
-1.6
-1.5
1.7

2.8

0.5

3.9

0.2
-0.6
-1.3
0.3
-2.2
3.0
1.4

1.6

.j.zI

-1.8
-0.3
-3.0
1.2

3.31

4.4

3.4

3.7
0.9

0.5
0.5
1.2

0.8
0.6

0.7
0.9
0.7
3.1
1.9

-0.2
2.0

4.1
3.2
2.9
3.8
3.8
5.2
4.6
3.1
1.8
1.0

—3.5
—3.1
-2.5

Notes:- DC and DLNC are the backward first differences in the levels and
logarithms, the latter x 100, of consumption of nondurable goods and
services, excluding clothing and footwear. RR is the real after tax rate
of interest from t-1 to t. It is computed from the treasury bill rate by
applying the implicit rate of tax revealed by comparing AAA municipal with
AAA corporate bonds. The change in the logarithm of the price deflator of
full NIPA consumption is subtracted on a quarterly basis, and converted
to annual rates of return. DH1 is the first difference of average hours
per employee from the Citibase tape. D112 is the first difference of
average weekly hours of production workers in manufacturing. DLNW is 100
times the annual change in the real value of average hourly earnings, not
corrected for overtime, of production workers in manufacturing.

-43-

Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Bruniberg (1954),"Utility analysis and the
consumption function: an interpretation of cross-section data", in
Kurihara, Kenneth K., ed., Post-Keynesian Economics, New Brunswick,
Rutgers University Press.

Modigliani,Franco, and Richard Bruinberg (1979),"Utility analysis and
aggregate consumption functions: an attempt at integration", in
Abel, Andrew, ed., The Collected Papers of Franco Modigliani, Vol 2,
Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press. 128-98
Muellbauer, John (1985),"Habits, rationality and the life-cycle
consumption function", Nuffield College, Oxford, processed.
Newey, Whitney K. (1984),"A method of moments interpretation of sequential estimators", Economics Letters, 14, 201-6
Pagan, Adrian R. (1984),"Econometric issues in the analysis of
regressions with generated regressors", International Economic
Review, 25, 221-47.
Phlips, Louis (1972),"A dynamic version of the linear expenditure model"
Review of Economics and Statistics, 64, 450-8
Singleton, Kenneth J. (1984),"Testing specifications of economic agents'
intertemporal optimum problems against non-nested alter natives", Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie Mellon
University, processed.
Smith, James P. (1977),"Family labor supply over the life cycle",
Explorations in Economic Research, 4, 205-76

Spinnewyn, Franz (1979a),"Rational habit formation", European
Economic Review, 15, 91-109
Spinnewyn, Franz (1979b), "The cost of consumption and wealth in a model
with habit formation", Economics Letters, 2, 145-8
Thurow, Lester (1969),"The optimum lifetime distribution of consumption
expenditures", American Economic Review, 59, 324-30
Varian, Hal R. (1983),"Non-parametric tests of consumer behavior",
Review of Economic Studies, 50, 99-110
Varian, Hal R. (1982),"The non-parametric approach to demand analysis",
Econometrica, 50, 945-73
Watson, Mark W. (1986), "Univariate detrending method with stochastic
trends," Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.
West, Kenneth D. (1984), "Speculative bubbles and stock price
volatility," Department of Economics, Princeton University,
Financial Research Center Memorandum No. 54, processed.

-46-

TABLE 3

1onté Carlo experiments on surprise consuniption functions

baseline

1.00

0

s.d.

trend

abs(t)

rej

2.25

0.62

0.075

yes

experiment la 1.00

.003842

2.10

0.60

0.082

yes

experiment 2a 0.65

.003842

1.92

0.50

0.085

yes

experiment 3a 0.30

.003842

1.46

0.26

0.087

yes

experiment lb 1.00

.003843

.949

0.08

0.067

no

experiment 2b 0.65

.003843

.962

0.07

0.075

no

experiment 3b 0.30

.003843

.874

0.05

0.666

no

PIH true

.003843

2.28

0.64

0.079

yes

2.12

-45-

Table 2
Regression results for surprise consumption functions

constant

log c(-1)

log y(-l)

Elogy

0.006
(0.4)

-0.178

-0.190

-0.018

-0.057

(3.5)

(3.6)

(1.4)

(2.1)

-0.217

-0.190

-0.273

-0.223

(2.7)

(2.3)

(3.3)

(2.7)

0.295
(3.3)

(2.7)

0.277
(5.7)

0.228
(4.6)

0.294
(3.6)

logy-Elogy

0.277
(6.0)

time

0.660

0.273
(3.5)

0.228
(4.7)

0.013
(1.0)

Elogw

logw-Elogw

- 0.047

(2.7)

0.743
(3.2)

-

.0006
(3.2)

0.119
(3.1)

-

(1.3)

0.258

0.022
(1.6)

-

0.119
(3.0)

.0005
(3.3)

all surprises

0.0000

0.0000

0.0018

0.0007

variant

0.0125

0.0159

00035

0.0058

traditional

0.8619

0.0316

0.8943

0.0635

unit elastic

0.0012

0.0034

0.6702

0.8182

e.s.e.

.00387

.00373

.00402

.00386

I

-5

3

-4

I

-3

i

I

-2
-1

2.

1

j

1.

Alnw—Rfl

It

I

1.

•

•

I

—3

—2

2.

.3

4

.5

•

1

4

2=cons

hours
hours
hours

2

.

3

I

3=cons
O=hours level
4'

+

l=cons

a,

+

+

+

4

I

real rate versus real rate

Changes in real wqges less

Figure

after tax

RR

—4

