NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEVELS AND TRENDS IN UNITED STATES INCOME AND ITS DISTRIBUTION
A CROSSWALK FROM MARKET INCOME TOWARDS
A COMPREHENSIVE HAIG-SIMONS INCOME APPROACH
Philip Armour
Richard V. Burkhauser
Jeff Larrimore
Working Paper 19110
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19110

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

We thank Scott Winship and Tim Smeeding as well as the participants of the Perspectives on Inequality
and Mobility session at the 2013 AEA/ASSA conference–especially James Ziliak–for their comments
on earlier drafts of this paper. An abbreviated version of an earlier draft of this paper presented at the
AEA/ASSA conference appeared in the 2013 AER papers and proceedings issue. The authors have
no material financial interests that relate to the findings described in this paper and received no outside
financial support for the research. Burkhauser over the past 12 months has received funding in excess
of $5,000 from the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research and the American
Enterprise Institute. In addition he received funding not in excess of $5,000 from: The Brookings Institution,
Employment Policies Institute, Pew Charitable Trusts, and the Smith Group. All opinions are those
of the authors and should not be attributed to the Joint Committee on Taxation or any Member of Congress.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Philip Armour, Richard V. Burkhauser, and Jeff Larrimore. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Levels and Trends in United States Income and Its Distribution
A Crosswalk from Market Income Towards a Comprehensive Haig-Simons Income Approach
Philip Armour, Richard V. Burkhauser, and Jeff Larrimore
NBER Working Paper No. 19110
June 2013
JEL No. C81,D31,H24,J3
ABSTRACT
Recent research on United States levels and trends in income inequality vary substantially in how they
measure income. Piketty and Saez (2003) examine market income of tax units based on IRS tax return
data, DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Smith (2012) and most CPS-based research uses pre-tax, post-transfer
cash income of households, while the CBO (2012) uses both data sets and focuses on household size-adjusted
comprehensive income of persons, including taxable realized capital gains. This paper provides a crosswalk
of income growth across these common income measures using a unified data set. It then uses a more
consistent Haig-Simons income definition approach to comprehensive income by incorporating yearly-accrued
capital gains to measure yearly changes in wealth rather than focusing solely on the realized taxable
capital gains that appear in IRS tax return data. Doing so dramatically reduces the observed growth
in income inequality across the distribution, but most especially the rise in top-end income since 1989.

Philip Armour
Cornell University
404 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
poa8@cornell.edu
Richard V. Burkhauser
Cornell University
Department of Policy Analysis & Management
259 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and University of Melbourne
and also NBER
rvb1@cornell.edu

Jeff Larrimore
Joint Committee on Taxation
1625 Longworth House Office Building
Washington, D.C. 20515
jeff.larrimore@mail.house.gov

Much of the debate over the distributional fairness of fiscal policies is discussed in the
context of the current distribution of income in the United States and how it has changed over
time. Given the importance of income statistics in such debates, there is a surprising lack of
consensus in the economics literature over what should be counted as income in distributional
analyses. Most economists agree that cash market income, such as labor earnings, interest, and
dividends should be included. But should income be measured on a pre-tax or post-tax basis?
Should cash transfers such as Social Security, unemployment, and disability payments be
included? What about in-kind benefits such as employer-provided health insurance, Medicare,
Medicaid, food stamps (SNAP), or school lunches? Further, should capital gains be included
and, if so, should it be on a yearly accrual basis or at realization?
We will show that the answers to these questions profoundly impact observed levels and
trends in “income” and its distribution. Too often, the choice of income definition has been based
primarily on data availability—with research based on IRS tax records concentrating on pre-tax,
pre-transfer cash market income of tax units, and research based on March Current Population
Survey (CPS) data focusing on pre-tax, post-transfer cash income of households excluding
capital gains.
While data availability concerns will always be a factor in measuring income, from a
theoretical basis, the Haig-Simons income definition is an attractive standard for calculating
annual income. Under this definition, an individual’s yearly income is defined as that person’s
consumption plus his or her change in net wealth in that year. (See Auerbach, 1989 and Barthold,
1993 for discussion of the Haig-Simons approach in the context of tax policy.) Such a definition
nicely links yearly consumption, which is most fundamentally related to economic well-being
but rarely available, with a measure of income that can largely be measured with available data.

2

Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon (2012) and Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
(2012) provide the most recent efforts to broaden an income definition based solely on IRS tax
records toward a more comprehensive Haig-Simons income measure using CPS data.1 Given
data limitations, neither approaches a full Haig-Simons income definition, which would include
income such as the imputed rent on owner-occupied housing, but both broaden the income
definitions substantially compared to previous research. Burkhauser, Larrimore, Simon (2012)
show that moving from a Piketty and Saez (2003) IRS tax record-based pre-tax, pre-transfer cash
market income of tax unit measure to a more comprehensive CPS-based household size-adjusted
post-tax, post-transfer cash income of persons measure substantially increases observed median
income growth since 1979 and flattens the level of growth across the distribution. This is even
more the case when they include the ex-ante value of employer- and government-provided health
insurance. But while health insurance is the most substantial in-kind benefit, Burkhauser,
Larrimore, and Simon (2012) do not consider other in-kind benefits and, because of CPS data
limitations, they do not include capital gains. In contrast, the CBO (2012), using data from both
the IRS and CPS, not only includes the ex-ante value of employer- and government-provided
health insurance but also includes food stamps and school lunches in its measure of the
household size-adjusted post-tax, post-transfer cash income of persons. But most importantly, the
CBO also includes taxable realized capital gains based on IRS data. When doing so, they observe
markedly faster income growth at the top of this income distribution measure.
CBO’s decision to include taxable realized capital gains is consistent with other users of
the IRS data (see, e.g. Piketty and Saez, 2003), since that is the measure of capital gains in the
IRS dataset. Here we provide an alternative measure of capital gains that is more consistent with
1
CBO (2011) provides a set of comprehensive income tables for income years 1979-2007. They changed their measure of the
value of Medicare and Medicaid in CBO (2012) and updated some of their earlier results in supplemental tables to adjust for this
change. In our discussion of the CBO comprehensive income measure, we most closely mirror this more recent series.

3

the income principles laid out by Haig-Simons. This alternative approach includes capital gains
at accrual, measured as the increase or decrease in the value of capital assets in each year
regardless of whether that asset was sold for a taxable realized gain.2 In contrast, taxable realized
capital gains include asset appreciation that may have occurred years or decades earlier as
current income. This is because individuals can choose, through the timing of transactions, when
to realize capital gains for tax purposes. Hence, income recorded as taxable realized capital gains
this year may not be due to increases in net-wealth this year. Additionally, taxable realized
capital gains exclude accrued gains this year from assets that are not recorded on this year’s tax
returns, either because the asset was not sold, was sold but held in a tax-sheltered account, or was
carved out of the tax code (e.g. primary housing).
Here we crosswalk from a Piketty-Saez (2003) market income definition to the more
comprehensive Burkhauser, Larrimore, Simon (2012) income measure excluding capital gains to
the CBO (2012) measure including taxable realized capital gains. In doing so, we demonstrate
the extent to which the inclusion of taxable realized capital gains as income drives the increase in
income inequality observed by the CBO. We then show that shifting from a taxable realized
capital gains to a yearly accrued measure of capital gains, more in the spirit of a Haig-Simons
definition of income, produces markedly different income trends.
I. Data and Methods
Our primary data set is the public-use CPS, enhanced with cell-means from Larrimore et
al. (2008) to overcome topcoding of high incomes.3 The CPS questionnaire directly captures all

2

As noted by Auerbach (1989) and Roine and Waldenstrom (2011), the Haig-Simons income definition should include all
capital gains in the year that they accrue, not just those that are realized.
3
In addition to topcoding of high incomes, there is a known trend-break in the CPS data between 1992 and 1993 when the
Census changed data collection procedures (Ryscavage, 1995; Jones and Weinberg, 2000; DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Smith,
2012). We control this break in all our series using a procedure similar to Atkinson, Piketty, and Saez (2011), Burkhauser et al.
(2012), and Larrimore (forthcoming), where all series are adjusted upward prior to 1993 such that no changes are recorded in the
year from 1992-1993.

4

cash income, including transfer income, excluding capital gains (see Weinberg, 2006 for a full
list of income sources included in the CPS primary income measure). The CPS also provides
values or imputations for certain government in-kind benefits, including food stamps, housing
subsidies, and school lunches. We include these values in our computation.
While the CPS does not capture the premiums paid for health insurance coverage, it does
ask respondents whether they are insured and, if so, their source of coverage. The Census Bureau
then imputes an ex-ante insurance value of health insurance for all covered persons based on
their employer’s or the government’s cost of purchasing it. When doing so, however, the Census
Bureau treats employer- and government-provided insurance differently. They impute the value
of employer-provided insurance coverage to individuals at its full ex-ante cost. The Census
Bureau determines the value of employer contributions by first asking individuals if they were
covered by employer provided health insurance, and if their employer paid for all, part, or none
of the cost of the plan. Then, individuals in the March CPS are statistically matched to those in
the National Medical Care Expenditure Survey or Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, depending
on survey year, based on a number of explanatory variables common to both.4 This statistical
matching provides an imputation of the employer’s contribution. We use this Census Bureau exante value of in-kind, employer-provided health insurance to the individual in our analysis.
In contrast to its treatment of employer-provided insurance, the Census Bureau imputes a
fungible insurance value of Medicare and Medicaid to covered individuals, which is intended to
represent the level of resources individuals would have spent on health insurance had it not been
provided to them. The ex-ante value for Medicare and Medicaid is calculated as the respective

4

These variables include: type of plan (family or individual), proportion of cost paid for by employer, earnings, full-time/parttime work status, industry, occupation, public or private sector, region, residence, and demographic characteristics.

5

program’s average outlay by state and risk class in the income year in question.5 For higher
income individuals, the Census Bureau values insurance as this ex-ante value, just as was the
case for employer-provided insurance. But for families that cannot meet basic food and housing
requirements, the Census Bureau assumes that the family derives no value from the insurance,
because the government provision of insurance frees up no income to be otherwise spent to
purchase insurance on their own. This approach implicitly assumes that since such families
cannot afford their basic needs, they would be unlikely to purchase this insurance at any price.
Such assumptions seem too strong. Simply because low-income individuals would forego
insurance, if it were not provided to them, does not indicate that they receive no value from it.
Rather it implies that their consumer surplus from its purchase is less than the consumer surplus
from other purchases, given the same level of spending. For example, Anderson, Dobkin, and
Gross (2012) observe that young adults with insurance have substantially higher healthcare
utilization rates than those without insurance. Similarly, Baicker et al. (2013) observe that in the
two years after a Medicaid lottery, those that receive Medicaid receive more preventative
medical care and are dramatically less likely to experience catastrophic out-of-pocket medical
costs than those who lose the lottery and remain uninsured. Even though Baicker et al. did not
observe improved physical health outcomes for those with insurance, their increased utilization
of medical services and decreased probability of catastrophic health expenses indicates that they
receive at least some value from the receipt of Medicaid.
Following the approach taken in Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon (2012) and CBO
(2012), we use the ex-ante insurance value for all individuals, regardless of whether the

5

Medicare risk classes are (1) age 65 and older, and (2) blind and disabled. Medicaid risk classes are (1) age 65 and older, (2)
blind and disabled, (3) age 21-64 nondisabled, and (4) age less than 21, nondisabled.

6

insurance is government-provided or employer-provided.6 For high-income individuals, we use
the Census-imputed values in our measure of government insurance. For low-income
individuals, we follow the Census Bureau imputation formula but do not replace these values
with a zero insurance value.
Although the CPS captures or imputes most sources of income, the Census Bureau does
not inquire about tax credits, tax liabilities, or capital gains.7 We supplement the CPS data with
imputed and matched data as described below.
To impute tax credits and liabilities, we use the NBER TaxSim 9.0 to estimate federal
and state income tax liabilities, including FICA and SECA taxes, based on the tax laws in effect
in each year (see Feenberg and Coutts, 1993 for an overview of the NBER TaxSim program).
Since the CPS samples households rather than tax filing units, we divide each household into tax
units prior to imputing tax liabilities. We perform this division using the procedure described in
Burkhauser et al. (2012), which mirrors the Piketty and Saez (2003) definition of potential tax
units. We consider all single individuals age 20 and over, married couples, and divorced or
widowed individuals to be independent tax units. We consider never-married children under the
age of 20 to be dependents and assign them to the tax unit of their parent or guardian.8
Finally, for capital gains, we separately employ two procedures, one for taxable realized
capital gains and one for yearly-accrued capital gains. For taxable realized capital gains, we array
all tax-units into percentiles of taxable income in the CPS data in each year. Auten and Gee

6
In their earlier work, CBO (2011) used the Census fungible value measure to value health insurance, but revised their
approach in their subsequent work, CBO (2012)
7
In 1992 the Census Bureau began imputing taxable realized capital gains in the CPS data. This series was updated in 2004
(see O’Hara, 2004). However, when we compared the distribution of realized taxable capital gains across our distribution of tax
units in the CPS data to those from the actual 2007 IRS tax records, we found that the CPS results were much less concentrated at
the top of the distribution. Hence, we decided to impute the capital gains data directly based on the administrative tax records
rather than use the CPS imputation.
8
In the small number of cases where never-married individuals under age 20 live in a household without a parent or guardian,
we assign them to the tax unit of the household’s primary family or the oldest adult in the household when there is no primary
family. Only if the household has no adults over age 20 are they considered their own tax unit.

7

(2009) observe that over 90 percent of working-age adults and over 85 percent of all adults over
age 25 file a tax return. Nevertheless, it is important to account for non-filers in tax data when
matching across the CPS and IRS datasets. Therefore, within each income percentile, we assign
tax units a probability of filing a tax return based on the distribution of non-filers in the taxable
income distribution excluding capital gains from the Joint Committee on Taxation 2007
Individual Tax Model (See Joint Committee on Taxation, 2011 for details). The vast majority of
non-filers are individuals at the lower tail of the taxable income distribution, below the legal
filing limit. Since the distribution of non-filers is not available in all years, we assume a constant
distribution of non-filers in all years.
Among imputed filers in the CPS data, we again rank tax units by taxable income into
percentiles. We perform a similar ranking on the IRS tax return data for each year. We then input
the taxable realized capital gains for each tax unit in the CPS data as the mean taxable realized
capital gains for tax units in the same percentile of the taxable income distribution in the tax
return data, assuming that non-filers have no taxable realized capital gains.
We implement a similar matching procedure for yearly-accrued capital gains using the
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) data. From the SCF, we obtain for each percentile of the
distribution the mean total assets and asset allocation in both taxable and non-taxable accounts.
However, because of a major break in the ability of the SCF data to capture wealth before and
after 1989, for consistency we only compare our yearly-accrued capital gains estimates for 1989
onward. Following Smeeding and Thompson (2010) we impute accrued capital gains from
stocks as the appreciation in the Dow Jones Industrial Average in the year times the assets held
in stocks and mutual funds. Unlike Smeeding and Thompson (2010), however, for this measure
and for our capital gains from real estate and privately held businesses, we use the single-year

8

level of appreciation rather than an average across multiple years to more closely reflect the
single-year Haig-Simons income growth measure.
While the SCF asset data include information on bond holdings along with holdings of
stocks and mutual funds, we do not estimate capital gains from bonds. The primarily return from
bonds for most bond holders is in the interest they pay rather than in capital gains. And the
yearly change in accrued capital gains on those bonds will depend on their fixed lifespans..
Hence, unlike stocks where realized capital gains per year can be relatively easily estimated by
assuming a given return on all stocks held in that year, there is no obvious way to link an average
return on a Bond Index, to the information the SCF provides on the bond holdings of
individuals.. So we do not include capital gains on bonds in our analyses.9
In addition to estimating capital gains from public equity investments, we also estimate
capital gains from personal business ownership of non-public companies. Such private
businesses are an important source of wealth and income for high-income individuals, As is the
case for investment accounts, the SCF inquires about the value of privately held businesses,
allowing us to use the same technique as above to match to the CPS data based on income
percentile. However, since these firms are not traded on a public market, it is a substantial
challenge to determine their rate of return. Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002) observe
that the return to private equity investing is similar to that of investing in publicly held
corporations and that these rates of return are highly correlated. Hence we assume the growth
rate for privately held corporations matches that of public corporations. But given the findings of
Davis et al. (2007) that employment growth at privately held firms is more volatile than at
9

To test the sensitivity of excluding capital gains on our measures of capital gains, we replicated all our results including an estimate of bond
capital gains. We calculated bond capital gains as bond holdings times the annual rate of return on the Vanguard Bond Fund (VBMFX), which
follows the Barclay’s Capital Aggregate Bond Index. In estimating the bond rate of return, we excluded dividend payment from the return on the
index in an attempt to minimize double counting of interest income. When doing so, we obtained quintile income growths from 1989-2007 within
one percentage point of those we provide in our main results for all quintiles. Therefore, it does not appear that the inclusion or exclusion of bond
capital gains greatly impacts our results.

9

publicly held firms, we recognize that there are differences between firms with different
ownership structures and conduct sensitivity analyses with regards to the capital gains accrual
rate for privately held businesses.
While our measure is plausibly the best currently available for imputing yearly-accrued
capital gains on investments, we acknowledge that the lack of available data on capital gains
accruals limits its precision. Most importantly, when imputing yearly-accrued capital gains we
assume that all investments receive the ordinary rate of return. Hence we will not capture extranormal returns received by some individuals on their investments. This may be of particular
concern for private equity investors who generate larger returns on investments through
purchasing entire companies and reforming their production process or business model. Our
yearly-accrued capital gains measure will understate extra-normal returns on such investments.
However, this will only impact our trends in top income shares to the extent that the frequency or
the size of these investments changes over time.
In addition to imputing capital gains from investments, we impute capital gains on
primary housing to reflect gains in wealth resulting from real estate holdings. Since only
homeowners can obtain housing capital gains, we use the same matching technique for
homeowners in the CPS to homeowners in the SCF to obtain an estimate of house values by
income percentile. We then impute housing capital gains as the growth in the House Price Index
of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) times the estimated home value.10 Importantly,

10

As a sensitivity test we also used S&P 500 data to impute our measure of investment returns and the Case-Shiller Home
Price Index as our measure of real estate returns. The overall trends for the S&P 500 is similar to that for the Dow Jones, but
since S&P 500 growth in 2007 was below that of the Dow Jones Index, income growth from 1999 through 2007 is lower when
using the S&P. For housing prices, the Case-Shiller index is more volatile than the FHFA index and observed a more marked
decline in home values in 2007. Hence the imputed incomes of homeowners when using Case-Shiller were lower in 2007 than
the values we report. This particularly impacted the income growth for the bottom quintile where the ratio of home values to
income is highest. Nevertheless, for both the housing and equity measures, the alternate specifications strengthened the finding
that the income growth for the top quintile relative to the middle quintile is slower when using accrued capital gains than when
using realized capital gains. Results using these alternate specifications are available in Appendix Tables 1 and 2.

10

since the SCF does not include state or locality information, we base all of our housing capital
gains on national estimates of home values and home price appreciation. Hence we miss the
substantial importance of local housing markets. Nevertheless, in the absence of local identifiers
this is the best available information for imputing housing capital gains. It is similar to the
method Smeeding and Thompson (2010) use to impute accrued housing capital gains.
II. Results
Table 1 compares income growth by quintile and for the top 5 percent across several
common income definitions over the entire three-business cycle period from 1979-2007. It
allows us to cross-walk from the relatively narrow Piketty and Saez-based market income of tax
units definition, which excludes taxable realized capital gains, in column 1 to the more
comprehensive CBO (2012)-based, household size-adjusted, post-tax post-transfer income of
person income definition, including in-kind income and taxable realized capital gains, in column
4.11 We chose 1979 and 2007 as our comparison years because they are peak income years of
business cycles and avoid conflating business cycle effects with long-term trends. Limitations in
separately observing the income held by the top 1 percent in the public use CPS data we use here
prevent us from providing trends in their distribution.
[Insert Table 1 About Here]
The first column reports mean income growth using a Piketty-Saez-style market income
of tax unit income measure. Using this measure, which is typical for those using solely IRS data,
the rich have gotten richer (37.9 percent increase for the top 5 percent), the poor have gotten

11
In their original work, Piketty and Saez (2003) primarily focus on taxable income net of taxable realized capital gains.
Burkhauser et al. (2012) show that CPS data can track this Piketty and Saez (2003) measure of the market income of tax units. In
their more recent work, Piketty and Saez (see for example Atkinson, Piketty and Saez, 2011) focus more on taxable income
including taxable realized capital gains. As we will show, this makes a dramatic difference in the growth of income among upper
income groups.

11

poorer (33 percent decline in the bottom quintile), and the middle has stagnated (2.2 percent
increase in the middle quintile). However this income definition does not include transfers, taxes,
or capital gains.12
Column 2, which is more in keeping with CPS-based research, broadens the income
definition to include cash-transfers and expands the sharing unit to the household to reflect the
sharing of resources by cohabiting couples and other householders who do not file a collective
tax return (see Gottschalk and Danziger, 2005; Smeeding, Rainwater, and Burtless, 2001; and
Burkhauser et al., 2011 for examples of research using similar definitions). In keeping with the
traditional inequality literature, it focuses on the individual as the unit of analysis and adjusts for
household size to reflect returns to scale of larger households.13 When doing so, income growth
accelerates for all quintiles, but especially for the bottom quintile where mean income growth is
now 9.9 percent, and in the middle where income increases by 22.8 percent or ten times the
growth of market income found in column 1. This is partially because government transfers are
primarily directed to individuals that otherwise have lower than average pre-transfer incomes.
But it also reflects the growth of cohabiting couples and of adult children living with their
parents who share in the resources of others in their household—a behavioral change not
captured by focusing solely on the market income of a tax unit unadjusted for the number of
people in that tax unit.
A justifiable concern with this traditional income measure used by CPS researchers is
that it includes as income some of the benefits received by individuals from the government, but
does not include the taxes used to pay for them. Additionally, such a measure selectively

12
Of the 22 country studies using income tax records discussed in Atkinson, Piketty and Saez (2011), the majority do not have
data on realized capital gains and hence do not use this source of income in their estimations of top income.
13
See Gottschalk and Smeeding (1997) for an early review of this literature and Burkhauser et al. (2012) for further discussion
of size-adjusting household income and a more detailed breakdown of Column 1 to Column 2 changes attributable to the broader
income definition, the larger sharing unit, and the size-adjustment.

12

includes only some transfers, excluding both non-cash transfers and transfers administered
through the tax code. Column 3 expands the income definition to reflect income post-tax
liabilities and the presence of in-kind transfers and benefits. Converting to a post-tax income
measure reduces the income of those with positive tax liabilities but increases the income for
those receiving refundable credits such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC)—the largest
means-tested anti-poverty cash transfer program in the United States (Ben-Shalom, Moffitt, and
Scholz, 2011). This column also incorporates several of the most important sources of in-kind
benefits and government transfers: employer- and government-provided health insurance, food
stamps, housing subsidies, and subsidized school lunches. To avoid double counting, we do not
include another important in-kind benefit, defined-benefit pension contributions, at accrual, since
they are included in the CPS data at the point of payout in retirement. We also do not include the
yearly-accrued value of Social Security contributions, for the same reason.
The inclusion of taxes—because they have fallen as a share of income, especially at
higher income levels—and in-kind benefits—because they have risen as a share of income,
especially at lower income levels—increases income growth throughout the distribution. But it
does so most, among the bottom two quintiles. As a result income growth between 1979 and
2007 is remarkably similar for each of the bottom four quintiles. The top quintile and the top 5
percent continue to grow faster, 54.0 and 68.9 percent respectively (column 3), but the gap in
growth between them and the bottom quintile is dramatically smaller than the gap using a
Piketty-Saez style cash market income of tax unit measure of income.
The final column of Table 1 reports results adding taxable realized capital gains, which is
the approach used by the CBO (2012), to incorporate capital gains information. When doing so,
we mirror the income growth patterns that they observe. Since the majority of realized capital

13

gains are accrued by individuals with greater asset levels and greater incomes, income growth
patterns since 1979 dramatically diverge relative to column 3 for higher income groups. Growth
in the top quintile and among the top 5 percent is now 83.1 and 136.7 percent respectively while
growth in the bottom three quintiles remains approximately the same.
Given our general agreement with the CBO findings on income growth by quintile when
using this income measure between 1979 and 2007, we now report income growth for each
single business cycle since 1979 in Panels A, B, and C of Table 2. Panel D provides the Gini
coefficient for the peak-year of each business cycle since 1979, which offers a summary level of
inequality at the peak of each business cycle.14
[Insert Table 2 about here]
When doing so, even when using the measure of income including taxable realized
capital gains in column 4, we observe that while income inequality has grown across all business
cycles, the majority of that inequality growth occurred in the 1980s. There was somewhat less
inequality growth in the 1990s and very little in the 2000s.
In the 1980s business cycle, the top 5 percent of the income distribution saw their income
grow by 55.6 percent, over 4.5 times the 11.7 percent growth in the middle quintile and over 20
times the 2.4 percent growth in the bottom quintile. In the 1990s, the growth pattern was Ushaped, with the bottom quintile’s income growing faster than those in the middle. While income
growth at the bottom and in the middle of the distribution was slower than for those at the top,
the difference was less extreme than in the 1980s—income growth was 43.4 percent for the top 5
percent versus 21.8 percent for the bottom and 16.4 percent for the middle quintile.

14

We base the starting and ending years of business cycles on the peaks in median size-adjusted household income of persons
(Burkhauser, Larrimore, and Simon, 2012; Daly and Valletta, 2006; and Karoly and Burtless, 1995, each use similar definitions).
These years often correspond to the last full year of macroeconomic growth as defined by the NBER. However, in cases such as
the 2000-2007 business cycle where the macroeconomic decline began in December 2007, the end-year here is defined as 2007,
when median size-adjusted household income peaked.

14

In contrast to the previous two periods where income growth was unequal but relatively
rapid for most groups, in the early 2000s income growth was relatively equal but slow across all
quintiles. Income grew between 5 and 7 percent over the period, throughout the distribution with
the top two quintiles experiencing slightly faster growth than the bottom three.
We find a similar pattern in our Gini coefficients in Panel D. Using this summary
inequality measure of CBO-style income, inequality increased from 0.303 to 0.359 (an 18
percent increase) in the 1980s business cycle and from 0.359 to 0.380 (a 6 percent increase) in
the 1990s business cycle. But in the 2000s business cycle, it grew by just 0.8 percent to 0.383. So
while inequality remains at an elevated level, even when considering the income definition
including taxable realized capital gains, inequality did not increase dramatically over the 2000s
business cycle.
Including accrued capital gains
The results using the income definition including realized capital gains seem to validate
the claim that inequality (fueled by a major increase in income at the top) has risen dramatically
over the period 1979-2007. This increase far exceeds inequality growth in our comprehensive
post-tax, post-transfer measure of income excluding all capital gains from column 3 that shows
that inequality fell slightly in the 1990s and remained constant in the 2000s.
However, as previously noted taxable realized capital gains deviate from the spirit of
Haig-Simon comprehensive income. In particular, including taxable realized capital gains in this
way will confound asset appreciation in earlier years but declared in this year with capital gains
actually accrued in this year. Hence it will artificially delay the receipt of some capital gains
income from when it should be counted under Haig-Simons principles. Additionally, it almost
completely ignores housing capital gains due to the $500,000 exclusion from taxation of housing

15

capital gains for primary residences owned by a married couple and also ignores capital gains
held in non-taxable accounts. Since housing assets represent the largest single asset of many
middle class households, the failure of tax-based data to capture the capital gains of these taxsheltered assets will likely distort the impact of capital gains from a Haig-Simons perspective.
Thus, to more closely reflect Haig-Simons’ principles in the treatment of capital gains, in Table 3
we now turn our attention to how inequality trends would change using yearly-accrued capital
gains of taxable and tax-sheltered assets rather than just realized taxable gains.
[Insert Table 3 about here]
This analysis relies on the Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF), but since the SCF data
prior to 1989 are not comparable with SCF data thereafter, we only consider income growth
using this measure for the two-business-cycle period from 1989-2007. Additionally, since the
SCF is a triennial survey, it is only available for select years, which do not include the 2000
business cycle peak. Thus, we only provide full business-cycle results for the two-business-cycle
period. However, we will discuss the triennial top income share results for each available year
between 1989 and 2007 in greater depth below. For comparability, we provide each of the
previously discussed series for this two-business-cycle period.
In the two business cycles since 1989, when looking solely at market income of tax units,
the rich get richer, the poor get poorer, and the middle class stagnate. But over the peak years of
these business cycles, growth is considerably smaller for the top income quintile and the top 5
percent than it was when considering the three-business-cycle period since 1979. Once again this
story changes when we expand our income definition in columns 2 and 3. Income growth across
all quintiles since 1989, and even in the top 5 percent, narrows remarkably when compared to the
extended period since 1979 seen earlier. In column 3, growth in the bottom quintile is greatest

16

and growth among the top 5 percent is smallest over this period. It is only when we add taxable
realized capital gains in column 4 that income growth in the top quintile and among the top 5
percent is greater than that in the bottom four quintiles.
But in column 5 when we include yearly-accrued capital gains excluding housing gains
and private business gains, instead of taxable realized capital gains, the inclusion of these gains
slows income growth in all but the bottom quintile of the distribution. Thus, when using this
measure that is more in line with Haig-Simon’s income principles, the top quintile of the
distribution had the least growth in income from 1989 through 2007 while the bottom quintile of
the distribution had the most. Measured in this way income inequality fell between 1989 and
2007.
How is it possible that the choice of treatment of capital gains can have such a dramatic
difference? It results from both the timing of realizing gains and from the likelihood of assets
appearing in taxable accounts for individuals at different points in the income distribution.
Table 4 presents the mean value of equity investments in taxable and non-taxable
accounts in the SCF data for each quintile of the income distribution (based on a household sizeadjusted, post-tax, post-transfer, cash plus in-kind income of persons measure of income—our
column 3 income measure in Table 3) in 1989 and 2007. This table illustrates that while equity
holdings have increased throughout the distribution, they have increased at a faster pace for those
at the lower end of the distribution than for those at the top. For example, in the bottom quintile
mean equity investment holdings (column 3 in Table 4) grew over 7-fold from $3,677 in 1989 to
$28,786 in 2007. This compares to the top quintile where mean equity holdings in 2007 were 3.5
times their 1989 amount ($381,423 versus $108,702).
[Insert Table 4 about here]

17

Further, this increase in equity holdings has disproportionately occurred in tax-sheltered
accounts (column 2). The use of tax-sheltered accounts increased throughout the distribution
over this period. By 2007 over a quarter of investments for equity holdings in each quintile of the
distribution were tax-sheltered, with greater percentages in the middle of the distribution
(column 4). Thus, the focus on taxable realized capital gains will miss this increasingly important
source of capital gains income. In particular, to the extent that a larger fraction of equities are
held in tax-sheltered accounts among the middle- and lower-quintiles, researchers focusing on
just taxable income will disproportionately miss income received by these middle- and lowerincome individuals.
Although tax-sheltered accounts are an important source of missed income-growth for the
bottom of the distribution relative to the top, at least as important for reconciling the divergent
findings of using taxable realized capital gains and yearly accrued capital gains is the trend in
capital gains from stocks over time. In particular, the appreciation of the Dow Jones Industrial
Average in 1989 was a substantial 27 percent, compared to a tepid 6.4 percent in 2007. Thus, the
lower growth rate means that one should expect a lower level of accrued gains, other than for
individuals whose asset holdings in 2007 were dramatically greater than in 1989.
In part, this simply represents the volatility inherent in an accrued capital gains measure,
as illustrated in Figure 1, which depicts the real appreciation in the Dow Jones Industrial
Average in each year since 1979. However, while the series is volatile and a comparison of
different years would alter the results, it also is a reflection of the slower growth in accrued
capital gains in the 2000s compared to either the 1980s or 1990s. The inflation-adjusted average
yearly growth in the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 8.2 percent over the 1980s business
cycle (1980-1989), 11.2 percent over the 1990s business cycle (1990-2000), but only 1.1 percent

18

over the 2000s business cycle (2001-2007). So accrued capital gains from equities in almost any
year of the 2001-2007 business cycle will be lower than over the previous two business cycles.
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
Given the lower stock market returns in the 2000s, it is not surprising that the rapid
accrual of capital gains occurred in the 1980s and 1990s rather than in the 2000s. This pattern
can be quite different from the one that results when focusing on taxable realized capital gains,
since the appreciation of investments in the 1980s and 1990s may not appear on income tax
returns until later. As a result, the high taxable realized capital gains income observed on tax
returns today are not necessarily a reflection of higher current incomes in a Haig-Simons sense
and, instead, are more likely to be a residual effect of previously accrued capital gains that are
only now being realized.
Although the inclusion of yearly-accrued capital gains from investment accounts in
column 5 of Table 3 is more in keeping with Haig-Simons principles than using taxable realized
capital gains, it still excludes a primary source of wealth accumulation for many Americans—the
increase in value of their primary residence. In column 6 of Table 3 we expand our income
definition to include yearly-accrued capital gains from owner-occupied housing.
As was the case with yearly-accrued capital gains from equity investments, the real
accrued capital gains from housing in 2007 (-4.7 percent) was below that seen in 1989 (0.7
percent).15 Thus, including this source of income should result in lower levels of observed
income for homeowners in 2007 than was the case in column 5 of Table 3, but the drop in home
prices is likely to affect growth at lower income levels as well as at upper income levels.
Table 5 shows why this is likely to be the case. Individuals with higher incomes are both

15

Annual accrued gains from housing using the FHFA data is available upon request from the author.

19

more likely to own a home (columns 1 and 3) and, conditional on owning a home (columns 2
and 4), are more likely to own expensive homes. As a result, the absolute decline in income from
including housing capital gains should be larger for those in the upper tail of the distribution than
for those in the lower tail. But, relative to their total income excluding housing gains, the home
value should be smaller for the top quintile relative to their income so the impact on percentage
income growth will be smaller at the top of the distribution.
[Insert Table 5 about here]
As column 6 of Table 3 shows, this is the case. Income growth slows for all income
quintiles relative to column 5 of Table 3. But it slows more for those lower in the distribution—
17.6 percentage points for the bottom quintile (from 32.2 percent to 14.6 percent)—than it does
for those near the top—11.2 percentage points for the top quintile (from 12.8 percent to 1.6
percent).
Nevertheless, similar to our column 3 of Table 3 results where we exclude all capital
gains, the income growth for the top quintile of the distribution was the slowest from 1989
through 2007 and the income growth for the bottom quintile was the largest. Further, the top 5
percent of the income distribution experienced a decline in their income, while each of the lower
quintiles experienced modest income growth. These results not only dissipate but reverse the
evidence supporting dramatic increases in income inequality powered by major increases in
capital gains when measured by taxable realized capital gains.
In the final column of Table 3, we add in a final element of accrued capital gains—those
that occur on closely held businesses. In doing so, we emphasize the increased uncertainty
around this estimate of accrued capital gains on privately held businesses given the lack of a
public market for such companies. In estimating these accrued capital gains, since investing in

20

privately held companies is riskier than investing in public corporations (Moskowitz and
Vissing-Jorgensen, 2002), one may expect private companies to have a greater rate of return to
account for the additional risk. But despite this expectation, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen
(2002) observe there is a strong correlation between the average rates of return on public and
private companies, and that the rate of return for private equity investments are similar to those
for public equity. Therefore, in estimating the rates of return when including accrued gains on
privately held businesses, we assume that the rate of return in each year matches that of publicly
traded corporations.16
Including the accrued capital gains from privately held businesses has very little effect on
the income growth of the bottom quintile of the distribution from 1989 through 2007, but income
growth for all the higher quintiles is slower than that for the previous series. In fact, among the
top quintile top incomes actually fell. This is because private business ownership is largely
concentrated among the top quintiles of the distribution and, as can be seen in Table 6 (columns
1 and 3). Furthermore, among business owners, individuals with higher pre-capital-gains
incomes tend to own businesses with substantially higher valuations (columns 2 and 4). Given
this concentration of business ownership wealth, the lower estimated rate of return on both
public and private equity in 2007 compared to 1989 results in the further erosion of top incomes
when including capital gains from privately held businesses. Since there is additional uncertainty
regarding the rate of return on private equity, our preferred results in Table 3 are those from
column 6, which excludes the capital gains on privately held businesses. Nevertheless, the results
from including capital gains on privately held businesses appear to reinforce our primary

16

Recognizing this uncertainty, we conducted a sensitivity analysis, assuming that the rate of return on private equity exceeds
that observed for public equity by 2 percentage points per year. The results of such an analysis were similar, with the lower end
of the distribution observing the greatest income growth since 1989. The results of this supplemental analysis are available from
the authors upon request.

21

observation that focusing on accrued capital gains presents a dramatically different picture than
that observed when using taxable realized capital gains which are limited to assets which are
taxable and more easily manipulated through market timing.
[Insert Table 6 about here]
Annual Top Income Shares
To better link our results to the top income literature, we show the trends in the share of
all income held by the top 5 percent (Figure 2) and top quintile of the distribution over all
available years between 1989-2007 across five alternative measures of income with and without
capital gains. The first two are post-tax, post-transfer income including in-kind benefits but
excluding all capital gains (column 3 from Table 3), which closely matches the income series
from Burkhauser et al. (2011), and post-tax, post-transfer income including in-kind benefits and
realized taxable capital gains (column 4 from Table 3), which closely matches the income series
from CBO (2012).
The next three, like the CBO measure, also contain post-tax, post-transfer income
including in-kind benefits. But rather than using taxable realized capital gains they offer
alternative measures of capital gains that are more consistent with Haig-Simons principals: the
first includes yearly-accrued capital gains from investments, excluding housing (column 5 from
Table 3); the next yearly-accrued capital gains from investments and housing (column 6 from
Table 3); and the last yearly-accrued capital gains from investments and housing including
personally held businesses (column 7 from Table 3). Once again, because we are dependent on
SCF data to estimate the three yearly-accrued capital gains measures, we have information only
for every three years.
Our traditional measure of full income based on CPS data that excludes capital gains

22

shows that the share of this income held by top income groups (either the top 5 or top 20 percent)
has been remarkably stable over the entire period from 1989-2007. Because top income groups
hold a disproportionate amount of assets in the U.S., it is not surprising that all four of our
measures that include capital gains show a higher share of that income is held by top income
groups in most years. But the pattern of growth in the share of full income captured by these four
measures is quite different.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
[Insert Figure 3 about here]
When we include taxable realized capital gains, the trend in top income shares is in line
with the CBO (2012) observation that top income shares have increased over the past two
decades and are now at or near their all-time peak. But that is not the case when using the three
yearly-accrued realized capital gains series.
When using any of the accrued capital gains series, the top income share measures are
noticeably more volatile, even with the qualification that they can only be observed for every
third year due to the SCF limitations. But despite this volatility, valuable trends can be observed.
The top income shares using accrued capital gains are above those seen when excluding capital
gains or including realized capital gains in each of our four years of observation in the 1990s
(1989-1998). There is a shift in this relationship in the 2000s. In 2001, accrued gains at the top
fell, resulting in lower top income shares using the accrued gains method than is seen when using
realized capital gains or excluding capital gains completely. But even in 2004 and 2007 the three
series using accrued capital gains show top income shares at or below those using realized gains.
This shift in the relationship between the top income series with different treatments of capital
gains is consistent with the idea that recent taxable realized capital gains are, in part, the residual

23

of gains from earlier years and do not reflect current capital gains income.17
Because of this time shifting for taxable realized capital gains, any of our accrued capital
gains series-based top income share patterns vary from those based on realized taxable capital
gains. We previously observed an increase in the top income shares since 1989 when including
taxable realized capital gains. However, when using any of the yearly-accrued measures, the
income shares of the top 5 and 20 percent of the distribution in each year of available data since
2000 were below those seen at the start of the series in 1989. So when we, based on Haig-Simons
principles, include capital gains in the year they accrue, , top income shares are volatile but do
not appear to have increased over the last 20 years.
III. Conclusion
When using the level and trend in income and its distribution as evidence in evidencebased tax law and fiscal policy making, it is important to understand the assumptions underlying
the alternative measures of income we provide in our analysis. If income and its distribution
were invariant across the most common measures of income we report here, then the choice of
income measure would not greatly matter. But that is not the case. Hence for policy purposes it is
critical to use a measure of income that is most consistent with the policy question being asked.
For those focused on taxable income of tax units excluding taxable capital gains—a Piketty and
Saez (2003) measure of market income, based on tax returns—undoubtedly income inequality
has grown substantially in recent years, and the middle-class is struggling. The inclusion of
taxable realized capital gains in income measures that are more inclusive—like the CBO (2012)
measure using both tax returns and CPS data—reinforces this view of rising inequality, but it

17

Additionally, in the long-run, one should expect fewer capital gains to be realized on tax returns than the total of accrued
capital gains. This is partially because some gains are deferred until death, at which point there is a step-up in basis so no realized
capital gains will be reported. Furthermore, since some capital gains, such as those on primary housing and Roth IRAs are tax
exempt, these gains will never appear on tax returns.

24

does so by including a measure of capital gains that misses the timing of capital gains accruals,
as well as the increasing importance of realized and accrued capital gains in tax-sheltered
accounts.
In contrast, when using our comprehensive income definition, that mirrors the CBO
(2012) report but excludes all capital gains, we observe that incomes have risen throughout the
distribution and since 1989 have largely risen uniformly throughout that distribution.
Alternatively, following Haig-Simons principals, when we include capital gains on a yearlyaccrued basis, it increases the volatility of income trends but results in slower growth throughout
the income distribution than when we exclude capital gains. This reflects lower capital gains
accrual rates in the most recent business cycle compared to the proceeding business cycles. But it
also shows that inequality did not rise in recent years. The top quintile of the income distribution
had the slowest income growth from 1989 through 2007, while the bottom quintile had the
fastest.
Recognizing the increased volatility of the accrued capital gains series and its triennial
rather than annual availability, we acknowledge that this series comes with substantial
limitations for researchers interested in observing current annual income and inequality trends.
Additionally, since capital gains are an irregular source of income, some researchers may opt to
avoid this volatility by excluding capital gains altogether—as the Census Bureau has
traditionally done in their official income statistics (DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Smith 2012).
However, should one wish to include capital gains, doing so based on yearly accrued capital
gains is more appropriate than including only taxable realized capital gains. Using yearlyaccrued capital gains will include gains accruing in tax-sheltered accounts and avoid the timing
problems that occur with the delayed realization of capital gains for tax filing purposes. As we

25

show in this paper, this fuller measure of capital gains contradicts the notion that income
inequality fueled by capital gains at the top end of the distribution has dramatically increased
over the past two business cycles.

26

REFERENCES
Anderson, M., C. Dobkin, and T. Gross. 2012. “The Effect of Health Insurance Coverage on the
Use of Medical Services,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4(1):1–27.
Atkinson, A.B., T. Piketty, and E. Saez. 2011. “Top Incomes in the Long Run of History,”
Journal of Economic Literature 49(1), 3–71.
Auerbach, A.J. 1989. “Capital Gains Taxation and Tax Reform,” National Tax Journal 42(3):
391–401.
Auten, G., and G. Gee. 2009. “Income Mobility in the United States: New Evidence from
Income Tax Data.” National Tax Journal 62(2): 301–328.
Baicker, K., S.L. Taubman, H.L. Hallen, M. Bernstein, J.H. Gruber, J.P. Newhouse, E.C.
Schneider, B.J. Wright, A.M. Zaslavsky, and A.N. Finkelstein. 2013. “The Oregon
Experiment—Effects of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes,” New England Journal of
Medicine 368(18): 1713–1722.
Barthold, T. 1993. “How Should We Measure Distribution,” National Tax Journal 46(3): 291–
99.
Ben-Shalom, Y., R.A. Moffitt, and J.K. Scholz. 2011. “An Assessment of the Effectiveness of
Anti-Poverty Programs in the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 17042.
Burkhauser, R.V., S. Feng, S.P. Jenkins, and J. Larrimore. 2011. “Trends in United States
Income Inequality Using the March Current Population Survey: The Importance of
Controlling for Censoring,” Journal of Economic Inequality 9(3): 393–415.
Burkhauser, R.V., S. Feng, S.P. Jenkins, and J. Larrimore. 2012. “Recent Trends in Top Income
Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from March CPS and IRS Tax Return Data,”
Review of Economics and Statistics 94(2), 371–388.
Burkhauser, R.V., J. Larrimore, and K. Simon. 2012. “A Second Opinion on the Economic
Health of the Middle Class,” National Tax Journal 61(1), 7–22.
Congressional Budget Office. 2011. Trends in the Distribution of Household Income between
1979 and 2007. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Congressional Budget Office. 2012. The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes,
2008 and 2009. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. Supplemental data
tables available online via: http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43373
Daly, M.C., and R.G. Valletta. 2006. “Inequality and Poverty in the United States: The Effects of
Rising Dispersion of Men’s Earnings and Changing Family Behavior,” Economica 73(289),
75–98.
Davis, S.J., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda. 2007. “Volatility and Dispersion in
Business Growth Rates: Publicly Traded versus Privately Held Firms,” in NBER
27

Macroeconomics Annual 2006, Vol. 21. eds. D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford,
1782-1872. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
DeNavas-Walt, C., B.D. Proctor, and J.C. Smith. 2012. Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance
Coverage in the United States: 2011. US Census Bureau Population Reports, P60-243, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC.
Gottschalk, P., and S. Danziger. 2005. “Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and Family Income
in the United States, 1975–2002,” Review of Income and Wealth 51(2), 231–254.
Gottschalk, P., and T.M. Smeeding. 1997. ‘‘Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and
Income Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature 35, 633–687.
Feenberg, D., and E. Coutts. 1993. “An Introduction to the TAXSIM Model,” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 12(1), 189–94, http://www.nber.org/~taxsim/
Joint Committee on Taxation. 2011. Summary of Economic Models and Estimating Practices of
the Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation JCX-46-11. U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, DC.
Jones, A.F., and D.H. Weinberg. 2000. “The Changing Shape of the Nation’s Income
Distribution,” Current Population Reports, U.S. Census Bureau.
Karoly, L.A., and G. Burtless. 1995. “Demographic Change, Rising Earnings Inequality, and the
Distribution of Personal Well Being, 1959-1989,” Demography 32(3), 379–405.
Larrimore, J. Forthcoming. “Accounting for United States Household Income Inequality Trends:
The Changing Importance of Household Structure and Male and Female Labor Earnings
Inequality,” Review of Income and Wealth.
Larrimore, J., R.V. Burkhauser, S. Feng, and L. Zayatz. 2008. “Consistent Cell Means for
Topcoded Incomes in the Public Use March CPS (1975-2007),” Journal of Economic and
Social Measurement 33(2-3), 89–128.
Moskowitz, T.J. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen. 2002. “The Returns to Entrepreneurial Investment: A
Private Equity Premium Puzzle?” American Economic Review 92(4), 745–778.
O’Hara, A. 2004. “New Methods for Simulating CPS Taxes.” U.S. Census Bureau Technical
Working Paper.
Piketty, T., and E. Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–1998,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 118(1), 1–39.
Roine, J., and D. Waldenstrom. 2011. “On the Role of Capital Gains in Swedish Income
Inequality.” Review of Income and Wealth 58(3): 569–587.
Ryscavage, P. 1995. “A Surge in Growing Income Inequality?” Monthly Labor Review 118(8),
51–61.

28

Smeeding, T., L. Rainwater, and G. Burtless. 2001. “United States Poverty in a Cross-National
Context,” FOCUS Institute for Research on Poverty 21(3), 50–54.
Smeeding, T.M., and J.P. Thompson. 2010. “Recent Trends in the Distribution of Income: Labor,
Wealth, and More Complete Measures of Well Being,” Political Economy Research
Institute Working Paper Series, No. 25.
Weinberg, D.H. 2006. “Income Data Quality Issues in the CPS,” Monthly Labor Review 129(6):
38–45.

29

Bottom Quintile
2nd Quintile
Middle Quintile
4th Quintile
Top Quintile
Top 5%

TABLE 1— MEAN INCOME GROWTH BY QUINTILE, 1979-2007
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Household sizeHousehold sizeTax-unit
adjusted post-tax, Column (3) plus
adjusted pre-tax,
unadjusted cash
post-transfer
realized taxable
post-transfer cash
market income
capital gains
income plus in-kind
income
income
-33.0
9.9
31.8
31.1
0.7
15.6
31.3
32.0
2.2
22.8
34.4
36.7
12.3
29.2
38.8
42.7
32.7
42.0
54.0
83.1
37.9
48.7
68.9
136.7

Source: Author calculations based on March CPS data merged with SOI tax return data and NBER TaxSim results.

30

TABLE 2— GINI COEFFICIENTS AND MEAN INCOME GROWTH BY QUINTILE FOR EACH BUSINESS CYCLE
FROM 1979-2007
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Household sizeHousehold sizeTax-unit
adjusted post-tax, Column (3) plus
adjusted pre-tax,
unadjusted cash
realized taxable
post-transfer
post-transfer cash
market income
capital gains
income plus in-kind
income
income
Panel A: 1979-1989
-0.2
0.0
4.3
2.4
Bottom Quintile
-0.2
4.3
7.0
6.4
2nd Quintile
0.0
9.1
11.8
11.7
Middle Quintile
4.0
12.9
15.7
15.6
4th Quintile
17.6
23.4
29.4
33.1
Top Quintile
25.6
32.0
44.6
55.6
Top 5%
Panel B: 1989-2000
Bottom Quintile
2nd Quintile
Middle Quintile
4th Quintile
Top Quintile
Top 5%

17.8
11.7
7.5
10.7
14.7
14.4

17.2
13.5
13.1
13.3
16.2
16.5

20.6
16.7
14.6
12.6
13.5
13.9

21.8
17.9
16.4
15.5
29.2
43.4

Panel C: 2000-2007
Bottom Quintile
2nd Quintile
Middle Quintile
4th Quintile
Top Quintile
Top 5%

-43.0
-9.8
-4.9
-2.5
-1.6
-4.0

-6.2
-2.4
-0.4
1.0
-1.0
-3.3

4.8
5.2
4.9
6.6
4.8
2.6

5.1
5.2
5.1
6.9
6.5
6.1

Panel D: Gini Coefficients
1979
1989
2000
2007

0.536
0.565
0.571
0.584

0.384
0.423
0.427
0.430

0.301
0.346
0.338
0.338

0.303
0.359
0.380
0.383

Source: Author calculations based on March CPS data merged with SOI tax return data and NBER TaxSim results.

31

(1)

Bottom Quintile
2nd Quintile
Middle Quintile
4th Quintile
Top Quintile
Top 5%

TABLE 3— MEAN INCOME GROWTH BY QUINTILE, 1989-2007
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

(6)

(7)
Column (3) plus
Household sizeaccrued capital
Tax-unit
Household size- adjusted post-tax,
Column (3) plus Column (3) plus gains, including
unadjusted adjusted pre-tax, post-transfer
Column (3) plus accrued capital accrued capital
housing and
cash market post-transfer cash income plus in- realized taxable gains from public gains, including privately held
income
income
kind income
capital gains
investments
housing
businesses
-32.9
9.9
26.4
28.0
29.4
12.9
15.2
0.8
10.8
22.7
24.0
22.9
8.5
3.1
2.3
12.6
20.2
22.3
18.1
6.1
-0.5
8.0
14.4
20.0
23.5
17.0
5.5
-0.6
12.9
15.1
19.0
37.5
10.9
-0.7
-14.5
9.9
12.7
16.8
52.2
6.7
-4.5
-25.3

Source: Author calculations based on March CPS data merged with SOI tax return data, Survey of Consumer Finance Data, and NBER TaxSim
results

32

TABLE 4— INFLATION-ADJUSTED INVESTMENT ASSETS BY QUINTILE OF HOUSEHOLD SIZE-ADJUSTED
COMPREHENSIVE INCOME, EXCLUDING ALL CAPITAL GAINS IN 1989 AND 2007
Taxable
Investment
Assets

Tax Sheltered
Investment Assets

Total Investment
Assets

% of Investment
Assets in Tax
Sheltered Accounts

Panel A: 1989
Bottom Quintile
2nd Quintile
Middle Quintile
4th Quintile
Top Quintile

3,013
8,302
11,587
17,892
87,544

664
1,297
3,208
5,634
21,158

3,677
9,599
14,795
23,527
108,702

18.0
13.5
21.7
23.9
19.5

Panel B: 2007
Bottom Quintile
2nd Quintile
Middle Quintile
4th Quintile
Top Quintile

19,534
25,632
31,176
41,303
284,595

9,252
13,738
19,559
30,683
96,828

28,786
39,370
50,734
71,985
381,423

32.1
34.9
38.6
42.6
25.4

Source: Author calculations based on Survey of Consumer Finance Data. Indexed to 2012 price levels using the CPI-U-RS.

33

TABLE 5— HOMEOWNERSHIP AND INFLATION-ADJUSTED HOME VALUES BY QUINTILE OF HOUSEHOLD SIZEADJUSTED COMPREHENSIVE INCOME, EXCLUDING ALL CAPITAL GAINS IN 1989 AND 2007
1989 mean home
2007 mean home
1989 percent
2007 percent
value of
value of
homeowners
homeowners
homeowners
homeowners
39.8
103,524
44.2
175,702
Bottom Quintile
60.1
114,872
62.4
175,578
2nd Quintile
71.5
119,157
74.2
184,892
Middle Quintile
78.5
142,193
82.2
225,564
4th Quintile
84.9
262,267
89.0
430,468
Top Quintile
Source: Author calculations based on Survey of Consumer Finance Data. Indexed to 2012 price levels using the CPI-U-RS.

34

TABLE 6— PRIVATE BUSINESS OWNERSHIP AND INFLATION-ADJUSTED BUSINESS VALUES BY QUINTILE OF
HOUSEHOLD SIZE-ADJUSTED COMPREHENSIVE INCOME, EXCLUDING ALL CAPITAL GAINS IN 1989 AND 2007
1989 percent
1989 mean
2007 percent
2007 mean
private business business value of
private business business value of
owners
business owners
owners
business owners
2.1
23,937
4.9
46,487
Bottom Quintile
6.0
19,562
5.3
34,581
2nd Quintile
8.4
25,472
8.9
45,362
Middle Quintile
12.7
36,918
13.1
96,707
4th Quintile
19.2
220,700
21.4
500,229
Top Quintile
Source: Author calculations based on Survey of Consumer Finance Data. Indexed to 2012 price levels using the CPI-U-RS.

35

0.40

0.30

0.20

0.10

0.00

‐0.10

‐0.20

‐0.30
1979

1981

1983

1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

FIGURE 1. REAL INFLATION-ADJUSTED RETURN ON STOCK INVESTMENTS,
BASED ON THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE, 1979-2007

36

2003

2005

2007

FIGURE 2. TOP 5 PERCENT INCOME SHARE USING VARIOUS COMPREHENSIVE INCOME DEFINITIONS, 1989-2007

Source: Author calculations based on March CPS data merged with SOI tax return data, Survey of Consumer Finance Data, and NBER TaxSim
results.
Notes: (1) Survey of Consumer Finance Data is only available on a triennial basis, so results are displayed only for the years where that data is
available. (2) Due to revisions to Census data collection procedures between 1992 and 1993, a direct comparison across these years is not
possible. Following the procedure of Burkhauser et al. (2012), we assume no change in the Census-based income distribution across these two
years. This adjustment is made for all four series.

37

FIGURE 3. TOP QUINTILE INCOME SHARE USING VARIOUS COMPREHENSIVE INCOME DEFINITIONS, 1989-2007

Source and Notes: See Figure 2

38

APPENDIX TABLE 1— ROBUSTNESS OF RESULTS FOR MEAN INCOME GROWTH BY QUINTILE BASED ON CHOICE OF ASSET APPRECIATION
MEASURE FOR EQUITY ASSETS, 1989-2007
Original Results
Alternate Method
Estimate accrued capital gains using the
Estimate accrued capital gains using the
annual Dow Jones Industrial Average
annual S&P 500 Index appreciation rate
appreciation rate
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Column (1) plus
Column (1) plus
Household sizeColumn (1) plus
accrued capital
Column (1) plus
accrued capital
adjusted post-tax,
accrued capital
gains, including
accrued capital
gains, including
post-transfer
gains from public
housing and
gains from public
housing and
income plus in-kind
investments
privately held
investments
privately held
income
businesses
businesses
26.4
29.4
15.2
27.3
11.3
Bottom Quintile
22.7
22.9
3.1
21.0
-0.4
2nd Quintile
20.2
18.1
-0.5
15.9
-4.5
Middle Quintile
20.0
17.0
-0.6
14.5
-5.2
4th Quintile
19.0
10.9
-14.5
4.9
-24.0
Top Quintile
16.8
6.7
-25.3
-2.0
-36.5
Top 5%
Source: Author calculations based on March CPS data merged with SOI tax return data, Survey of Consumer Finance Data, and NBER TaxSim
results

39

APPENDIX TABLE 2— ROBUSTNESS OF RESULTS FOR MEAN INCOME GROWTH BY QUINTILE BASED ON CHOICE OF ASSET
APPRECIATION MEASURE FOR REAL ESTATE, 1989-2007
Original Results
Alternate Method
(1)
Estimate accrued capital gains
Estimate accrued capital gains
Household sizefor real estate using the annual
for real estate using the annual
adjusted post-tax, postFederal Housing Finance Agency
Case-Shiller Home Price Index
transfer income plus inHouse Price Index growth rate
growth rate
kind income and
(2)
(3)
accrued capital gains
Column (1) plus accrued capital
Column (1) plus accrued capital
from public investments
gains from housing
gains from housing
29.4
12.9
-20.1
Bottom Quintile
nd
22.9
8.5
-9.4
2 Quintile
18.1
6.1
-9.0
Middle Quintile
17.0
5.5
-9.2
4th Quintile
10.9
-0.7
-15.6
Top Quintile
6.7
-4.5
-19.7
Top 5%
Source: Author calculations based on March CPS data merged with SOI tax return data, Survey of Consumer Finance Data, and NBER TaxSim
results

40

