                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WIN SOME LOSE SOME? EVIDENCE FROM A RANDOMIZED MICROCREDIT
        PROGRAM PLACEMENT EXPERIMENT BY COMPARTAMOS BANCO

                                         Manuela Angelucci
                                            Dean Karlan
                                          Jonathan Zinman

                                        Working Paper 19119
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19119


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




Thanks to Tim Conley for collaboration and mapping expertise. Thanks to Innovations for Poverty
Action staff, including Alissa Fishbane, Andrew Hillis, Elana Safran, Rachel Strohm, Braulio Torres,
Asya Troychansky, Irene Velez, Sanjeev Swamy, Matthew White, Glynis Startz, and Anna York, for
outstanding research and project management assistance. Thanks to Dale Adams, Abhijit Banerjee,
Esther Duflo, Jake Kendall, Melanie Morten, David Roodman and participants in seminars at M.I.T./Harvard
and NYU for comments. Thanks to Compartamos Banco, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and
the National Science Foundation for funding support to the project and researchers. All opinions are
those of the researchers, and not the donors, Compartamos Banco, or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The research team has retained complete intellectual freedom from inception to conduct
the surveys and estimate and interpret the results (contract available upon request).

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Manuela Angelucci, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Win Some Lose Some? Evidence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment
by Compartamos Banco
Manuela Angelucci, Dean Karlan, and Jonathan Zinman
NBER Working Paper No. 19119
June 2013
JEL No. D12,D22,G21,O17

                                             ABSTRACT

Theory and evidence have raised concerns that microcredit does more harm than good, particularly
when offered at high interest rates. We use a clustered randomized trial, and household surveys of
eligible borrowers and their businesses, to estimate impacts from an expansion of group lending at
110% APR by the largest microlender in Mexico. Average effects on a rich set of outcomes measured
18-34 months post-expansion suggest some good and little harm. Other estimators identify heterogeneous
treatment effects and effects on outcome distributions, but again yield little support for the hypothesis
that microcredit causes harm.


Manuela Angelucci                                   Jonathan Zinman
Department of Economics                             Department of Economics
University of Michigan                              Dartmouth College
Lorch Hall, 611 Tappan St.                          314 Rockefeller Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                            Hanover, NH 03755
mangeluc@umich.edu                                  and NBER
                                                    jzinman@dartmouth.edu
Dean Karlan
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208269
New Haven, CT 06520-8629
and NBER
dean.karlan@yale.edu
I.      Introduction
The initial promise of microcredit, including such accolades as the 2006 Nobel Peace
Prize, has given way to intense debate about if and when it is actually an effective
development tool. A clear theoretical and empirical tension exists: innovations in lending
markets, under the “microcredit movement”, aim to expand access to credit by lowering
transaction costs and mitigating information asymmetries. Yet theories and empirical
evidence from behavioral economics raises concerns about overborrowing at available
rates, and have drawn much media and political attention in India, Bolivia, the United
States, Mexico, and elsewhere. Moreover, there may be negative spillovers from
borrowers to non-borrowers, such as business stealing. Revealed preference may not be a
sufficient starting point for welfare analysis: people may borrow based on present-biases
that make debt seem attractive ex-ante, yet ultimately make them worse off in the sense
that in a moment of informed ex-ante reflection they would not have borrowed as much.
These biases may work through preferences (e.g., beta-delta discounting), expectations
(e.g., over-optimism), and/or price perceptions (e.g., underestimating exponential growth
and decline).2

Both sets of theories can have merit. For example, unbiased borrowers may use credit
well, and benefit from expanded credit access, while others may borrow too much, and
suffer from expanded access. Does such heterogeneity in impacts exist? Existing
empirical evidence is limited, and mixed. Most of the evidence on the impacts of small-
dollar credit thus far has been on mean outcomes, or on a limited examination of
heterogeneous treatment effects. 3 But expanded credit access could produce welfare
losses for some borrowers even in the absence of mean negative impacts. If enough
people are harmed—where “enough” depends on one’s social welfare weights—null or
even positive mean impacts can mask net negative welfare consequences.

Using a large-scale clustered randomized trial that substantially expanded access to group
lending in north-central Sonora, Mexico, we provide evidence on impacts of expanded
access to microcredit on outcome means and distributions measured from detailed
household surveys. We do this for a broad set of outcomes, including credit access,
perceived creditworthiness, use of funds, business outcomes, income, consumption,
health, education, female decision-making power, social attitudes, and subjective
measures of well-being and financial condition.



2
  See, e.g., DellaVigna (2009) for a discussion and review of such issues.
3
  Randomized-control evaluations of joint-liability microlending at lower interest rates by non-
profits (Banerjee et al. 2009; Crepon et al. 2011), or a for-profit bank (Attanasio et al. 2011), or
individual liability loans (Karlan and Zinman 2010; Karlan and Zinman 2011; Augsburg et al.
2012) find somewhat positive but not transformational treatment effects. Further studies have
found a wide range of impacts from business grants (de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2008;
Berge, Bjorvatn, and Tungooden 2011; Fafchamps et al. 2011; Karlan, Knight, and Udry 2012),
and from relatively large loans (Gine and Mansuri (2011)). See Karlan and Morduch (2009) for a
broader literature review that includes non-experimental estimates of mean impacts.
                                                                                                  1
Strong impacts in either direction seem plausible in our setting. The market rate for
microloans is about 100% APR, making concerns about overborrowing and negative
impacts plausible. But existing evidence suggests that returns to capital in Mexico are
about 200% for microentrepreneurs (D. J. McKenzie and Woodruff 2006; D. McKenzie
and Woodruff 2008), raising the possibility of transformative positive impacts.

Compartamos Banco (Compartamos) implemented the experiment. Compartamos is the
largest microlender in Mexico, and targets working-age women who operate a business or
are interested in starting one.4 In early 2009 we worked with Compartamos to randomize
its rollout into an area it had not previously lent, North-Central Sonora State (near the
Arizona border). Specifically, we randomized loan promotion—door-to-door for
treatment, none for control—across 238 geographic “clusters” (neighborhoods in urban
areas, towns or contiguous towns in rural areas). Compartamos also verified addresses to
maximize compliance with the experimental protocol of lending only to those who live in
treatment clusters. Treatment assignment strongly predicts the depth of Compartamos
penetration: during the study period, according to analysis from merging our survey data
with Compartamos administrative data, 18.9% (1565) of those surveyed in the treatment
areas had taken out Compartamos loans, whereas only 5.8% (485) of those surveyed in
the control areas had taken out Compartamos loans. We conducted 16,560 detailed
business/household follow-up surveys during 2011 and 2012, up to three years, and an
average of 26 months, since the beginning of the credit expansion.

Random assignment of treatment creates a control group that helps identify the causal
impacts of access to credit by addressing the counterfactual “what would have happened
had Compartamos not entered this market?” This addresses two selection biases: demand-
level decisions on whether to borrow, and supply-level decisions on where to lend. For
example, under the canonical view of microcredit we would expect borrowers to be
talented and spirited in ways that are difficult to control for using observational data.
Such unobservables may be correlated with both self-selection into borrowing (borrowers
with more potential have more to gain from borrowing) and good longer-run outcomes
(e.g., more successful businesses). This pattern would bias estimates of the effects of
microcredit upward; e.g., a positive correlation between longer-run outcomes and
microcredit would be due, perhaps largely, to the effect of unobserved borrower
characteristics rather than to the causal effect of credit itself. On the supply side, lenders
may select on growth potential, and hence lend more in areas (and to borrowers) that are
likely to improve over the evaluation horizon. Again, this means an observed positive
correlation between outcomes and borrowing (or lending) would be driven by unobserved
characteristics of the borrowers (communities, and/or lending strategies), not necessarily
by the causal impacts of the credit itself. Understanding the causal impacts of borrowing
and credit access informs theory, practice, and policy.

The randomized program placement design used here (see also, e.g., Crepon et al (2011),
Banerjee et al (2009), and Attanasio et al (2011)) has advantages and disadvantages over
individual-level randomization strategies (e.g., Karlan and Zinman (2010), Karlan and
4
   See http://www.compartamos.com/wps/portal/Grupo/InvestorsRelations/FinancialInformation
for annual and other reports from 2010 onward,.
                                                                                            2
Zinman (2011) and Augsburg et al (2012)). Randomized program placement effectively
measures treatment effects at the community level (more precisely: at the level of the unit
of randomization), assuming no spillovers from treatment to control across community
boundaries (we are not aware of any prior studies with evidence of such spillovers).
Measuring treatment effects at the community level has the advantage of incorporating
any within-community spillovers. These could in theory be positive (due, e.g., to
complementarities across businesses) or negative (due, e.g., to zero-sum competition).
Our estimated effects on the treatment group, relative to control, are net of any within-
treatment group spillovers from borrowers to non-borrowers. Capturing spillovers with
individual-level randomization is more difficult. But individual-level randomization can
be done at lower cost because it typically delivers a larger take-up differential between
treatment and control, thereby improving statistical power for a given sample size.

We start by estimating mean treatment effects (average intent-to-treat), and then take five
approaches to examining distributional shifts and heterogeneous treatment effects. First
we estimate effects on outcome variance and second we examine whether differences in
variance are captured entirely by the variables we observe. Third, we estimate quantile
treatment effects. Fourth, we estimate treatment effects on the likelihood that an outcome
variable increased or decreased, for the sub-sets of outcomes and respondents for which
we have panel data. Fifth, we examine whether treatment effects vary heterogeneously
with baseline characteristics such as prior business ownership, education, location, and
income, and (nonstandard) preferences.

The mean treatment effects suggest some good and little harm. Of the 34 more-ultimate
outcomes for which we estimate treatment effects in the full sample, we find 8 treatment
effects that are positive with at least 90% confidence, and only one statistically
significant negative effect (0 when we adjust for multiple hypothesis testing). There is
evidence of both increased business investment and improved consumption smoothing.
Happiness, trust in others, and female intra-household decision power also increase.

We also find evidence of changes in dispersion. Of the 29 non-binary outcomes tested,
we find statistically significant increases in eight, and statistically significant decreases in
seven (both with and without adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing). Variance
increases in the treatment group relative to control for total and Compartamos borrowing
(both for the number of loans and the amount of loans), business revenues and expenses,
and household expenditures on groceries and on school and medical expenses. Variance is
lower for informal borrowing, nights the respondent did not go hungry, asset purchases,
remittances received, fraction of children not working, lack of depression, and decision-
making power.

We estimate quantile treatment effects and show that there are meaningful effects on the
shape of outcome distributions, particularly in the form of positive treatment effects in
the right tail: revenues, expenses, profits, groceries, and school and medical expenses
each have this pattern. Treatment effects on happiness and on trust in people increase
throughout their distributions. There is little evidence of negative impacts in the left tails



                                                                                              3
of distributions, alleviating (but not directly addressing) concerns that expanded credit
access might adversely impact people with the worst baseline outcomes.

Overall we do not find strong evidence that the credit expansion creates large numbers of
“losers” as well as winners. None of the 17 outcomes for which we have panel data
shows significant increases in the likelihood of worsening over time in treatment relative
to control areas. In the sub-group analysis, there are hints that some sub-groups— in
particular, those with lower incomes, and those without prior formal credit experience or
with experience in an informal savings group—experience negative treatment effects on
balance, but the evidence is statistically weak: only those three sub-groups, out of 20 sub-
groups, have more than three negative treatment effects out of the 34 we count as having
fairly strong normative implications (and after adjusting for multiple hypothesis testing).

Our results come with several caveats. Cross-cluster spillovers could bias our estimates in
an indeterminate direction. External validity to other settings is uncertain: theory and
evidence do not yet provide much guidance on whether and how a given lending model
will produce different impacts in different settings (with varying demographics,
competition, etc.). Our results do not derive the optimal lending model: we cannot say
whether a different lender type, product, etc. could have produced better (or worse)
impacts. The time horizon for measuring impacts varies across individuals and clusters:
the maximum window from first offer of loans to follow-up is three years, but given a
fast but staggered start, the typical community can accurately be described as having
about two years of exposure to lending before the follow-up surveys were completed.

II.    Background on the Lender, Loan Terms, and Study Setting
A.     Compartamos and its Target Market
The lender, Compartamos Banco, is the largest microlender in Mexico with 2.3 million
borrowers.5 Compartamos was founded in 1990 as a nonprofit organization, converted to
a commercial bank in 2006, went public in 2007, and has a market capitalization of
US$2.2 billion as of November 16th, 2012. As of 2012, 71% of Compartamos clients
borrow through Crédito Mujer, the group microloan product studied in this paper.

Crédito Mujer nominally targets women that have a business or self-employment activity
or intend to start one. Empirically, 100% of borrowers are women but we estimate that
only about 51% are “microentrepreneurs”.6 Borrowers tend to lack the income and/or
collateral required to qualify for loans from commercial banks and other “upmarket”
lenders. Below we provide additional information on marketing, group formation, and
screening.




5
  According to Mix Market, http://www.mixmarket.org/mfi/country/Mexico, accessed August
22nd, 2012.
6
  We define microenterpreneurshp here as currently or ever having owned a business, and use our
endline survey data, including retrospective questions, to measure it.
                                                                                             4
B.      Loan Terms
Crédito Mujer loan amounts during most of the study range from M$1,500-M$27,000
pesos (12 pesos, denoted M$, = $1US), with amounts for first-time borrowers ranging
from M$1,500 - M$6,000 pesos ($125-$500 dollars) and larger amounts subsequently
available to members of groups that have successfully repaid prior loans.7 The mean loan
amount in our sample is M$6,462 pesos, and the mean first loan is M$3,946 pesos. Loan
repayments are due over 16 equal weekly installments, and are guaranteed by the group
(i.e., joint liability). Aside from these personal guarantees there is no collateral. Loans
cost about 110% APR during our study period. For loans of this size, these rates are in the
middle of the market (nonprofits charge similar, sometimes higher, sometimes lower,
rates than Compartamos).8

C.      Targeting, Marketing, Group Formation, and Screening
Crédito Mujer groups range in size from 10 to 50 members. When Compartamos enters a
new market, as was the case in this study, loan officers typically target self-reported
female entrepreneurs and promote the Credito Mujer product through diverse channels,
including door-to-door promotion, distribution of fliers in public places, radio,
promotional events, etc. In our study, Compartamos conducted only door-to-door
promotion in randomly assigned treatment areas (see Section III). As loan officers gain
more clients in new areas, they promote less frequently and rely more on existing group
members to recruit other members.

When a group of about five women – half of the minimum required group size –
expresses interest, a loan officer visits the partial group at one of their homes or
businesses to explain loan terms and process. These initial women are responsible for
finding the rest of the group members. The loan officer returns for a second visit to
explain loan terms in greater detail and complete loan applications for each individual.
All potential members must be older than 18 years and also present a proof of address
and valid identification to qualify for a loan. Business activities (or plans to start one) are
not verified; rather, Compartamos relies on group members to screen out poor credit
risks. In equilibrium, potential members who express an interest and attend the meetings
are rarely screened out by their fellow members, since individuals who would not get
approved are neither approached nor seek out membership in the group.

Compartamos reserves the right to reject any applicant put forth by the group but relies
heavily on the group’s endorsement. Compartamos does pull a credit report for each
individual and automatically rejects anyone with a history of fraud. Beyond that, loan
officers do not use the credit bureau information to reject clients, as the group has
responsibility for deciding who is allowed to join.



7
  Also, beginning in weeks 3 to 9 of the second loan cycle, clients in good standing can take out
an additional, individual liability loan, in an amount up to 30% of their joint liability loan.
8
  See http://blogs.cgdev.org/open_book/2011/02/compartamos-in-context.php for a more detailed
elaboration of market interest rates in 2011 in Mexico.
                                                                                               5
Applicants who pass Compartamos’ screens are invited to a loan authorization meeting.
Each applicant must be guaranteed by every other member of the group to get a loan.
Loan amounts must also be agreed upon unanimously. Loan officers moderate the group’s
discussion, and sometimes provide information on credit history and assessments of
individuals’ creditworthiness. Proceeds from authorized loans are disbursed as checks to
each client.

D.     Group Administration, Loan Repayment, and Collection Actions
Each lending group decides where to meet, chooses the channel of repayment, creates a
schedule of fines for late payments, and elects leadership for the group, including a
treasurer, president, and secretary. In an attempt to promote group solidarity,
Compartamos requires groups to choose a name for themselves, keep a plant to
symbolize their strength, and take a group pledge at the beginning of each loan.

The treasurer collects payments from group members at each weekly meeting. The loan
officer is present to facilitate and monitor but does not touch the money. If a group
member does not make her weekly payment, the group president (and loan officer) will
typically solicit and encourage “solidarity” pooling to cover the payment and keep the
group in good standing. All payments are placed in a plastic bag that Compartamos
provides, and the treasurer then deposits the group’s payment at either a nearby bank
branch or convenience store.9

Beyond the group liability, borrowers have several other incentives to repay. Members of
groups with arrears are not eligible for another loan until the arrears are cured. Members
of groups that remain in good standing qualify for larger subsequent loan amounts, and
for interest rates as low as 2.9% monthly (compared to 3.89% on first loans). 10
Compartamos also reports individual repayment history for each borrower to the Mexican
Official Credit Bureau. Loans that are more than 90 days in arrears after the end of the
loan term are sent to collection agencies.

Compartamos trains all of its employees in an integrated model of personal development,
known as FISEP. Under FISEP, Compartamos employees are encouraged to strive for six
values in their physical, intellectual, social-familiar, spiritual, and professional lives.
Loan officers share this philosophy with Compartamos clients to promote their personal
development and help build group solidarity. Each client also receives a magazine from
Compartamos with financial advice, tips for personal development, and entertainment.

Late payments are common (Karlan and Zinman (2013) finds a 90-day group
delinquency rate of 9.8%) but the ultimate default rate is only about 1%.


9
   Compartamos has partnerships with six banks (and their convenience stores) and two separate
convenience stores. The banks include Banamex (Banamexi Aquí), Bancomer (Pitico), Banorte
(Telecomm and Seven Eleven), HSBC, Scotiabank, and Santander. The two separate convenience
stores are Oxxo and Chedraui.
10
   To determine the exact interest rate, Compartamos considers the number of group members,
punctuality, willingness to pay, and group seniority.
                                                                                             6
E.     Study Setting: North-Central Sonora, 2009-2012
We worked with Compartamos to identify an area of Mexico that it planned to enter but
had not yet done so. The bank selected the north-central part of the State of Sonora:
Nogales, Caborca and Agua Prieta and surrounding towns. The study area borders
Arizona to the north, and its largest city, Nogales (which is on the border), has about
200,000 people. The area contains urban, peri-urban, and rural settlements. The study
began in 2009, and concluded in 2012.

To understand the market landscape, we examine data from our endline survey.
Respondents in the control group report having the majority of their loans (66% of all
loan funds) from a bank or financial institution, including other microlenders. The
average size of all loans is 8,351 pesos, or roughly $696. The most prevalent lenders are
all considered close competitors of Compartamos: Bancoppel (12.1%, 5,001 pesos),
Banco Azteca (9.3%, 6,776 pesos) and Financiera Independencia (5.4%, 4,918 pesos).
Moneylenders (0.7%, 4,468 pesos) and pawnshops (0.4%, 2,065pesos) make up a small
fraction of the market. Besides financial institutions, the other two prevalent sources are
the government (8.4% of all loan funds, average size of 44,723 pesos) and trade credit
(11.7%, 5,331 pesos).

III.   Research Design, Implementation, and Data
A.     Design Overview
Our analysis uses a randomized cluster encouragement design, with randomization at the
neighborhood- (urban areas) or municipality- (rural areas) level, and two sample frames.
One sample frame, containing 33 clusters in the outlying areas of Nogales, has baseline
and follow-up surveys. The second sample frame contains the remaining 205 clusters and
has just follow-up surveys. Both baseline and endline surveys were administered to
potential borrowers—women 18 or older, who answered yes to any of three questions: (1)
“Do you have an economic activity or a business? This can be, for example, the sale of a
product like cosmetics, clothes, or food, either through a catalogue, from a physical
location or from your home, or any activity for which you receive some kind of income”;
(2) “If you had money to start an economic activity or a business, would you do so in the
next year?”; (3) “If an institution were to offer you credit, would you consider taking it?”

The endline survey was administered approximately 2-3 years after Compartamos’ entry,
to 16,560 respondents. This constitutes our “Full Endline Sample”. The baseline survey
was administered to 2,912 respondents in an area in which Compartamos had not yet
expanded about one year following its initial expansion activities. Combining the
baseline and endline produces the “Panel Sample” of 1,823 respondents. Figure 1 depicts
the timeline of surveying and treatment.

B.     Experimental Design and Implementation
The research team divided the study area into 250 geographic clusters, with each cluster
being a unit of randomization (see below for explanation of the reduction from 250 to
238 clusters). In most urban areas, cluster boundaries are based on formal and informal

                                                                                          7
neighborhood boundaries. Rural areas are more easily defined as an entire community.
We then further grouped the 168 urban clusters (each of these 168 were located within the
municipal boundaries of Nogales, Caborca, or Agua Prieta) into “superclusters” of four
adjacent clusters each. 11 Then we randomized so that 125 clusters were assigned to
receive direct promotion and access of Crédito Mujer (treatment group), while the other
125 clusters would not receive any promotion or access until study data collection was
completed (control group). This randomization was stratified on superclusters for urban
areas, and on branch offices in rural areas (one of three offices had primary responsibility
for each cluster).12

Violence prevented both Compartamos and IPA surveyors from entering some
neighborhoods to promote loans and conduct surveys, respectively. We set up a decision
rule that was agnostic to treatment status, and strictly determined by the survey team with
respect to where they felt they could safely conduct surveys. 12 clusters were dropped
(five treatment and seven control). These are omitted from all analyses, and the final
sample frame consists of 238 geographic clusters (120 treatment and 118 control).

Table 1 verifies that our survey respondents are observably similar across treatment and
control clusters. Columns 1-3 present summary statistics for the full sample using data
from the endline survey on variables unlikely to have changed due to treatment, such as
age and adult educational attainment. Columns 4-6 present summary statistics for the
baseline of the panel sample, for a larger set of variables (including income and
preference measures). Columns 2 and 5 present tests of orthogonality between each
variable and treatment status. We also report p-values from an F-test that all coefficients
for the individual characteristics are zero in an OLS regression predicting treatment
assignment presented in Columns 3 and 6. Both tests pass: the p-values are 0.337 and
0.222.

Appendix Table 1 shows that, in the panel, attrition does not vary by treatment (Columns
1-3). While attrition is not random, as the probability of being in the endline is positively
correlated with age, being married, and prior business ownership, and negatively
correlated with income and formal account ownership (Column 2), it does not
systematically differ in control and treatment areas, as the p-value of the F-test of joint
significance of the coefficients of the baseline variables interacted by treatment is 0.145
(Column 3).

Compartamos began operating in the 120 treatment clusters in April 2009, and follow-up
surveys concluded during March 2012 (see below). For this three-year study period,
Compartamos put in place an address verification step to require individuals to live in
treatment areas in order to get loans, and only actively promoted its lending in treatment
clusters. This led to an 18.9% take-up rate among those with completed endline surveys

11
   In future work with Tim Conley, we plan to use these superclusters to estimate spillovers from
treatment to control, by examining whether treatment versus control differences are smaller in
high-intensity than low-intensity.
12
   In urban areas branches are completely nested in superclusters; i.e., any one supercluster is
only served by one branch.
                                                                                               8
in the treatment clusters, and a 5.8% take-up rate in the control clusters. All analysis will
be intent-to-treat, on those surveyed, not just on those who borrowed in the treatment
clusters.

C.      Partial Baseline and Full Endline Survey
After an initial failed attempt at a baseline survey in 2008, 13 we later capitalized on a
delay in loan promotion rollout to 33 contiguous rural clusters (16 treatment and 17
control), on the outskirts of Nogales, to do a baseline survey during the first half of 2010.
For sampling, we established a targeted number of respondents per cluster based on its
estimated population of females above the ages of 18 (from Census data) who would
have a high propensity to borrow from Compartamos if available: those who either had
their own business, would want to start their own business in the following year, or would
consider taking out a loan in the near future. Then we randomly sampled up to the target
number in each cluster, for a total of 6,786 baseline surveys. Compartamos then entered
these treatment clusters beginning in June 2010 (i.e., about a year after they entered the
other treatment clusters). Respondents were informed that the survey was a
comprehensive socioeconomic research survey being conducted by a nonprofit,
nongovernmental organization (Innovations for Poverty Action) in collaboration with the
University of Arizona (the home institution of one of the co-authors at the time of the
survey). Neither the survey team nor the respondents were informed of the relationship
between the researchers and Compartamos.

The survey firm then conducted an endline survey between November 2011 and March
2012. This timing produced an average exposure to Compartamos loan availability of 15
months in the clusters with baseline surveys. In those clusters, we tracked 2,912
respondents for endline follow up. In the clusters without baseline surveys, we followed
the same sampling rules used in the baseline, and the average exposure to Compartamos
loan availability was 28 months. In all, we have 16,560 completed endline surveys. We
also have 1,823 respondents with both baseline and endline surveys.

Our main sample is the full sample of endline respondents. Their characteristics are
described in Table 1, Columns 1-2. Relative to the female Mexican population aged 18-
60, our sample has a similar age distribution (median 37), is more rural (27% vs. 22%)
and married (75% vs. 63%), and has more occupants per household (4.6 vs. 3.9).14

D.      Who Borrows?
Before estimating treatment effects of access to Compartamos credit, we provide some
analysis of who borrows from Compartamos during our study period. Understanding the

13
   We were unable to track baseline participants successfully, and in the process of tracking and
auditing discovered too many irregularities by the survey firm to give us confidence in the data. It
was not cost-effective to determine which observations were reliable, relative to spending further
money on an expanded follow-up survey and new baseline survey in areas still untouched by
Compartamos. Thus we decided to not use the first baseline for any analysis.
14
   Source; Instituto Nacional de Estadìstica y Geografìa. “Demografìa y Poblaciòn.” 2010.
Accessed 22 March 2013 from http://www3.inegi.org.mx/.
                                                                                                  9
characteristics of borrowers is interesting descriptively, and also informs the
interpretation of treatment effects. We measure borrowing using Compartamos
administrative data, merged with borrower characteristics measured by our surveys. Table
2, Panel A uses the entire endline sample from treatment clusters. The mean of the
dependent variable (i.e., take-up in the treatment clusters) is 18.9% during the study
period. The mean number of loans per borrower among treatment group members is 3.7
(standard deviation of 3.05); 70% of borrowers in the treatment group borrowed more
than once (Appendix Figure 2). The endline provides a large sample from treatment
areas, 8,262 observations, but contains only a few variables that are plausibly unaffected
by treatment, i.e. unaffected by treatment. Of these variables, we observe that women
who had prior businesses are more likely to borrow (by 9.6% percentage points), while
those with tertiary education are less likely to borrow than those with primary or
secondary education only, and younger respondents (18-30) are less likely to borrow than
middle-aged respondents (31-50). However, with these few variables we cannot predict
much of the variation in the dependent variable: the adjusted R-squared is only 4.4%.

We now turn to the panel sample, which is much smaller—682 observations in treatment
areas—but allows us to consider a much broader set of baseline predictors of take-up.
Take-up is lower in the panel, 11.9%, presumably at least in part due to the fact that the
time elapsed between Compartamos’ entry and our endline is about 13 months less for the
panel sample than for the full endline sample (recall from Section III.C that
Compartamos entered the areas covered by our panel later). Table 2 Column 2a presents
results from a regression of take-up (again defined as borrowing from Compartamos
during our study period) on household demographics, income, consumption, assets,
business characteristics, direct or indirect knowledge of and experience with formal credit
institutions, and perceived likelihood of being eligible for formal loans. This rich set of
regressors explains only a very small share of the variation in the dependent variable: the
adjusted-R-squared is 2.3%.15 Therefore we do not attempt to predict take-up in the
control group based on observable information.

IV.     Identification and Estimation Strategies
A.      Average Intent-to-Treat Effects
We use survey data on outcomes to estimate the average effect of credit access, or the
Average Intent to Treat (AIT) effect, with OLS equations of the form:

(1) Yics =  + Tc + Xs + Zics + eics


15
   The bottom panel of Table 2 groups the regressors thematically and reports the partial adjusted
R-squared and the p-value from an F-test for joint significance for each group. These results
indicate that the strongest predictors of take-up are “credit expectations”: responses to questions
about the likelihood of applying and being approved for a formal loan. If we omit these variables
from the set of take-up predictors, the adjusted R-squared drops to -1.4%, that is, the other
variables basically explain none of the variation in take-up. Consistent with this finding, besides
credit-related variables, the only other statistically significant predictor of take-up is education
(tertiary education increases take-up likelihood).
                                                                                                 10
The variable Y is an outcome, or summary index of outcomes, following Kling et al
(2007) and Karlan and Zinman (2010), for person i in cluster c and supercluster s. We
code Y’s so that higher values are more desirable (in a normative sense). Standard errors
are clustered at the geographic cluster c level, as that is the unit of randomization. The
Data Appendix details the survey questions, or combinations thereof (for summary
indices), that we use to measure each outcome. T is a binary variable that is 1 if
respondent i lives (“lives” defined as where she sleeps) in a treatment cluster c, and is 0
otherwise; X is a vector of randomization strata (supercluster fixed effects, where the
superclusters are nested in the bank branches), and Z is baseline value of the outcome
measure, when available.16

The parameter  identifies the AIT effect under random assignment and absent spillover
effects from treatment to control clusters (We are not aware of any prior studies with
evidence of such spillovers).  is a useful policy parameter, because it estimates the effect
of providing access to Credito Mujer.

The AIT is a lower bound of the Average Treatment on the Treated (ATT) effect under the
assumption that any within-cluster spillover effect on “non-compliers” (non-borrowers) is
lower than any within-cluster spillover effect on “compliers” (people induced to borrow
by the treatment). In the absence of within-cluster spillovers, one can estimate the ATT
effect on Y by scaling up the estimated AIT effect on Y by the reciprocal of the
differential compliance rate in treatment and control areas. In our setting this would lead
to ATT point estimates that are about eight times larger than the AITs.

B.        Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
Looking only at mean impacts may miss important heterogeneity in treatment effects, as
discussed at the outset. So we examine heterogeneity using several methods, none of
which require additional identification assumptions.

B.1. Distributions
We start by testing whether the outcome variances are equal across treatment and control
groups using a form of Levene’s test for clustered data (Iachine et al. 2010). Rejecting the
null hypothesis of equality of variances indicates that treatment effects are heterogeneous.
When we do reject equality of variances, we also test whether the observed heterogeneity
of treatment effects is explained by observed characteristics. To establish this, we test for
equality of variances of the residuals obtained from regressing an outcome on the
treatment dummy, a set of predetermined variables measured at baseline (either socio-
economic variables only, or those plus proxies for risk and time preferences), and their
interaction with the treatment dummy. This exercise can help us understand the
determinants of heterogeneity and predict which groups of people benefit or lose from
treatment.

Quantile Treatment Effects (QTEs) provide further insight into how access to
Compartamos credit changes the shape of outcome distributions; e.g., whether most of

16
     Adding controls for survey date does not change the results.
                                                                                          11
the changes in outcomes between the treatment and control groups are in the tails, in the
middle, or throughout the distribution. QTEs also provide some information on the
“winners and losers” question: if a QTE is negative (positive) for a given outcome in the
tails, the treatment worsens (improves) that outcome for at least one household. But one
cannot infer more from QTEs about how many people gain or lose without further
assumptions. 17 We estimate standard errors using the block-bootstrap with 1000
repetitions.

B.2. Winners and Losers? Average Intent to Treat Effects on Changes (Panel Only)
Next, we examine a theoretical and policy question of critical interest: are there
substantial numbers of people who are made worse off (as measured by one or more
outcomes) by increased access to credit? We answer this question by using the panel data
to estimate the average treatment effect on the likelihood that an outcome increases, or
decreases, from baseline to follow up. We create two dummies for whether a person’s
outcome increased or decreased from baseline to endline. We separately estimate the
treatment effects on the probability of improving (relative to not improving), and of
worsening (relative to not worsening) by logit. Recall, however, that have panel data on
only about 11% of our sample and for a subset of outcomes.

B.3. Who Wins and Who Loses? Heterogeneous AITs
Another method for addressing the winners and losers question is to estimate AITs for
sub-groups of households. Note that there may substantial impact heterogeneity also
within subgroups.. We do this with a modified version of equation (1):

(2) Yic = a + 1Tc*Si1 + Tc*Si0 + Si1 + Xs + Zics + eics

Where 1 and 2 are the coefficients of interest, and Si is a single baseline characteristic
separated into two sub-groups; e.g., prior business owner (Si1) or not (Si0). As with the
main AIT estimates, standard errors are clustered at the geographic cluster c level, as that
is the unit of randomization. We estimate (2) rather than putting several Si into the same
equation because we are particularly interested in whether there are potentially
identifiable sub-groups that experience adverse treatment effects, and who hence might
merit further scrutiny by microlenders or policymakers going forward (e.g., screened out,



17
    The QTEs are conceptually different than the effect of the treatment at different quantiles. That
is, QTEs do not necessarily tell us by how much specific households gain or lose from living in
treatment clusters. For example: say we find that business profits increase at the 25th percentile in
treatment relative to control. This could be because the treatment shifts the distribution rightward
around the 25th percentile, with some business owners doing better and no one doing worse. But it
also could be the result of some people doing better around the 25th percentile while others do
worse (by a bit less in absolute value); this would produce the observed increase at the 25 th
percentile while also reshuffling ranks. More formally, rank invariance is required for QTEs to
identify the effect of the treatment for the household at the qth quantile of the outcome
distribution. Under rank invariance, the QTEs identify the treatment effects at a particular
quantile. However, rank invariance seems implausible in our setting; e.g., effects on borrowers
are likely larger (in absolute value) than effects on non-borrowers.
                                                                                                  12
or subjected to different underwriting) 18 . We examine Si that have been deemed
interesting by theory, policy, and/or prior work: prior business ownership, education,
urban location, income level, prior formal credit experience, prior formal bank account
experience, and prior informal savings group experience. Data for four of these seven Si
come from the baseline survey, and for these characteristics we can estimate (2) only for
the subset of individuals in our panel. We also examine heterogeneity with respect to
preferences (risk aversion, time inconsistency and patience). These Si are only available
for the panel sample frame, and also yield more speculative inferences as the questions in
the survey are likely noisy measures of the underlying parameters of interest.

C.        Dealing with Multiple Outcomes
We consider multiple outcomes, some of which belong to the same “family” in the sense
that they proxy for some broader outcome or channel of impact (e.g., we have several
outcomes that one could think of as proxies for business size: number of employees,
revenues, expenditures, and profits). This creates multiple inference problems that we
deal with in two ways. For an outcome family where we are not especially interested in
impacts on particular variables, we create an index—a standardized average across each
outcome in the family—and test whether the overall effect of the treatment on the index
is zero (see Kling et al (2007)). For outcome variables that are interesting in their own
right but plausibly belong to the same family, we calculate adjusted critical values
following the approach introduced by Benjamini and Hochberg (1995).19 In such cases
we report whether the outcome is significant using their procedure. The unadjusted p-
value is most useful for making inferences about the treatment effect on a particular
outcome. The adjusted critical levels are most useful for making inferences about the
treatment effect on a family of outcomes.

V.        Results
In tracking our results please keep in mind that sample sizes vary across different
analyses for several reasons: using the panel sample only, using sub-samples conditioned
on the relevance of a particular outcome (e.g, decision power questions were only asked
of married respondents living with another adult), and item non-response. Appendix
Table 3 provides additional details.

A. Average Intent-to-Treat Effects
Figure 2 summarizes results obtained from estimating equation (1) separately for each
outcome. Panel A in each of Tables 3-7 provides more details on the results. We group
outcomes thematically.




18
     However, we also estimate a version of equation 2 in which we add all the subgroups - and
     their interaction with the treatment dummy - in the right hand side
19
     An alternative approach is to calculate adjusted p-values following Aker et al (2011). We
     calculate both and find nearly identical results.
                                                                                                 13
A.1. Credit and Other Financial Services
Table 3 Panel A and the top panel of Figure 2 present AIT estimates on credit and other
financial services. These outcomes provide a sort of “1st-stage” underlying any impacts
on more ultimate impacts like business performance, household income, and well-being.

As noted above, strong compliance with the experimental design produced more lending
in treatment (18.9% reporting taking a loan from Compartamos) than control clusters
(5.8%). Column 1 shows that the treatment group has 0.121 (se=0.035) more loans on
average in the past two years than the control group, and Column 2 shows an increase in
the total amount borrowed ($M1248 more, se=$M471).20 Columns 3 and 4 show the
analogous results for Compartamos borrowing (see also Appendix Figure 2 for more
detail on treatment group borrowing);21 comparing these to the total borrowing effects
we find no evidence of crowd-out and some suggestion of crowd-in on amount borrowed.
Columns 5 and 6 show imprecisely estimated null effects on informal borrowing. 22 All
told, these results suggest that there was little substitution of Compartamos loans for
other debt.

Next we examine several other indicators of financial access. Column 7 shows that the
increase in formal sector borrowing does not increase the likelihood that someone would
go to a formal source if they needed a $M6,000 loan tomorrow (although it does increase
the perceived likelihood of getting the loan), 23 and Column 8 shows that overall
satisfaction with access to financial services has not changed (point estimate = -0.005,
se=0.012, dependent variable is binary for being satisfied). Column 9 shows a significant
negative effect of 1.9 percentage points on participation in an informal savings group, on
a base of 22.8%.24 We lack data that directly addresses whether this reduction is by
choice or constraint (where constraints could bind if increased formal access disrupts
informal networks), but the overall pattern of results is more consistent with choice: there


20
   All of the loan counts and loan amounts are right-skewed, so we re-estimate after top-coding
each at the 99% percentile. The estimates remain statistically significant with >99% confidence.
21
   Results are similar if we use Compartamos’ administrative data instead of survey data to
measure Compartamos borrowing. Interestingly, we find less underreporting of Compartamos
borrowing than in a comparable study in South Africa (Karlan and Zinman 2008). Here 22% of
borrowers who we know, from administrative data, to have borrowed from Compartamos during
the previous two years report no borrowing from Compartamos over the previous two years.
22
   Note that the (self-reported) prevalence of such borrowing is quite low relative to formal
sources; e.g., less than 3% of the sample reports any use of moneylenders or pawnshops among
their last 3 loans. We did prompt specifically for specific lender types, including moneylenders
and pawnshops, so the low prevalence of informal borrowing in our sample is not simply due to
respondent (mis)conceptions that money owed to these sources is not a “loan”.
23
   The effect on the likelihood that someone would go to an informal source is also not
significant. But we do find a reduction in the likelihood of expected problems with getting the
$M6,000 loan: 0.04 percentage points on a base of 0.21. Taken together, these results suggest that
the presence of Compartamos increases option value on the intensive but not extensive margin: it
does not change, e.g., whether someone is (primarily) a formal or informal sector borrower, but it
does increase the overall amount of credit one can access.
24
   We do not find a significant effect on the likelihood of having a bank account.
                                                                                               14
is no effect on the ability to get credit from friends or family in an emergency (results not
shown in table), and a positive effect on trust in people (Table 7, to be discussed below).

In all, the results in Table 3 show that Compartamos’ expansion increased household
borrowing from Compartamos and borrowing overall, decreased the use of informal
savings groups (likely by choice not by constraint), but did not shift satisfaction with
financial services.

A.2. Business Outcomes
Table 4 Panel A and the second panel of Figure 2 present AIT estimates of impacts on
some key business outcomes. Columns 1 and 2 show null effects on business ownership:
current and ever (-0.4 percentage points and -0.1 percentage points, both se’s=0.9, means
in control groups are 0.24 and 0.39).25 Column 3 reports a 0.8 percentage point increase
(se=0.4, control mean 0.05) on using loan proceeds to grow a business.

Turning to various measures of business size, Column 4 shows a null effect on the
number of employees (0.003, se = 0.010). Note that having any employees is rare–only
9% of households in the control group have a business with any employees. Columns 5-6
show that revenues and expenditures over the past two weeks increase by similar
amounts (M$121 and M$118, which are 27% and 36% of the control group means).
Columns 7 and 8 show imprecisely estimated null effects on profits, whether measured as
revenues minus expenditures (Column 7) or in response to “How much business income
did you earn?” (de Mel et al (2009)). Adjusting the critical levels for these results, under
the assumption that the outcomes in Columns 4-8 all belong to the same family (e.g.,
business size), does not change the significance of the coefficients. These results are
consistent with Column 3, which finds a significant positive treatment effect on the
likelihood of ever having used a loan to grow a business.

Column 9 shows positive but not statistically significant evidence that the loans helped
people manage risk: specifically, an increase of 0.7 percentage points (se=0.5) in the
likelihood that the business did not experience financial problems in the past year (note
this could be a direct effect of increased access to credit if failure to get access to credit is
itself deemed a financial problem).

In all, the results on business outcomes suggest that expanded credit access increased the
size of some existing businesses. But we do not find effects on business ownership or
profits.

A.3. Household Consumption and Expenditures
Table 5, and the third panel of Figure 2, report AITs on measures of household
consumption and expenditures over various horizons. In theory, treatment effects on these

25
   Respondents identified whether they currently had a business by responding to the following
prompt: “How many businesses or economic activities do you currently have? It can be, for
example, the sale of a product or food, either through catalogue, in an establishment or in your
home.” We find a similar result on the number of businesses owned (not shown in table); this is
not surprising given that fewer than 10% of owners have multiple businesses.
                                                                                              15
variables could go in either direction. Loan access might increase expenditures through at
least two channels. One is consumption smoothing. A second is income-generation that
leads to higher overall spending; although we do not find an effect on business profits or
income in Table 4 (or on other income sources, reported in Table 6), it is important to
keep in mind that any single measure of income or wealth is likely to be noisy. So one
might detect (income) effects on spending even in the absence of detecting effects on
income itself. On the other hand, loan access might lead to declines in our spending
variables if loans primarily finance short-term consumption smoothing or durable
purchases that must then be repaid, with interest, at the expense of longer-term
consumption. Also, if people “overborrow” on average, making bad investments (broadly
defined) with the loan proceeds, then spending might need to fall to cover losses on these
investments.

The first two columns of Table 5 present estimated effects on uses of loan proceeds (also
recall the result from Table 4 Column 3 showing a significant impact on using loan
proceeds to grow a business). Column 1 shows a positive effect on the likelihood that
someone did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan; i.e., this result suggests that increased
credit access reduces the likelihood of costly “fire sales” by one percentage point (se=0.4
percentage points), a 20% reduction. This is a striking result, since the positive treatment
effect on debt mechanically pushes against a reduction in fire sales (more debt leads to
greater likelihood of needing to sell an asset to pay off debt, all else equal). Also, given
that such sales are low-prevalence (only 4.9% of households in the 2 years prior to the
endline), they may be practices that people resort to in extreme circumstances. In this
case, the treatment might be beneficial for people in people considerable financial
distress. We do not find a significant effect on using loans for asset purchases (column 2).

Columns 3-10 present results for eight expenditure categories. Groceries and hunger are
not affected by the treatment, which is not surprising, given that our sample is generally
not poor. The two statistically significant effects—reductions in temptation goods and
asset purchases—do not survive adjusting the critical values under the assumption that
the eight expenditure categories belong to the same outcome family.

One of the individually significant results (Column 3) is a 6% reduction in temptation
goods (cigarettes, sweets, and soda); Banerjee et al (2009) attribute their similar finding
to household budget tightening required to service debt (i.e., temptation spending is
relatively elastic with respect to the shadow value of liquidity). An alternative
explanation is that female empowerment (discussed below in Table 7) leads to reduced
spending on unhealthy items.

The other individually significant result is a five percentage point (10%) reduction in
durable assets purchased in the past two years (Column 8). 26 In tandem with the
reduction in asset sales to pay off a loan (Column 1), this result could be interpreted as a
reduction in asset “churn.” If secondary markets yield relatively low prices (due, e.g., to a

26
   Our survey instrument did not ask in detail about the value of assets bought and sold unless
they were bought or sold in relation to a loan. Consequently, we report the counts of assets here
instead of their values.
                                                                                              16
lemons problem), then reduced churn could actually be welfare-improving. Note however
that we do not find a treatment effect on a broader measure of asset sales than the debt
service-motivated one in Column 1: Column 9 shows an imprecisely estimated increase
in the likelihood that the household did not sell an asset over the previous two years
(0.007, se=0.007).

A.4. Household Income and Saving
Table 6, and the top part of the “Income and Consumption” panel in Figure 2, examines
additional measures of income: total household income, labor income, participation in
any economic activity, remittance income, and positive saving in the last six months. The
motivation for examining these measures is twofold. Methodologically, as discussed
above, any individual measure of income, wealth, or economic activity is likely to be
noisy, so it is useful to examine various measures. Substantively, there is prior evidence
of microloan access increasing job retention and wage income (Karlan and Zinman
2010), and speculation that credit access might be used to finance investments in
migration or immigration (that pay off in the form of remittances, e.g.).27

We do not find significant effects on any of the five measures. Most of the estimates are
fairly precise: the only confidence interval containing effect sizes that would be large
relative to the control group mean is remittance income.

A.5. Welfare
Table 7 reports AITs on various measures of welfare. We start with perhaps the most
important, a measure of depression,28 where we estimate a 0.045 (se=0.024) standard
deviation increase in happiness (i.e., the absence of signs of depression). Job stress, locus
of control, and trust in institutions are unaffected, and the upper ends of these confidence
intervals contain effects that are only +/- 0.06 standard deviations (Columns 2-4). An
index of trust in people (family, neighbors, personal acquaintances, people just met,
business acquaintances, borrowers, and strangers) increases by an estimated 0.05
standard deviations (se=0.027). This could be a by-product of the group aspect of the
lending product. Satisfaction with one’s life and harmony with others, and with economic
situation, are unaffected on average (Columns 6 and 7). There is a small but nearly
significant positive effect on physical health status: a one percentage point increase in the
likelihood of self-reporting good or better health, on a base of 0.78, with a p-value of 0.13
(Column 8). The point estimate on the proportion of children not working is also small
and positive: 0.007, on a base of 0.915 among the sample of households with a school-
aged child, with a p-value of 0.24.
27
   The treatment effect on a more direct measure of out-migration—whether anyone left the
household for work in the last 2 years without returning —is .002, se= .003.
28
   The depression measure is an index of responses to questions about the incidence of the
following: being bothered by things that do not normally bother you, having a poor appetite, not
being able to shake off the blues even with support from friends and family, feeling just as good
as other people, having trouble focusing, feeling depressed, feeling like everything required extra
effort, being hopeful about the future, thinking your life was a failure, feeling fearful, having
restless sleep, feeling happy, talking less than usual, being lonely, thinking people were
unfriendly, having crying spells, enjoying life, feeling sad, thinking people dislike you, and
feeling like you couldn’t keep going on.
                                                                                                17
The last three columns (10-12) show effects on the respondent’s intrahousehold decision
making power, for the subsample of women who are not single and not the only adult in
their household (recall that all survey respondents are women).29 These are key outcomes
given the strong claims (by, e.g., financial institutions, donors, and policymakers) that
microcredit empowers women by giving them greater access to resources and a
supportive group environment (Hashemi et al 1996; Kabeer 1999). On the other hand,
there is evidence that large increases in the share of household resources controlled by
women threatens the identity of some men (Maldonado et al 2002), causing increases in
domestic violence (Angelucci 2008). Column 10 shows an increase on the extensive
margin of household financial decision making: treatment group women are 0.8
percentage points more likely to have any say. This is a large proportional effect on the
left tail—i.e., on extremely low-power women—since 97.5% of control group
respondents say they participate in any financial decision making; this effect represents
an improvement for almost one third of the 2.5% of respondents that otherwise had no
financial decision making. Column 11 shows a small but significant increase in the
number of issues for which the woman has any say: 0.07 (se=0.03) on a base of 2.78.
Both Column 10 and Column 11 show significant effects after adjustment for multiple
hypothesis testing. Column 12 shows no increase in the amount of intra-household
conflict. Note the expected sign of the treatment effect on this final outcome and its
interpretation is ambiguous: less conflict is more desirable all else equal, but all else may
not be equal in the sense that greater decision power could produce more conflict. In
practice we find little evidence of any treatment effects on the amount of intra-household
conflict.

In all, the results in this table paint a generally positive picture of the average impacts of
expanded credit access on well-being: depression falls, trust in others rises, and female
household decision power increases.

A.6. Big Picture
Viewing the average treatment effect results holistically, using Figure 2, we can draw four
broad conclusions. First, increasing access to microcredit increases borrowing and does
not crowd-out other loans. Second, loans seem to be used for both investment—in
particular for expanding previously existing businesses—and for risk management. Third,
there is evidence of positive average impacts on business size, avoiding fire sales, lack of
depression, trust, and female decision making. Fourth, there is little evidence of negative
average impacts: we find only three statistically significant negative treatment effects on
individual outcomes, out of 45 outcomes. Moreover, each of the three “negative” results

29
   The dependent variable in column 10, “Participates in any financial decisions,” is a binary
variable equal to one if the respondent participates in at least one of the household financial
decisions, and equal to zero if she participates in none of the decisions. The dependent variable in
column 11, “# of household decisions she has a say on,” represents the number of household
issues (of four) that the respondent either makes alone, or has some say on when a disagreement
arises if she makes the decision jointly. The dependent variable in column 12, the “# of household
issues in which a conflict arises,” represents the number of household issues (of four) in which a
disagreement sometimes arises if the respondent makes the decision jointly.
                                                                                                 18
actually has a normatively positive or neutral interpretation, as discussed above, and two
of them lose statistical significance with the family-wise correction for multiple
hypothesis testing.

B.     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
B.1. Distributions
We first test the hypothesis of common treatment effects on borrowers and non-borrowers
by comparing the standard deviations in treatment and control groups: these two standard
deviations are identical under the null of constant treatment effects. We reject this null
hypothesis for 9 of the 10 continuous outcomes for which we detect statistically
significant AITs in Tables 3-7. (Results reported in the bottom rows of Panel A for each of
Tables 3-7. We do not test binary outcomes and do not have any categorical outcomes.)
Moreover, we find that loan access significantly changes the standard deviations for 6 out
of the 19 continuous outcomes whose means do not change significantly. The prevalence
of treatment effects on standard deviations is evidence of heterogeneous effects. In these
15 outcomes where the standard deviation differs, it increases under treatment compared
to control in 8, and decreases in 7. If the treatment causes a decrease in outcome variance,
there is a negative correlation between impact size and the outcome in the absence of the
treatment (see Appendix 1). Adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing does not change
any of these results.

Next we use the panel data to test whether the variance treatment effects are driven
entirely by the characteristics we can observe, by comparing the variances of treatment
versus control residuals obtained from regressing outcomes on treatment assignment,
baseline characteristics, and interactions between these characteristics and treatment
assignment. The “apples-to-apples” comparisons here are between the “panel only” row
and the “residuals” rows. Controlling for our observables eliminates the statistically
significant treatment effect on standard deviation in only 1 of the 15 cases. In three of the
14 cases without a statistically significant effect in the panel sample controlling for
observables actually generates statistical significance (for profits and household business
income), both with and without adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing. These results
suggest that heterogeneous treatment effects are not readily explained by observables,
and implies that treatment effects likely vary even within the subgroups we examine in
Section V.B.3.

Figure 3 shows QTE estimates for number of employees, revenues, expenditures, and
profits. These are all conditional on business ownership, since Table 4 finds no treatment
effects on ownership. For businesses with any employees, treatment decreases the
likelihood of 1 employee but increases the likelihood of having 3 employees. Revenues,
expenditures, profits, and business income each appear to increase in the right tail
(Figures 3c to 3f), although the increases in expenditures are not statistically significant at
the estimated percentiles. In addition, profits also fall at low percentiles (although the left
tail effects are not statistically significant), hinting that the treatment might cause profit
losses to some. In all, the results on business outcomes indicate that expanded credit
access increases business size and profitability to the right of the median.


                                                                                            19
Figure 4 presents the QTEs we could estimate for the continuous expenditure outcomes
in Table 5. Although most individual QTEs are not statistically significant, the overall
pattern suggests right-tail increases in several spending categories. Treated households
are more likely to have bought zero new assets, and very nearly less likely to have bought
any of the non-zero asset counts. This is consistent with the previously documented
reduction in fire sales of assets.

Figure 5 shows QTE estimates for two of the three continuous measures of income used
in Table 6. Many of these QTE estimates are imprecise, and none is significantly different
from zero at the estimated percentiles. Remittances are not included in the QTE graphs
because fewer than five percent receive any remittances.

Figure 6 shows QTE estimates for eight of the nine continuous outcomes measures used
in Table 7 (the QTE estimates for children working did not converge). The depression
index improves throughout the entire distribution, with larger point estimates to the left of
the median (Figure 6a). QTEs for trust in people show a similar pattern, although only
one of the individual QTEs is statistically significant (Figure 6e). We find no strong
patterns for the stress, control, or institutional trust indices (Figures 65.b to 65.d),
although there is a negative effect on locus of control at the 5th percentile, which
confirms the possibility of some people being negatively affected by the treatment. The
point estimates for the satisfaction and harmony index are all zero (and often precisely
estimated), excepting a significant increase at the 75th percentile (Figure 6f). Likewise,
the two decision power variables show mostly precise zeros at each number of issues,
with the exception of statistically significant increase for the likelihood of having say on
all four household issues asked about (Figure 6g).

Overall, we glean three key patterns from the QTE estimates. First, there are several
variables with positive treatment effects in the right tail: revenues, expenses, profits, and
school/medical expenses (and several of the other expenditure categories have nearly
significant positive QTEs at the 90th percentile or above). Second, we see positive effects
on depression and trust throughout their distributions. Third, there are few hints of
negative impacts in the left tail of distributions—with the exception of profits and locus
of control—alleviating concerns that expanded credit access might adversely impact
people with the worst baseline outcomes. However, as we discussed above, the results
thus far tell us relatively little about whether and to what extent distributional changes
produced winners and losers. We now turn to two additional sets of analyses that help us
understand if the treatment creates winners and losers.

B.2. Winners and Losers? Average Intent to Treat Effects on Changes (Panel Only)
We start by estimating treatment effects on likelihoods of outcomes increasing, and of
outcomes declining, from baseline to follow-up. These results are presented in Panels B
and C of Tables 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7, corresponding to the AIT endline estimates in the Panel
A’s of those same tables. We estimate these effects using logits, for the subset of
outcomes and respondents with panel data. Given the typically positive average treatment
effects, we are particularly interested in treatment effects on the likelihood that an
outcome worsens over time, in order to examine whether the AIT is masking important
dispersion.
                                                                                          20
Before discussing the results on increases and decreases in detail, we pause to examine
the internal and external validity of the panel sample. As discussed earlier, presence in the
panel is uncorrelated with treatment status, supporting internal validity. The external
validity of the panel is more subjective. We have panel data on only about 11% of our full
sample, and the panel sample represents 33 of 238 clusters in our full sample. The smaller
sample and cluster count also reduce our power. Appendix Figure 1 summarizes AITs for
the panel sample, in order to compare the AIT’s on just the panel to the AITs for the full
endline. Two key patterns emerge. First, we find only three significantly different
treatment effects from the full sample, although this lack of significant differences is due
in large part to large confidence intervals (for the panel sample treatment effects in
particular). Second, although the remaining differences are not statistically significant,
the overall pattern of results for the panel is less positive than for the full sample.

With the above caveats in mind, we now return to Tables 3-7. We have a limited set of
variables collected both at baseline and endline. For credit activity (Table 3), there is no
statistical evidence that access to Credito Mujer crowds out loans from money lenders
and pawnshops (Panel C), or changes the likelihood of membership in informal savings
groups.

For the more ultimate outcomes, the general picture is weakly positive, and hence
consistent with the AITs in the Panel A’s. Table 4 shows no significant effects on
likelihoods of business ownership increasing or decreasing (Columns 1 and 2). The
likelihood of using a loan to grow a business is more likely to increase in the treatment
group (0.016 on a base of 0.040, se=0.009), and no more likely to decrease (0.001,
se=0.006). There is no evidence that businesses shrink or get less profitable (Columns 4-
8, Panel C). Indeed, the likelihoods of having a larger number of employees (Column 4)
and a higher business income (Column 8) go up by 7 and 6 percent compared to the
changes in the control group, although only the former is significant at conventional
levels (and not significant after adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing). Besides
business income, we have panel data for two other income sources: total household
income and remittances (Table 6). Neither of these sources is more likely to decline in
treatment areas (Panel C), and the treatment effect on the likelihood of remittance income
increasing is positive (0.017 on a base of 0.027, se=0.010), but not significant after
adjustment. Table 7 Panel C shows no ill-effects on any of available welfare measures
(depression index, health status, child labor). Panel B shows a 2.6 percentage point (se =
1.5) increase in the likelihood of better health, on a base of 0.11.

In sum, this analysis from the panel data shows some evidence that expanded credit
access increases the likelihood of outcomes improving over the treatment horizon, and no
evidence of treatment effects on the likelihood of outcomes declining. I.e., we do not find
any evidence here that Credito Mujer makes outcomes worse over time.

B.3. Who Wins and Who Loses? Heterogeneous AITs
Next we examine whether any of 20 sub-groups experience negative treatment effects.
We organize the analyses by heterogeneity in socioeconomic characteristics and in
                                                                                          21
preferences. Socioeconomic status is readily observed by lenders, other service providers,
regulators, etc., so documenting any systematically negative or positive treatment effects
for specific sub-groups provides guidance for screening and targeting microcredit.
Preferences are more difficult to observe and measure accurately, but understanding
whether and how the effects of access to credit vary with proxies for risk and time
preferences can shed light on how prospective borrowers are deciding whether and how
much to borrow.

The sub-group analyses are summarized in Table 8, with more detail provided in Figures
7-13 for the socioeconomic variables, and Figures 14-16 for the preference variables. The
Figures show effect sizes in standard deviation units for all outcomes except for the
borrowing outcomes on number of loans. The effect sizes on these three variables are not
scaled (i.e., the units are number of loans), because for these we are primarily interested
in the magnitude of the “first-stage”, including the extent of any crowd-out of other loan
sources by Compartamos borrowing.

We focus our discussion, as before, on whether there are statistically significant positive
and/or negative impacts on our various outcomes. In addition, we check whether there are
differential impacts for mutually exclusive subgroups. When considering these
differential impacts, one should keep in mind that if there are differential take-up rates by
subgroup the estimated AITs may be statistically different for a pair of subgroups even if
the actual average treatment effects are the same for borrowers and non-borrowers in
those groups. The take-up rates are statistically different for women without and with
prior business ownership (16.3% and 25.4%) and formal credit experience (10.5% and
15.4%). This is not an issue, however, when the signs of the two AITs differ.

Table 8 provides counts of positive and negative significant treatment effects for each of
the 20 sub-groups, and of significant differences in treatment effects and their direction
within the 10 groups. We use adjusted critical levels for these counts; Figures 7-16 also
show when the adjustment causes a treatment effect that is significant without adjustment
to become not significant. We focus often on the “Totals” (Columns 9 and 10), which
sum across categories of the 34 ultimate outcomes of interest: business (9 outcomes),
income and consumption (14 outcomes), and other welfare (11 outcomes). We count each
of these outcomes individually, with two exceptions. First, we exclude spending on
temptation goods and the number of issues with conflict, because the normative
interpretation of any treatment effects on these outcomes is especially difficult (see
discussion in Section V.A). Second, we combine information on overall asset sales and
purchases, since sales may somewhat mechanically induce subsequent
purchases. Specifically, if asset sales and purchases each fall for a given sub-group, we
count this as a single, positive treatment effect in the Total. In all, this means that our
summary counts allow for a maximum of 34 significant treatment effects for each sub-
group, and a minimum of zero.




                                                                                          22
Socio-economic variables using the full sample

Prior business ownership
First, we examine treatment effects for prior business owners versus non-prior business
owners, using two retrospective questions from the endline data on business ownership
prior to treatment. 24% of the sample owned a business prior to treatment. We find a
strong first stage for this sub-group (Figure 7.a), and positive effects on several business
outcomes and on total household income, and positive effects on trust in people and the
extensive margin of household decision making. All told there are 8 or 9 positive
treatment effects, depending on whether we use adjusted critical levels. (Below and Table
8 focuses on adjusted critical values, but Figures 7-16 show both). The two (nearly)
significant negative effects (on informal savings and asset purchases) are actually
consistent with improvement in financial resiliency and risk management; as discussed
above, we consider these potentially “good” outcomes from a policy perspective.

The picture is less uniformly sanguine for the non-business owner sub-group (Figure 7.b),
but still positive. This group also has a strong first stage. Effects on business outcomes
are not significant, and several are statistically significantly lower than for business
owners (Figure 7.c). However, this may simply be caused by the lower take-up rate for
this subgroup. There is a nearly significant reduction in the likelihood of working in the
last 30 days, and this treatment effect is significantly lower for non-business owners than
business owners. On the other hand, non-business owners in treatment areas have fewer
asset sales for debt service, less depression, and more decision power. On balance, the
results suggest that non-business owners use the loans to pay off more expensive debt,
work less, and are happier for it. We cannot rule out some negative effects on this sub-
group, but the pattern does not suggest clear welfare reductions.

Education
We measure education using endline data, despite the fact that it could in principle be
affected by credit access (in practice, adults returning to school in Mexico is rare),
because we find no effects of treatment assignment on educational attainment. The sub-
group with relatively high-education (the 71% of the sample > primary school) fares
pretty well (Figure 8.a). We see increases in business revenues and expenditures, a
reduction in asset sales to pay loans, and a nearly significant reduction in financial
problems with the business (p-value = 0.11). Depression falls and decision power rises.
The one somewhat worrisome treatment effect is that home improvements fall (and are
significantly below the low-education sub-group). But overall we can rule out
systematically negative effects on the relatively high-education sub-group, and
furthermore the treatment effects mirror those of the average treatment effects for the full
sample.

The low-education sub-group (the 29% of the sample with primary school or less) does
not have any significant treatment effects among the 34 outcomes we count as
normatively interesting. The first stage is strong (Figure 8.b), but all of the point
estimates on business outcomes are clustered around zero. There is a bit of evidence that
household income (in particular from wage labor) falls, as does temptation spending.
There are no significant effects on well-being measures, although several of the point

                                                                                         23
estimates are positive and close-to-significant. In all, we do not find robust evidence that
low-education individuals are systematically harmed by expanded access to credit;
although the hints that income falls is worrisome, there are no corroborating mechanisms
to generate that effect and thus it seems just as likely to be a consequence of multiple
outcome testing as a true negative result. Only 2 of the 34 treatment effects are
significantly different for the two education sub-groups using the adjusted critical levels.

Urban/rural
We next examine impacts in rural and then urban areas (27 and 73% of the sample).30 We
find a strong first stage of similar magnitudes (Figure 9.c) for both sub-groups (Figures
9.a and 9.b).

However, the loans are used differently. In rural areas (Figure 9.a), loan access increases
investment: business ownership, expenditures, revenues, and business income show
statistical and economically significant increases, and higher increases than in urban
areas. The effect on participation in an economic activity is also significantly higher in
rural areas. There is some evidence of improvements in decision power, but no other
statistically significant treatment effects on the welfare measures.

In urban areas (Figure 9.b), on the other hand, loans seem to be primarily used for risk
and debt management. Access to loans causes a reduction in fire sales for loan repayment,
and membership in informal savings groups declines (although not by significantly more
than for rural individuals). Labor supply and business ownership decrease. Happiness,
trust in people, and decision power all improve (though not significantly more than in
rural areas). One interpretation of these results is that urban-area women can smooth
consumption using credit instead of low-return, unpleasant “survival” activities (e.g.
being a street vendor).

Socio-economic variables using the panel sub-sample
From here forward we use baseline data to measure sub-group characteristics and hence
are limited to the panel sub-sample. This explains why the confidence intervals are wider
in Figures 10-16 than in Figures 7-9. One should also keep in mind the caveats re: the
external validity of the panel-sub sample; on balance, we find some evidence that AIT
effects are less favorable here than in the full sample (Appendix Figure 1; compare to
Figure 2).

Income
Figures 10.a and 10.b summarize results by baseline income per adult in the household.
We do not find differences in the first stage, although the effects for the high-income
group are weaker than for most other groups. Overall there are few significantly different
treatment effects across the two sub-groups (Figure 10.c). Nevertheless, the pattern of
results is weakly suggestive of some important heterogeneity in treatment effects. Those
with above-median income (Figure 10.a) have few significant treatment effects: one

30
   In unreported results, we find no impact on "anyone has left" the household in the last 2 years
or "number of people who have left" in the last 2 years. Here an urban area is defined as having a
population above 16,000 people.
                                                                                               24
positive (on children not working) and two negative (on business ownership and locus of
control). Those with below-median income (Figure 10.b) have one positive treatment
effect (on the intensive margin of decision power), and five negative ones (on profits,
business problems, locus of control, trust in institutions, and life satisfaction).

Formal credit experience
Figures 11.a and 11.b show results for those with and without formal credit experience at
baseline.31 This could be a particularly important categorization, with theories in both
directions. One could argue that experience gives people better financial management
skills (including the decision to borrow in the first place), and hence the more-
experienced would fare better from expanded credit access. Formal credit experience
might also be correlated with other inputs that increase returns to borrowing. On the other
hand, if learning is incomplete then formal credit experience might actually proxy for
proclivity to overborrow.

We find similar first stages for the two groups (Figure 11.c). There are six significantly
different treatment effects on more ultimate outcomes, with five of them (all measures of
“Other Welfare”) favoring the formal credit experience group. The point estimates also
suggest that the formal group has higher profits (p-value 0.2). These differences are likely
even larger than they appear at first sight, considering that the take-up rate is significantly
higher in the formal group (15.4%, vs. 10.5% in the group without formal credit
experience).

Looking at the groups individually, those with formal credit experience have four
significant treatment effects using adjusted critical values. Three are positive (on
growing a business, health, and decision power), and one is negative (fire sales increase).
Those without formal credit experience have five significant treatment effects. One is
positive (on the extensive margin of decision power), and four are negative (on job stress,
locus of control, life satisfaction, and economic satisfaction).

In all, the results here provide some evidence that those with no formal credit experience
fare worse when credit access expands, mostly with respect to subjective well-being
outcomes. We discuss this more in the conclusion.

Formal Account Experience
Figures 12.a and 12.b show results for those with and without prior experience with an
account with a bank or cooperative (20% and 80% of the panel). Part of the motivation
here is unpacking the results on formal credit experience: if those lacking experience fare
worse because they lack skills and knowledge obtained from participating in the formal
sector per se (not just managing loans), then we would expect to see a similar pattern of
results for those lacking formal account experience. While the two variables are
positively correlated, we do not find a similar pattern: those lacking experience have two
significant treatment effects out of 34. Moreover, of the four significant differences in
treatment effects between the groups (Figure 12.c), three favor the inexperienced.

31
   We define formal credit experience as having ever taken out a loan from a bank or financial
institution.
                                                                                            25
Informal Savings Group Experience
Figures 13.a and 13.b show results for those with and without prior informal savings
group participation. Again, part of the motivation is unpacking the results on formal
credit experience. The idea here is that those with informal savings group experience
have already learned how to manage their finances in a group context, and one that
encourages weekly payments (Gugerty 2006; Basu 2011). Those lacking experience may
lack the requisite financial knowledge and skills to succeed in a group lending setting, in
which case we might expect to see a pattern of results that parallels those for the no
formal credit experience sub-group. These two variables are positively correlated, but we
again do not see a similar pattern: those without experience have 4 positive and 3
negative treatment effects, while those with experience have 2 and 4. Of the 7 significant
differences, four favor the inexperienced (all business outcomes) and three favor the
experienced (all “other welfare” outcomes).

Preferences
We next group people by their risk and time preferences, as elicited at baseline. Although
these preference measures would be difficult for lenders to use in targeting or screening,
this exercise helps explore mechanisms underlying the somewhat negative effects we find
above for those with lower income and less experience with formal credit. E.g., are the
negative effects due to resource constraints (which might leave resource-constrained,
non-borrowing households vulnerable to negative spillovers from borrowing households),
and/or to differences in decision making that lead to “overborrowing”?

Risk preferences
We form two sub-groups based on elicited risk preferences: risk tolerant, or not. Our
elicitation method is to give the respondent an opportunity to choose which one of four
heads-or-tails lotteries they would like to play, hypothetically: {150, 5}, {100, 10}, {80,
25}, or {50, 50}. From left to right the choices decrease in expected value, but increase in
the minimum possible payoff. All payoffs are denominated in pesos, so there is no payoff
larger than $12USD. Given the sharp decline in expected value from the first choice to
the others, we label the 28% of respondents who choose {150, 5} “risk tolerant”, and
everyone else “risk intolerant”.

Risk tolerance is an interesting margin for exploring heterogeneous treatment effects for
at least two reasons. First, risk tolerance may be a necessary condition for pursuing risky
but profitable-in-expectation opportunities that open up with the expansion of credit
access. Hence we would expect risk tolerant respondents to have higher mean treatment
effects. Second, small-stakes risk aversion is incompatible with standard preferences, and
hence may be indicative of behavioral biases (e.g., loss aversion) or cognitive limitations
that could produce overborrowing.

At baseline, risk tolerant individuals are more likely to have a business and a larger
business (as measured by expenses; the point estimates on revenues, profits, and business
income are also positive and marginally significant or nearly so). These correlations




                                                                                         26
suggest that our proxies for risk preferences do have some validity, despite being elicited
using a single, hypothetical survey question.32

Turning to treatment effects for the risk tolerant or intolerant (Figure 14), the results are
surprising: treatment effects are not clearly positive, or more positive, for the risk tolerant
(despite the fact that the first stage seems weakly stronger for the risk tolerant). Rather,
both groups have few significant treatment effects, and there are only three significant
differences between the risk tolerant and intolerant (Figure 14.c).

Next we categorize respondents as “patient” (56% of the panel) or “impatient” (44%),
based on responses to two standard, hypothetical, smaller-sooner vs. larger-later
questions.33 Figure 15 shows that we again find few significant treatment effects for each
group. There are three significantly different treatment effects, with two favoring the
patient and one favoring the impatient.

Finally, we categorize respondents as “present-biased” (30% of the panel) or not (70%),
based on responses to four standard, hypothetical, smaller-sooner vs. larger-later
questions.34 Bauer et al (2012) find that present-biased Indian villagers are more likely to
use microcredit, and speculate that installment debt and/or joint liability serve as
commitment devices that improve financial discipline35. We do not find that present-
biased individuals are more likely to borrow, however (Table 2). And we do not find
evidence that the present-biased clearly benefit much from microcredit: Figure 16.a
shows zero significant treatment effects beyond the first-stage.36 The non-present-biased
have only one significant treatment effect (Figure 16.b), and we do not find any
significant differences between the two groups (Figure 16c).

Summary of Treatment Effects by Subgroup
The main takeaway is some, albeit far from overwhelming, evidence that some people
fare worse when faced with expanded access to credit. Several of the sub-groups have
more negative treatment effects than positive ones, with the patterns of results for those
who are poorer or without prior use of formal credit access perhaps the most eye-
opening.


32
   Risk preferences are typically elicited using more elaborate methods, although some simpler
methods for measuring risk attitudes have produced measures that are conditionally correlated
with behavior (Dohmen et al. 2011; Kimball, Sahm, and Shapiro 2008).
33
   The first is: “If you could choose between 200 pesos tomorrow and 300 pesos in one month,
which would you prefer?” If the respondent chooses 200, a follow-up question ups the one-month
payoff to 400. We label the respondent “patient” if she chooses either larger-later reward.
34
   The first two questions are detailed in the above footnote. The second two questions offer the
same payoffs at 6 months from today vs. 7 months from today. We label someone present-biased
if they choose the smaller-sooner amount in the tomorrow vs. 1-month frame, but at least
sometime choose the larger-later amount in the 6-month vs. 7-month frame.
35
     Bauer et al (2012) measure present bias using ten smaller-sooner vs. larger-later questions and gave the
     payoff from a randomly-selected choice to a random selection of respondents.
36
   When estimating treatment effects for the present-biased or not-biased, we do not control for
patience.
                                                                                                           27
However, we emphasize the lack of a preponderance of evidence that expanded credit
access is welfare-reducing for any of the 20 sub-groups examined. First, even within the
sub-groups that seem to fare worst here – people with below-median income and no prior
formal credit—there are only 5 and 4 negative treatment effects out of 34 (Table 8
Column 10). The likelihood that we would find two or three sub-groups out of twenty
with at least four negative treatment effects out 34, purely by chance (i.e., due to false
negatives), is high. Second, there is little evidence that those with lower income fare
worse than their higher income counterparts, statistically speaking (Table 8 Column 11).

As such, and consistent with the findings from the test of equality of outcome variances,
we view the results here as motivating further exploration of heterogeneity in treatment
effects of expanded access to financial services. They are far from definitive statements
about who wins and loses, or about how many lose. In fact, the full picture of results in
this paper points more strongly to impacts that are positive on balance, for most
borrowers and potential borrowers.

B.4. Differential Treatment Effects by Subgroup: all Sub-Group Tests in Same Model
Our analysis so far has focused on differences by one type of heterogeneity at a time.
This approach yields policy-relevant results, especially if lenders can readily target
potential clients by sub-group. But this approach does not reveal what causes any
heterogeneity in treatment effects; e.g., are differences between risk tolerant and risk
intolerant driven by risk preferences per se, or by a correlation between risk preference
on some third variable like prior business ownership?

We explore the drivers of heterogeneous treatment effects by including all of the
heterogeneity tests in the same model; i.e., instead of the two interaction terms in
equation (2), we include three interactions in models estimated on the endline sample:
treatment assignment interacted with each of prior business ownership,
education>primary, and rural. We also include main effects for each of the three variables
interacted with treatment assignment. Models estimated on the panel sample take the
same form, but with nine interactions and main effects instead of three (see Table 9 Panel
B for the complete list, and note that we cannot include the tenth characteristic, rural vs.
urban, in the panel sample model because that entire sample is rural).

Table 9 reports counts of the number of times each interaction term is significant and
significantly positive across outcomes (outcome categories in Columns 1-8, and all 34
outcomes of ultimate interest in Columns 9-10). Column 9 here is comparable to the
count across the univariate tests in Table 8 Column 11.

For the most part, the number of significant differences for the majority of characteristics
decreases or remains the same (e.g. the number of significant differences by formal
account experience decreases from 4 to 3). The only exceptions are business ownership in
the full sample, and income and risk tolerance in the panel sample, all of which show just
one more significant difference when the other covariates are included in the regression.
Most other subgroups show the same number of differences or one fewer difference.
Only those subgroups showing more than four differences in Table 8 show a decrease of


                                                                                         28
more than 1 significant difference: location (rural vs. urban), formal credit experience,
and informal savings experience each show two or more fewer differences.

Overall, Table 9 indicates that few significant differences exist between members of
subgroups we examine. Relative to other characteristics, prior business ownership,
location, and informal savings experience appear to differentiate impacts the most. Still,
the highest number of significant differences for one characteristic (prior business
ownership) only represents about one fifth of the possible number of differences (7/34).

VI.    Conclusion
We use randomized program placement and household surveys to measure various
impacts of Compartamos Banco’s entry into north-central Sonora, Mexico.

Over our three-year evaluation horizon, we find generally positive average effects on our
sample of borrowers and prospective borrowers: there is evidence that businesses grow,
that households are better able to manage liquidity and risk, and that (prospective)
borrowers are happier, more trusting, and have greater intra-household decision power.
But there is little evidence of wealth-building: we do not find evidence that profits,
household income, or consumption increase on average. It may be that wealth-building
impacts take years to germinate: future research would do well to evaluate impacts over
longer horizons than 2-3 years.

Compartamos Banco’s expansion also causes heterogeneous treatment effects: we find
significant differences between treatment and control groups in the standard deviations
for half of the outcomes tested. Moreover, we also find some evidence of local effects on
the shapes of outcome distributions; in particular, quantile treatment effects show right-
tail increases in several outcomes, including business profits. Treatment effects on
happiness and on trust in people increase throughout their distributions. One way future
work might better discern the welfare implications of credit expansions (and other
interventions) is to use theories to generate distinct testable predictions about impacts on
higher moments and distributions.

Perhaps most importantly, we do not find strong evidence that the credit expansion
creates large numbers of “losers” as well as winners. First, there are few significant and
negative quantile treatment effects in the left tails, i.e. people in the left tail of the
distribution of outcomes are not hurt by the program. Second, none of the 17 outcomes
for which we have panel data show significant increases in the likelihood of worsening
over time in treatment relative to control areas. Third, in the sub-group analysis, there is
no clear pattern of strongly negative impacts on any of the 20 sub-groups we examine.
But there are hints that some sub-groups—in particular, those with lower incomes, and
those without prior formal credit experience—experience negative treatment effects on
balance.

Concerns about the possibility that expanded access to (expensive) credit does more harm
than good motivate several lines of inquiry going forward. Understanding what drives
any “overborrowing” is critical, and much remains to be done to unpack empirical
                                                                                         29
relationships underpinning the many behavioral biases and heuristics hypothesized to
affect financial decisions.

There is also more work to be done on mechanism design; e.g., on how different
screening, targeting, and liability rules affect both average impact and heterogeneous
treatment effects. The issue of organizational form looms large in microfinance policy
debates: our study concerns a lender that has been both widely praised (for expanding
access to group credit for millions of people) and widely criticized (for being for-profit
and publicly traded, and for charging higher interest rates than similar lenders do in other
countries).37 Would a non-profit lender generate different impacts? More uniform ones?
Better ones?

Closely related questions concern how product presentation (e.g., marketing, disclosures)
and pricing mediate impacts. New evidence from a nationwide, non-overlapping study
with Compartamos on interest rates shows that demand is quite elastic: cutting APRs by
roughly 10 percentage points (also a 10% decrease) substantially increased lending on
both the extensive and intensive margins, while proving sustainable (i.e., profit-neutral)
for Compartamos (Karlan and Zinman 2013). Much work remains to be done to ascertain
the impacts of price changes on borrowers: how do they change the marginal borrower
(relative to branch expansion)? Are lower prices unambiguously better for consumer
welfare, or do some higher prices provide a form of behavioral discipline against
overborrowing?

The impacts study here, combined with the interest rates study discussed directly above,
provide some unusual evidence on the mechanics of “double bottom lines.”
Compartamos, like many other for-profits (especially in microfinance), has labeled itself
a “social enterprise” that maximizes social welfare subject to a profit maximization
constraint. The interest rate study suggests that Compartamos can move along the profit-
maximizing frontier by cutting prices in the face of very elastic demand, thereby
substantially expanding access to credit without making major changes to its operations.
I.e., there is a range of prices in which Compartamos has satisfied the profit
maximization constraint, and therefore the bank has a degree of freedom to choose a
price that maximizes social welfare. The results from the two papers suggest that
maximizing access, via lower prices, is a simple solution to the social enterprise’s
maximization problem.

A key question remains of course, particularly with respect to those without prior formal
credit: is this about the type of person, or this is about their lack of experience using
credit. The first implies improved screening tools in order to help individuals self-select
into financial transactions that will help them further their own stated goals. In other
words, how does Compartamos nudge individuals to borrow, or not, to maximize their
wellbeing as they would self-report in a moment of reflection (Thaler and Sunstein 2009).
Or, alternatively, how does Compartamos provide additional training to individuals

37
  The rates, to be clear, are actually below average compared to both for-profit and non-profit
microcredit market in Mexico; they are only high when compared to other countries and
continents.
                                                                                            30
without prior formal credit experience so that they manage their loan more optimally?
Importantly, can such training be provided in a profit-neutral way? Evidence from one
randomized trial on business education found that the increased profits roughly equaled
the costs from adding in entrepreneurship training to a group-based microcredit program
(Karlan and Valdivia 2011).

In all, our study adds to the mounting evidence that microcredit is generally beneficial on
average, but not necessarily transformative in the ways often advertised by practitioners,
policymakers, and donors. The most consistent impacts come out in the more subjective,
qualitative wellbeing outcomes, rather than the more traditional economic outcomes such
as income and consumption. We also provide new evidence on various distributional
impacts suggesting that expanded credit access has multifaceted, complex, and
heterogeneous effects on businesses and households. Better understanding of these
distributional impacts may hold a key for making progress on the modeling, application,
and evaluation of credit market innovations and interventions.




                                                                                        31
                                      Appendix 1
This Appendix explains (1) why Levene’s test of equality of variances is a test of
homogeneous effects and (2) when we can conclude that subjects with the lowest
counterfactual outcome are the ones who benefit the most from the treatment.

Define Y0 and Y1 as the potential outcomes in the absence and presence of the treatment.
The treatment is living in a cluster where Compartamos Banco actively advertises
Credito Mujer and which has access to this product. If the treatment effects are constant
within compliers (c=1) and within non-compliers (c=0) and amount to Tc and T(1-c), then
Y0=Y0cc+Y0(1-c)(1-c) and Y1=c(Y0cc + Tc)+(1-c)(Y0(1-c)+ T(1-c)). In this case the variances
of Y0 and Y1 are identical, i.e. Var(Y0)=Var(Y1). Note, however, that one could have
heterogeneous effects even if Var(Y0)=Var(Y1), if the covariance of the treatment effects,
T, with Y0 is negative and such that Cov(Y0,T)=1/2[Var(Y0)+Var(T)]. Therefore, this test
is informative only if we reject the null.

To simplify the notation, write down the individual-specific potential outcomes as Y1
=Y0+T.      In     this     case,    Var(Y1)=Var(Y0+T)=Var(Y0)+Var(T)+2Cov(Y0,T).If
Var(Y1)<Var(Y0), the covariance Cov(Y0,T) is negative. This finding suggests that the
benefits of the availability of Credito Mujer may be larger for people with lower
outcomes in the absence of the treatment.




                                                                                        32
                                      References

Angelucci, Manuela. 2008. “Love on the Rocks: Domestic Violence and Alcohol Abuse
       in Rural Mexico.” B.E Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 8 (1).
Attanasio, Augsburg, Britta Augsburg, Ralph de Haas, Fitz Fitzsimons, and Heike
       Harmgart. 2011. “Group Lending or Individual Lending? Evidence from a
       Randomised Field Experiment in Mongolia.” EBRD Working Paper 136
       (December).
Augsburg, Britta, Ralph de Haas, Heike Harmgart, and Costas Meghir. 2012.
       “Microfinance at the Margin: Experimental Evidence from Bosnia and
       Herzegovina.” Working Paper (September).
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Rachel Glennerster, and Cynthia Kinnan. 2009. “The
       Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation”. Working
       paper.
Basu, Karna. 2011. “Hyperbolic Discounting and the Sustainability of Rotational Savings
       Arrangements.” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 3 (4) (November):
       143–171. doi:10.1257/mic.3.4.143.
Bauer, Michal, Julie Chytilová, and Jonathan Morduch. 2012. “Behavioral Foundations
       of Microcredit: Experimental and Survey Evidence from Rural India.” American
       Economic Review 102 (2) (April): 1118–1139. doi:10.1257/aer.102.2.1118.
Berge, Lars, Kjetil Bjorvatn, and Bertil Tungooden. 2011. “Human and Financial Capital
       for Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field and Lab Experiment.”
Crepon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Pariente. 2011. “Impact of
       Microcredit in Rural Areas of Morocco: Evidence from a Randomized
       Evaluation.” M.I.T. Working Paper (March).
De Mel, Suresh, David J. McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2009. “Measuring
       Microenterprise Profits: Must We Ask How the Sausage Is Made?” Journal of
       Development Economics 88 (1) (January): 19–31.
       doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2008.01.007.
De Mel, Suresh, David McKenzie, and Christopher Woodruff. 2008. “Returns to Capital
       in Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 123 (4): 1329–1372.
DellaVigna, Stefano. 2009. “Psychology and Economics: Evidence from the Field.”
       Journal of Economic Literature 47 (2) (June): 315–372.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Jürgen Schupp, and Gert G.
       Wagner. 2011. “Individual Risk Attitudes: Measurement, Determinants, and
       Behavioral Consequences.” Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (3)
       (June 1): 522–550. doi:10.1111/j.1542-4774.2011.01015.x.
Fafchamps, Marcel, David McKenzie, Simon Quinn, and Christopher Woodruff. 2011.
       “When Is Capital Enough to Get Female Microenterprises Growing? Evidence
       from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana.” Working Paper.
Giné, Xavier, and Ghazala Mansuri. 2011. “Money or Ideas? A Field Experiment on
       Constraints to Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan.”
Gugerty, Mary Kay. 2006. “You Can’t Save Alone: Testing Theories of Rotating Savings
       and Credit Organizations.” Economic Development and Cultural Change
       forthcoming.

                                                                                    33
Hashemi, Syed, Sidney Schuler, and Ann Riley. 1996. “Rural Credit Programs and
        Women’s Empowerment in Bangladesh.” World Development 24 (4): 635–53.
Iachine, Ivan, Hans Chr. Petersen, and Kirsten O. Kyvik. 2010. “Robust Tests for the
        Equality of Variances for Clustered Data.” Journal of Statistical Computation and
        Simulation 80, no. 4: 365–377. doi:10.1080/00949650802641841.
Kabeer, Naila. 1999. “Conflicts Over Credit: Re-Evaluating the Empowerment Potential
        of Loans to Women in Rural Bangladesh.” World Development 29.
Karlan, Dean, Ryan Knight, and Christopher Udry. 2012. “Hoping to Win, Expected to
        Lose: Theory and Lessons on Micro Enterprise Development.” National Bureau
        of Economic Research Working Paper w18325.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Morduch. 2009. “Access to Finance.” In Handbook of
        Development Economics. Vol. 5. Edited by Dani Rodrik Mark Rosenzweig.
        Elsevier.
Karlan, Dean, and Martin Valdivia. 2011. “Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact of
        Business Training on Microfinance Clients and Institutions.” Review of
        Economics and Statistics 93 (2): 510–527.
Karlan, Dean, and Jonathan Zinman. 2008. “Lying About Borrowing.” Journal of the
        European Economic Association 6 (2-3). Journal of the European Economic
        Association: 510–521.
———. 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply Decisions to
        Estimate the Impacts.” Review of Financial Studies 23 (1): 433–464.
———. 2011. “Microcredit in Theory and Practice: Using Randomized Credit Scoring
        for Impact Evaluation.” Science 332 (6035) (June 10): 1278–1284.
———. 2013. “Long-Run Price Elasticities of Demand for Microcredit: Evidence from a
        Countrywide Field Experiment in Mexico.”
Kimball, Miles, Claudia Sahm, and Matthew Shapiro. 2008. “Imputing Risk Tolerance
        From Survey Responses.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 103
        (483): 1028–1038.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. “Experimental Analysis of
        Neighborhood Effects.” Econometrica 75 (1) (January): 83–120.
Maldonado, Jorge, Claudio Gonzales-Vega, and Vivanne Romero. 2002. “The Influence
        of Microfinance on Human Capital Formation: Evidence from Bolivia.”
        Contributed Paper at 2002 LACEA Conference.
McKenzie, D., and C. Woodruff. 2008. “Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital
        and Access to Finance in Mexico.” The World Bank Economic Review 22 (3)
        (October 22): 457–482. doi:10.1093/wber/lhn017.
McKenzie, David J., and Christopher Woodruff. 2006. “Do Entry Costs Provide an
        Empirical Basis for Poverty Traps? Evidence from Mexican Microenterprises.”
        Economic Development and Cultural Change 55 (1) (October): 3–42.
        doi:10.1086/505725.
Thaler, Richard H, and Cass R Sunstein. 2009. Nudge : Improving Decisions About
        Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New York: Penguin Books.




                                                                                       34
Table 1: Summary statistics and balance tests

                                             A. Full Endline Sample Frame                        B. Baseline for Panel Sample Frame
                                                       Difference:                                            Difference:
                                                      Treatment -                                             Treatment -
                                        Mean            Control       Balance Test             Mean             Control      Balance Test
                                         (1)                (2)            (3)                  (4)                (5)             (6)
Female                                    1                  0                                   1                  0
Age                                    37.664            0.504*         0.001**               39.345              0.711           0.001
                                       (0.086)           (0.286)        (0.000)               (0.254)           (0.805)         (0.002)
Primary school or none                  0.289             -0.011         -0.022                0.324              0.015          -0.039
(omitted: above high school)           (0.004)           (0.012)        (0.023)               (0.011)           (0.033)         (0.093)
Middle school                           0.399              0.009         -0.004                0.378              0.012          -0.026
                                       (0.004)           (0.010)        (0.019)               (0.011)           (0.026)         (0.069)
High school                             0.235             -0.000         -0.006                0.210             -0.033          -0.057
                                       (0.003)           (0.012)        (0.016)               (0.010)           (0.027)         (0.080)
Prior business owner                    0.244              0.005          0.000                0.488             -0.015          -0.006
                                       (0.003)           (0.009)        (0.008)               (0.012)           (0.029)         (0.027)
In urban area                           0.726              0.000          0.298
                                       (0.003)           (0.000)        (0.284)
Married                                                                                        0.766             -0.023           -0.030
(omitted: single)                                                                             (0.010)           (0.027)          (0.034)
Separated                                                                                      0.082              0.005           -0.019
                                                                                              (0.006)           (0.017)          (0.052)
Household income per adult in
the last 30 days (000s)                                                                        1.571             -0.063            -0.002
                                                                                              (0.043)           (0.103)           (0.007)
High risk aversion                                                                             0.716             -0.042           -0.053*
                                                                                              (0.011)           (0.026)           (0.030)
High formal credit experience                                                                  0.315            -0.044*            -0.046
                                                                                              (0.011)           (0.025)           (0.028)
Impatient now                                                                                  0.445              0.018             0.031
                                                                                              (0.012)           (0.026)           (0.025)
Present bias                                                                                   0.300           -0.057**          -0.067**
                                                                                              (0.011)           (0.022)           (0.027)
Has had a formal account                                                                       0.198             -0.012            -0.006
                                                                                              (0.009)           (0.026)           (0.031)
Has been a member of an
informal savings group                                                                         0.238             -0.034           -0.030
                                                                                              (0.010)           (0.022)          (0.028)



Share of sample in treatment
group                                                                       0.499                                                 0.374
pvalue of F test of joint
significance of explanatory
variables                                                                       0.337                                                   0.222
N                                          16560              16560             16489               1823              1823              1790
Number of clusters                          238                238               238                  33                33                33
Respondents are Mexican women aged 18-60. Respondents in the panel sample all reside in rural areas. Columns 2 and 5 report the coefficient
on treatment assignment (1=Treatment, 0=Control) when the variable in the row is regressed on treatment assignment. Columns 3 and 6 report
the results of balance tests. The cells show the coefficient for each variable when they are all included in one regression with treatment
assignment as the dependent variable. Standard errors are in parentheses below the coefficients. All regressions include supercluster fixed
effects and standard errors clustered by the unit of randomization. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.
Table 2: Takeup analysis

                                     A. Treatment Group in Endline Sample             B. Treatment Group in Panel Sample

                                                                                                             Partial Adjusted R-
                                                      Takeup                               Takeup                  Squared
                                                        (1)                                  (2a)                   (2b)
Female                                                   0                                     0
Age 31 - 40                                          0.030**                                -0.007
(omitted: 18-30)                                      (0.012)                              (0.050)
Age 41 - 50                                          0.030**                                -0.044
                                                      (0.014)                              (0.048)
Age 51 - 60                                            0.025                                0.033
                                                      (0.016)                              (0.063)
Primary school or none                                0.034*                              -0.114**
(omitted: above high school)                          (0.019)                              (0.045)
Middle school                                        0.065***                               -0.043
                                                      (0.020)                              (0.046)
High school                                           0.037*                               -0.092*
                                                      (0.021)                              (0.049)
Prior business owner                                 0.096***                               0.047
                                                      (0.011)                              (0.033)
In urban area                                         0.092*
                                                      (0.051)
Married                                                                                     0.083
(omitted: single)                                                                          (0.067)
Separated                                                                                   -0.001
                                                                                           (0.075)
Household income per adult in
the last 30 days (000s)                                                                     -0.010
                                                                                           (0.006)
High risk aversion                                                                          -0.046
                                                                                           (0.031)
High formal credit experience                                                               0.014
                                                                                           (0.072)
Impatient now                                                                               0.002
                                                                                           (0.030)
Present bias                                                                                0.025
                                                                                           (0.030)
Has had a formal account                                                                    -0.006
                                                                                           (0.036)
Has been a member of an
informal savings group                                                                      0.000
                                                                                           (0.000)

                                                                                      P-value for Joint
Variables for:                                                                          Significance
Household demographics                                                                     0.531                   -0.0006
Household materials                                                                        0.677                   -0.0013
Wealth and Expenditures                                                                    0.437                   -0.0063
Subjective welfare                                                                         0.286                    0.0005
Business size                                                                              0.153                   -0.0068
Business expectations                                                                      0.561                   -0.0018
Credit expectations                                                                        0.008                    0.0361
Credit familiarity                                                                         0.003                    0.0036
Credit experience                                                                          0.000                   -0.0064

Share of sample that took up                               0.189                                 0.119
Adjusted R2                                                0.044                                 0.023
N                                                           8262                                   682                    682
Number of clusters                                           120                                    16                     16
Respondents are Mexican women aged 18-60. Respondents in the panel sample all reside in rural areas. Columns 1 and 2a
show the coefficient for each variable when they are all included in one OLS regression with takeup as the dependent variable.
The standard errors are in parentheses below the coefficients and are clustered by the unit of randomization. Column 2b shows
the value of the Adjusted R-Squared when the regression includes the variable(s) in the row minus the value of the Adjusted R-
Squared when the regression does not include the variable(s) in the row. Other baseline variables, listed below the line, are also
included in the regression for the panel sample. The P-Value for Joint Significance column for the panel sample reports the p-
value for a test that the coefficients on the variables in the row are jointly equal to zero. All regressions include supercluster
fixed effects. The coefficient on membership in an informal savings group is 0 because it was dropped from the regression due
to collinearity with other variables. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.
Table 3: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects on Credit and Other Financial Services
                                                   Household Loans in the Last 2 Years                                             Financial Access


                                                                                         Amount from                                 Satisfied
                                                                               # from a        a                     Formal credit w/access to     Member of
                                                          # from Amount from moneylender moneylender                 is 1st choice   financial       informal
            Outcome:      Total #       Total amount Compartamos Compartamos or pawnshop or pawnshop                   for credit  services (1/0) savings group
                             (1)             (2)            (3)      (4)          (5)         (6)                          (7)           (8)            (9)
Panel A: Average intent-to-treat effects (OLS, full sample)

Treatment                 0.121***     1248.488***      0.108***       644.844***         -0.001        28.156           -0.01          -0.005        -0.019***
                           (0.035)      (470.749)        (0.012)        (75.732)         (0.004)       (26.373)         (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.007)

Baseline value
controlled for               No            Yes              No             No             Yes            Yes               No             No            Yes
Adjusted R-squared         0.013          0.005           0.039          0.023           0.003          0.001            0.008          0.008          0.023
N                          16177          15602           15788          15768           15968          15963            14076          14879          16551
Number missing              383            958             772            792             592            597              2484           1681            9
Unadjusted p-value         0.001          0.009           0.000          0.000           0.841          0.287            0.347          0.675          0.009
Significant adjusted?       Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              No             No               No             No            Yes
Control group mean          0.95         6702.579         0.051         286.851          0.026          71.127           0.341          0.453          0.228
% = 0 in control           46.323         47.924           96.1          96.199          98.006         98.068           65.94          54.657         77.209
Treatment effect on
likelihood non-zero       0.051***       0.050***       0.077***        0.076***          0.001         0.000            -0.010         -0.005        -0.020***
                           (0.011)        (0.012)        (0.007)         (0.007)         (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.008)
Treatment group
standard deviation         1.436        32197.997         0.495         3985.405         0.188        1268.178
Control group
standard deviation         1.299        22156.605         0.282         2039.400         0.204         957.999
p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations                 0.006           0.027          0.000           0.000          0.090          0.964
Significant adjusted?       Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            No             No

p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations - panel only    0.028          0.849           0.000           0.000          0.678          0.089
Significant adjusted?       Yes            No              Yes             Yes            No             No
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES         0.026          0.488           0.000           0.000          0.589          0.084
Significant adjusted?       Yes            No              Yes             Yes            No             No
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES +
preferences                0.024          0.453           0.000           0.000          0.625          0.077
Significant adjusted?       Yes            No              Yes             Yes            No             No
Panel B: Likelihood of increase from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                               0.090***                                          0.007         0.006                                           -0.017
                                         (0.032)                                         (0.008)       (0.009)                                         (0.014)
Significant adjusted?                      Yes                                             No            No
Mean in the control
group                                     0.441                                          0.012          0.015                                           0.116
Panel C: Likelihood of decrease from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                                 0.004                                           0.011         0.011                                           -0.008
                                         (0.016)                                         (0.012)       (0.012)                                         (0.016)
Significant adjusted?                      No                                              No            No
Mean in the control
group                                     0.091                                          0.038          0.038                                           0.114
N for panels B & C                        1705                                           1751           1749                                            1823
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Treatment effect on likelihood non-zero
shows probit marginal effects with standard errors below; panels B and C report logit marginal effects. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster
fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included
when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and
Hochberg. The significance of each coefficient following this adjustment (if applied) is shown in Panel A. If a control was added for the baseline value of the
outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is
missing and zero otherwise.

Outcome(s): The number of loans in columns 2 and 3 refer to the most recent 3 loans, first among the respondent's loans and then within the household. The
dependent variable in column 7 represents responses to a question asking respondents where they would go to obtain a loan of 6,000 pesos tomorrow. The
adjusted critical values were calculated by treating columns 1-6 and 7-9 each as a separate family of outcomes.
Table 4: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects on Business Outcomes
                                                                                                                                                    No financial
                                                                                                                                      Household       problems
                                           Has ever    Used a loan to                 Revenues in    Expenditures                      business      managing
                            Has a          owned a         grow a       Number of      the last 2     in the last 2 Profits in the   income last     business in
            Outcome:      business         business       business      employees        weeks           weeks      last 2 weeks        month       the last year
                             (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)            (7)            (8)             (9)
Panel A: Average intent-to-treat effects (OLS, full sample)
Treatment                  -0.004           -0.001        0.008**         0.003        121.004**       118.814**        -0.208           60.58          0.007
                          (0.009)          (0.009)         (0.004)       (0.010)        (52.512)        (47.419)       (38.983)        (63.891)        (0.005)

Baseline value
controlled for              Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes            No
Adjusted R-squared         0.025           0.085          0.011            0.016          0.009           0.001            0             0.02          0.003
N                          16560           16557          16529           16560          16093           16184          15994           15577          16534
Number missing               0               3              31               0             467             376            566            983            26
Unadjusted p-value         0.657           0.882          0.042            0.738          0.022           0.013          0.996          0.344          0.119
Significant adjusted?                                                       No             Yes             Yes            No              No
Control group mean          0.243           0.389          0.05            0.145        450.328         327.595        145.388         839.818          0.944
% = 0 in control           75.693          61.143         94.961          90.648         81.105          86.156         82.171          73.67           5.602
Treatment effect on
likelihood non-zero         -0.004         -0.001         0.008**         -0.001          0.001          -0.004          0.001          -0.002          0.007
                           (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.007)         (0.007)        (0.010)         (0.004)
Treatment group
standard deviation                                                        0.532         3082.823       5184.061        5015.812       3292.372
Control group
standard deviation                                                        0.539         2321.344       1753.038        1711.938       2783.683
p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations                                                                0.233           0.000          0.000           0.233          0.723
Significant adjusted?                                                      No              Yes            Yes             No             No

p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations - panel only                                                   0.809           0.032          0.003           0.298          0.066
Significant adjusted?                                                      No              Yes            Yes             No             No
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES                                                        0.900           0.000          0.000           0.006          0.015
Significant adjusted?                                                      No              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES +
preferences                                                               0.954           0.000          0.000           0.001          0.013
Significant adjusted?                                                      No              Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes
Panel B: Likelihood of increase from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                   -0.016        -0.017          0.016*         0.070**          -0.002         0.088           -0.018         0.058
                           (0.018)       (0.019)          (0.009)        (0.031)         (0.044)        (0.057)         (0.054)        (0.037)
Significant adjusted?                                                       No              No            No               No            No
Mean in the control
group                        0.133         0.143           0.040          0.184           0.540          0.394           0.502          0.489
Panel C: Likelihood of decrease from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                    0.004                         0.001          0.019           -0.023         -0.039          0.006          -0.048
                           (0.016)                        (0.006)        (0.041)         (0.044)        (0.045)         (0.061)        (0.037)
Significant adjusted?                                                      No               No             No             No              No
Mean in the control
group                        0.098                         0.021          0.156           0.352          0.329           0.375          0.375
N for panels B & C           1823          1823            1820            498             445            454             430            439
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01


Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Treatment effect on likelihood non-zero
shows probit marginal effects with standard errors below; panels B and C report logit marginal effects. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster
fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included
when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by Benjamini and
Hochberg. The significance of each coefficient following this adjustment (if applied) is shown in Panel A. If a control was added for the baseline value of the
outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is
missing and zero otherwise.

Outcome(s): Business profits (column 7) are calculated by substracting responses for expenses from responses for revenues of the businesses. Income in column
8 is calculated from a question asking an explicit, all-in question about household income from business or productive activity. Sample sizes are lower in
columns 4-8 of Panels B and C because, having found no effect on transitions into business ownership in columns 1 and 2, we select only business owners in
columns 4-8. The adjusted critical values were calculated by treating columns 4-8 as an outcome family.
Table 5: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects on Household Consumption and Expenditures
                            Use of loan proceeds           Last week      Last 2 weeks     Last 30 days                 Last year                            Last 2 years


                        Did not sell                                                                  Amount spent                              Asset
                         an asset to                    Amount spent                                  on school and Amount spent              categories
                       help pay for a Used a loan to on temptation        Amount spent Nights did not    medical     on family               bought item     Did not sell    Made home
            Outcome:        loan        buy any asset        goods        on groceries  go hungry       expenses      events                     from         an asset      improvement
                             (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)                       (8)            (9)            (10)
Panel A: Average intent-to-treat effects (OLS, full sample)
Treatment                 0.010**           -0.004         -5.857**          -1.179            0.053           863.846           -29.8         -0.049**         0.007           -0.014
                          (0.004)          (0.008)          (2.704)         (29.257)          (0.065)         (852.120)        (89.766)         (0.022)        (0.007)         (0.010)

Baseline value
controlled for               No             No                No               No               No               No              No               No             No              No
Adjusted R-squared          0.002          0.007             0.009            0.026           0.008            -0.001           0.001            0.011          0.006           0.007
N                           16552          16534            16164            16201            16429            16413            16373           16494          16483           16507
Number missing                8              26               396              359             131               147             187               66             77              53
Unadjusted p-value          0.011          0.566             0.031            0.968           0.415             0.312           0.740            0.030          0.330           0.181
Significant adjusted?                                         No               No               No               No              No               No             No              No
Control group mean          0.951           0.171           99.463          1683.656           29.2           3475.976         870.874           0.505          0.862           0.377
% = 0 in control            4.907          82.894           21.519            1.133           0.498            29.242          88.237           64.898         13.792          62.334
Treatment effect on
likelihood non-zero       0.009***          -0.004           -0.003           -0.002          0.002*            -0.006           -0.000        -0.027**         0.006           -0.014
                           (0.004)         (0.008)          (0.009)          (0.003)          (0.001)          (0.010)          (0.006)         (0.012)        (0.007)         (0.010)
Treatment group
standard deviation                                          126.696         1195.798           2.890         55084.963         5018.143         0.764
Control group
standard deviation                                          126.886         1034.827           3.177         14780.896         5762.358         0.801
p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations                                                   0.992            0.014            0.029            0.047               0.764       0.001
Significant adjusted?                                         No               Yes              Yes              Yes                 No          Yes

p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations - panel only                                      0.893            0.258            0.047            0.101               0.017       0.001
Significant adjusted?                                         No               No               Yes              No                  Yes         Yes
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES                                           0.907            0.591            0.133            0.119               0.022       0.000
Significant adjusted?                                         No               No               No               No                  Yes         Yes
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES +
preferences                                                  0.864            0.620            0.120            0.150               0.022       0.000
Significant adjusted?                                         No               No               No               No                  Yes         Yes
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Treatment effect on likelihood non-zero shows probit marginal
effects with standard errors below. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of
the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical
levels following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. The significance of each coefficient following this adjustment (if applied) is shown in Panel A.
Outcome(s): All amounts are in pesos. Responses in dollars were converted at a rate of 12 pesos per dollar. Column 3 includes cigarettes, sweets, and soda. Column 7 refers to
important events such as weddings, baptisms, birthdays, graduations, or funerals. The survey instrument did not include details about the value of assets bought and sold unless they
were bought or sold in relation to a loan. Consequently, we report the count of assets in column 8 instead of their value. The adjusted critical values were calculated by treating
outcomes in columns 3-10 as one outcome family.
Table 6: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects on Household Income and Savings
                                        Last 30 days                            Last 6 months

                                         Income from                                   Income
                                          salaried and Participated in   Amount of greater than or
                                         non-salaried an economic        remittances  equal to
            Outcome: Total income             jobs         activity        received   expenses
                             (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)        (5)
Panel A: Average intent-to-treat effects (OLS, full sample)
Treatment                  26.062           -29.791         -0.011         -26.152           0.01
                         (156.972)         (127.732)       (0.009)        (34.934)         (0.009)

Baseline value
controlled for               Yes              No             No              Yes             No
Adjusted R-squared          0.019            0.01           0.008           0.002           0.004
N                          15240           16155           16560           16368           16426
Number missing              1320             405              0              192             134
Unadjusted p-value          0.868           0.816           0.252           0.455           0.255
Significant adjusted?        No               No             No              No              No
Control group mean        6176.089        4540.709          0.478          198.35           0.385
% = 0 in control            1.216          17.928          52.217          96.056          61.549
Treatment effect on
likelihood non-zero         -0.001          -0.009         -0.011           0.002           0.010
                           (0.002)         (0.008)        (0.010)          (0.004)         (0.009)
Treatment group
standard deviation        6428.145        5268.009                        1579.322
Control group
standard deviation        6034.154        5115.035                        2067.668
p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations                  0.638           0.285                           0.032
Significant adjusted?        No              No                              Yes

p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations - panel only      0.728         0.684                            0.020
Significant adjusted?         No            No                               Yes
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES           0.858         0.912                            0.042
Significant adjusted?         No            No                               No
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES +
preferences                  0.720         0.770                            0.052
Significant adjusted?         No            No                               No
Panel B: Likelihood of increase from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                   -0.012                                         0.017*
                           (0.027)                                         (0.010)
Significant adjusted?         No                                             No
Mean in the control
group                        0.626                                          0.027
Panel C: Likelihood of decrease from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                    0.019                                          0.009
                           (0.030)                                         (0.010)
Significant adjusted?         No                                             No
Mean in the control
group                        0.339                                          0.049
N for panels B & C           1679                                           1800
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01



Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are
in parentheses. Treatment effect on likelihood non-zero shows probit marginal effects with standard
errors below; panels B and C report logit marginal effects. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45
supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value
of the outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was
measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels
following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. The significance of each coefficient following
this adjustment (if applied) is shown in Panel A. If a control was added for the baseline value of the
outcome, any missing values for the baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a
variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is missing and zero otherwise.

Outcome(s): Anyone reporting having a job or a business is classified as participating in an economic
activity (column 3). For column 5, anyone reporting having income greater than expenses, less
purchase of a house or a car or a big investment or debt, in the last 6 months is coded as a 1. The
adjusted critical values were calculated by treating all outcomes in the table as one outcome family.
Table 7: Average Intent-to-Treat Effects on Various Measures of Welfare
                                                                             Subjective well-being                                                         Child welfare           Intra-household decision power


                                                                                                                                                                                                               # of
                                                                                                          Satisfaction                                                                          # of       household
                        Depression        Job stress                        Trust in                        (life and    Satisfied with                     Fraction of     Participates in household       issues in
                       index (higher index (higher       Locus of         institutions      Trust in       harmony)        economic     Good health        children 4-17     any financial issues she has which conflict
            Outcome: = happier)         = less stress) control index         index        people index        index        situation      status            not working       decisions       a say on        arises
                             (1)              (2)           (3)                (4)            (5)               (6)            (7)          (8)                 (9)              (10)           (11)           (12)
Panel A: Average intent-to-treat effects (OLS, full sample)
Treatment                 0.045*            -0.004         0.003             -0.011         0.049*           0.017           -0.009           0.012            0.007          0.008***         0.071**           0.023
                          (0.024)          (0.025)        (0.024)           (0.025)         (0.027)         (0.024)         (0.011)          (0.008)          (0.006)          (0.003)         (0.030)          (0.033)

Baseline value
controlled for                Yes             No              No              No              No              No              No              Yes               Yes              No               No              No
Adjusted R-squared           0.031           0.004           0.009           0.009           0.027           0.009           0.007           0.025             0.013            0.001            0.01           0.016
N                            16336           7656            16549           16530           16558           16553           16526           16556             12305            12183           12379           12400
Number missing                224            8904              11              30              2               7               34              4               4255             4377            4181             4160
Unadjusted p-value           0.059           0.870           0.915           0.653           0.067           0.473           0.418           0.125             0.236            0.009           0.020           0.479
Significant adjusted?                                                                                                                                                            Yes             Yes              No
Control group mean             0               0               0               0                0               0            0.458           0.779             0.915            0.975            2.78           1.525
% = 0 in control               0               0               0               0                0               0            54.239          22.061            5.896            2.503           9.252           35.043
Treatment effect on
likelihood non-zero                                                                                                          -0.009           0.012            0.002          0.007***           0.007           0.004
                                                                                                                            (0.011)          (0.008)          (0.005)          (0.003)          (0.006)         (0.012)
Treatment group
standard deviation           0.973           1.019           0.996           1.007           0.985           0.999                                             0.245                            1.312           1.421
Control group
standard deviation           1.000           1.000           1.000           1.000           1.000           1.000                                             0.254                            1.336           1.415
p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations                   0.032           0.259           0.447           0.242           0.299           0.959                                             0.013                            0.016           0.826
Significant adjusted?                                                                                                                                                                            Yes             No

p-value for test of
equality of standard
deviations - panel only     0.326         0.467           0.149              0.067           0.108           0.647                                             0.632                            0.833           0.191
Significant adjusted?                                                                                                                                                                            No              No
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES          0.464         0.325           0.307              0.054           0.147           0.234                                             0.848                            0.701           0.188
Significant adjusted?                                                                                                                                                                            No              No
p-value for test of
equality of variance
for residuals, SES +
preferences                 0.492         0.668           0.356              0.057           0.134           0.184                                             0.853                            0.649           0.298
Significant adjusted?                                                                                                                                                                            No              No
Panel B: Likelihood of increase from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                   0.014                                                                                                            0.026*            0.014
                           (0.031)                                                                                                           (0.015)          (0.020)
Mean in the control
group                       0.535                                                                                                            0.112             0.871
Panel C: Likelihood of decrease from baseline (logit, panel sample)
Treatment                   -0.014                                                                                                            -0.007           -0.004
                           (0.031)                                                                                                           (0.015)          (0.006)
Mean in the control
group                       0.465                                                                                                            0.092             0.024
N for panels B & C           1800                                                                                                            1823              1369
* p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01

Specification: Standard errors, clustered by 238 geographic clusters (the unit of randomization), are in parentheses. Treatment effect on likelihood non-zero shows probit marginal effects with standard errors
below; panels B and C report logit marginal effects. Controls for randomization strata (i.e. 45 supercluster fixed effects and 3 branches) are included but not shown. Controls for the baseline value of the
outcome (its value, and missing/non-missing value) are included when the outcome was measured in the baseline. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we adjust critical levels following the approach by
Benjamini and Hochberg. The significance of each coefficient following this adjustment (if applied) is shown in Panel A. If a control was added for the baseline value of the outcome, any missing values for the
baseline observation of the outcome were coded as zero and a variable was added that is equal to one if the baseline value is missing and zero otherwise.



Outcome(s): Higher values in the indices denote beneficial outcomes. Column 1 consists of a standard battery of 20 questions that ask about thoughts and feelings in the last week. The feelings and mindsets
include: being bothered by things that do not normally bother you, having a poor appetite, not being able to shake off the blues even with support from friends and family, feeling just as good as other people,
having trouble focusing, feeling depressed, feeling like everything required extra effort, being hopeful about the future, thinking your life was a failure, feeling fearful, having restless sleep, feeling happy, talking
less than usual, being lonely, thinking people were unfriendly, having crying spells, enjoying life, feeling sad, thinking people dislike you, feeling like you couldn’t keep going on. In column 2, the sample frame
is restricted to just those that report participating in an economic activity; the index includes three questions about job stress. The index of locus of control in column 3 includes five questions about locus of
control. In column 4, institutions include government workers, financial workers, and banks. Trust in people in column 5 includes questions about trust in family, neighbors, personal acquaintances, people just
met, business acquaintances, people who borrow money, strangers, and a question about whether people would be generally fair. Columns 10-12 only include married respondents living with another adult.
Table 8: Summary of Average Intent-to-Treat Effects by Sub-Group with Adjusted P-values: One Specification Per Outcome Per Subgroup

                                                         Measures of Credit
                                                         and Other Financial                               Income and                                                          Significantly different
                                Outcome area:                  Services               Business            Consumption            Other Welfare               Total              effects on outcomes
                                                             (9 measures)          (9 outcomes)           (14 outcomes)          (11 outcomes)           (34 outcomes)             (34 outcomes)
                                                            (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)           (9)       (10)            (11)          (12)
Subgroup                                        Sample       +          -           +          -           +         -            +         -             +          -            Total         A>B
A. Full sample                                               4          1           3          0           1         0            4         0             8          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    2             2
B. Panel sample                                              2          0           0          0           0         0            1         1             1          1

A. Prior business owner                          Full        3          1           5          0           1          0            2          0           8          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    6             6
B. Not a prior business owner                    Full        4          0           0          0           1          0            3          0           4          0

A. Education > Primary                           Full        4          0           3          0           1          0            3          0           7          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    2             1
B. Education <= Primary                          Full        3          1           0          0           0          0            0          0           0          0

A. In rural area                                 Full        3          0           5          0           0          0            1          0           6          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    7             5
B. In urban area                                 Full        4          1           1          1           1          1            4          0           6          2

A. Above median HH income per adult             Panel        0          0           0          1           0          0            1          1           1          2
                                                                                                                                                                                    2             1
B. Below median HH income per adult             Panel        2          1           0          2           0          0            1          3           1          5

A. Formal prior credit experience               Panel        0          0           1          0           0          1            2          0           3          1
                                                                                                                                                                                    6             5
B. No formal credit experience                  Panel        2          0           0          0           0          0            1          4           1          4

A. Formal account experience                    Panel        0          0           0          1           1          0            1          2           2          3
                                                                                                                                                                                    4             1
B. No formal account experience                 Panel        2          0           0          0           0          0            1          1           1          1

A. Member of informal savings group             Panel        0          0           0          3           0          0            2          1           2          4
                                                                                                                                                                                    7             3
B. Not member of informal savings group         Panel        2          0           4          0           0          1            0          2           4          3

A. Risk tolerant                                Panel        2          0           0          0           0          0            2          1           2          1
                                                                                                                                                                                    3             2
B. Risk intolerant                              Panel        0          0           0          0           0          0            1          2           1          2

A. Patient now                                  Panel        2          0           0          0           0          0            1          2           1          2
                                                                                                                                                                                    3             2
B. Impatient now                                Panel        2          0           0          0           0          2            1          0           1          2

A. Present biased                               Panel        1          0           0          0           0          0            0          0           0          0
                                                                                                                                                                                    0             0
B. Not present biased                           Panel        2          0           0          0           0          0            0          1           0          1

 The table summarizes the results presented in Figures 6-15 using adjusted p-values. Each cell is a count of treatment effects that are significant with 90% confidence using adjusted critical levels
following the approach by Benjamini and Hochberg. If asset sales and purchases both fall, we count the overall effect as positive. Measurements of Credit and Other Financial Services are excluded
from the total columns. Consumption of temptation goods and the # of disagreements in which a conflict arises are excluded from all counts. The sample column indicates which sample frame of
respondents is included in the estimation. We use the full sample for examining heterogeneous effects we can identify using variables in the endline assumed to be static over the treatment period or
that are retrospective. We use the panel sample for examining heterogeneous effects we can identify using variables in the baseline survey. The final column shows the number of treatment effects that
are significantly different between the two groups with 90% confidence.
Table 9: Summary of Average Intent-to-Treat Effects by Sub-Group: All Variables in the Same Regression



                                                             Credit & Other
Outcome area:                                               Financial Services            Business        Income & Consumption          Other Welfare                Total
                                                              (9 Measures)             (9 Outcomes)           (14 Outcomes)            (11 Outcomes)            (34 Outcomes)
                                                            Total          +         Total          +        Total       +            Total         +          Total        +
Subgroup                                                     (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)            (7)         (8)          (9)        (10)
Panel A: Endline Sample
Treatment X Prior business owner                              2            2           4           4            2           2           1            1           7           7
Treatment X Education > Primary                               0            0           0           0            1           0           1            1           2           1
Treatment X In rural area                                     0            0           4           3            0           0           1            0           5           3
Panel B: Panel Sample
Treatment X Prior business owner                              2            1           1           1            1           1           2            1           4           3
Treatment X Education > Primary                               0            0           0           0            0           0           0            0           0           0
Treatment X Above median HH income per adult                  0            0           1           1            1           0           1            0           3           1
Treatment X Formal prior credit experience                    1            1           0           0            1           0           2            2           3           2
Treatment X Formal account experience                         0            0           0           0            0           0           3            1           3           1
Treatment X Member of an informal savings group               0            0           3           0            0           0           2            2           5           2
Treatment X Risk intolerant                                   0            0           1           1            0           0           3            1           4           2
Treatment X Patient now                                       0            0           0           0            1           1           2            1           3           2
Treatment X Present biased                                    0            0           0           0            0           0           0            0           0           0

The table reports the number of statistically significant coefficients on interaction terms for each subgroup within a given category of outcomes and sample. The coefficients are
from an OLS regression which includes each subgroup shown in the left hand column along with their interaction with treatment and treatment itself on the right hand side with an
outcome (e.g. business profits) as the dependent variable. Standard errors are clustered by the unit of randomization. The critical levels are adjusted following the approach by
Benjamini and Hochberg.
                               Figure 1: Study Timeline and Survey Locations
                                                                                 Compartamos launches
                                                                                 Credito Mujer in 1st      Compartamos launches
                                                                                 treatment community in   Credito Mujer in control
                                                                                 region 2                 group in regions 1 and 2
                                         Compartamos launches Credito Mujer in
                                         1st treatment community in region 1
                    Random Assignment
                     (238 communities)



                          March - April                               April - June                        November         - March
                              2009                                       2010                               2011             2012

                         # of Communities
                                                                   Baseline Survey                            Endline Survey
                     Treatment       Control                       # of respondents                           # of respondents

                                                                                                                  14737
1. Caborca, Agua
                                                                                                             Average exposure:
Prieta, and urban        104             101                                0
                                                                                                                28 months
areas of Nogales



                                                                                                                   1823
2. Outlying areas                                                                                            Average exposure:
                          16              17                              1823
of Nogales                                                                                                      15 months




Total                    120             118                              1823                                      16560
                                                   Figure 2: Average Intent−to−Treat Effects for the Full Sample, at a Glance
   Credit & Other Financial Services
                                                                                                                                   Total #
                                                                                                                     Total amount
                                                                                                                           # from Compartamos
                                                                                                                                                      Amount from Compartamos
                                                                                        # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                                                                                Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                                                                              Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                                                                      Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                                                                           Member of informal savings group
   Business
                                                                                                    Has a business
                                                                                         Has ever owned a business
                                                                                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                                                                                 Number of employees
                                                                                                  Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                                 Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                          Profits in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                  Household business income last month
                                                                   No financial problems managing business in the last year
   Income & Consumption
                                                                                                        Total income
                                                                     Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                                                                             Participated in an economic activity
                                                                                    Amount of remittances received
                                                                                Income greater than or equal to expenses
                                                                                     Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                                                                     Used a loan to buy any asset
                                                       Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week                               [ns]
                                                                   Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                                 Nights did not go hungry
                                                    Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
                                                                      Amount spent on family events in the last year
                                                 Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years                                [ns]
                                                                                                      Did not sell an asset
                                                                                     Made home improvement
   Other Welfare
                                                                                           Depression index (higher = happier)
                                                                             Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                                                                                Locus of control index
                                                                                          Trust in institutions index
                                                                                                            Trust in people index
                                                                                    Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                                                                                 Satisfied with economic situation
                                                                                                             Good health status
                                                                                      Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                                                                                            Participates in any financial decisions
                                                                                         # of household issues she has a say on
                                                                           # of household issues in which conflict arises

−0.6               −0.5             −0.4             −0.3              −0.2              −0.1            0.0                0.1          0.2             0.3            0.4
       Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
 This figure summarizes the treatment effects presented in Tables 3−7. Here treatment effects on continuous variables are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing
 outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for that outcome.
 For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is not significant [ns] at this level
 if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                           Figure 3: Quantile Treatment Effects for Business Outcomes
                                3a On number of employees                                         3b On number of employees, only businesses with employees
       0.04                                                                                  0.05
       0.02
                                                                                             0.00
AIT




                                                                                       AIT
       0.00
                                                                                         −0.05
      −0.02

      −0.04                                                                              −0.10
               0                                           62               87   95                 0                                          65           86       95
               0                                            1                2   3+                 1                                          2             3       4+

                            3c On revenues in the last 2 weeks                                                3d On expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                     Thousands of pesos                                                                   Thousands of pesos
       6                                                                                      3
       4                                                                                      2
QTE




                                                                                       QTE
       2                                                                                      1
       0                                                                                      0
      −2                                                                                     −1
            5 10      20       30    40      50      60         70    80     90 95                 5 10       20    30    40     50     60      70    80         90 95
           0.0 0.0    0.2      0.5   0.7     1.0     1.3        1.8   2.5    4.0 7.1              0.0 0.0     0.0   0.0   0.1    0.4    0.7     1.2   2.0        4.0 6.0

                             3e On profits in the last 2 weeks                                              3f On household business income last month
                                     Thousands of pesos                                                                   Thousands of pesos
       2                                                                                      2
       1                                                                                      1
       1
QTE




                                                                                       QTE
                                                                                              0
       0
      −1                                                                                     −1
      −1                                                                                     −2
            5 10       20      30    40      50      60         70    80     90 95                 5 10       20    30    40     50     60      70    80         90 95
           −1.8−0.8   −0.1     0.0   0.1     0.3     0.6        0.9   1.3    2.0 3.6              0.0 0.0     0.0   0.3   0.6    1.0    1.5     2.0   3.0        5.0 8.0
                                      X axis shows the quantile (top row) and the control group value at that quantile (bottom row)
For continuous variables, vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for quantile treatment effects with standard errors block−bootstrapped by
cluster with 1,000 replications. For count variables, vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for the AIT estimate of the likelihood of treatment
group respondents having the value on the x axis for that outcome relative to the control group respondents having that value. Standard errors are
clustered by the unit of randomization. A + sign indicates that the value of the variable is at or above that number. The sample for all estimates
includes only business owners, except for the sample in Figure 2b, which includes only business owners with >0 employees.
                                              Figure 4: Quantile Treatment Effects for Consumption Outcomes
                        4a On amount spent on temptation goods                                                              4b On amount spent on groceries
                                         Thousands of pesos                                                                           Thousands of pesos
       0.04
                                                                                                   0.40
       0.02
                                                                                                   0.20
QTE




                                                                                            QTE
       0.00
      −0.02                                                                                        0.00

      −0.04                                                                                       −0.20
               5 10       20      30      40      50     60         70    80     90 95                     5 10       20       30      40     50     60    70    80    90 95
              0.0 0.0     0.0     0.0     0.0     0.1    0.1        0.1   0.2    0.2 0.3                  0.5 0.7     1.0      1.2     1.3    1.5    1.7   2.0   2.2   3.0 3.3

              4c On amount spent on school and medical expenses                                                      4d On amount spent on family events
                                        Thousands of pesos                                                                           Thousands of pesos
       4                                                                                           2
       3                                                                                           1
QTE




                                                                                            QTE
       2                                                                                           1
       1
                                                                                                   0
       0
                                                                                                  −1
      −1
            5 10        20      30      40       50     60      70        80     90 95                  5 10        20       30      40      50     60     70    80    90 95
           0.0 0.0      0.0     0.1     0.5      0.9    1.5     2.5       4.0    7.0 13.0              0.0 0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0     0.0    0.0    0.0   0.0   0.7 3.6

                         4e On asset categories bought item from
       0.06

       0.04
AIT




       0.02

       0.00

      −0.02

              0                                                66               89   97
              0                                                 1                2   3+
                                        X axis shows the quantile (top row) and the control group value at that quantile (bottom row)
For continuous variables, vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for quantile treatment effects with standard errors block−bootstrapped by
cluster with 1,000 replications. For count variables, vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for the AIT estimate of the likelihood of treatment
group respondents having the value on the x axis for that outcome relative to the control group respondents having that value. Standard errors are
clustered by the unit of randomization. A + sign indicates that the value of the variable is at or above that number.
                                            Figure 5: Quantile Treatment Effects for Income Outcomes
                                   5a On total income                                              5b On income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                                    Thousands of pesos                                                                   Thousands of pesos
                                                                                            1.00

       0.50




                                                                                            0.50
       0.00
QTE




                                                                                     QTE
      −0.50                                                                                 0.00




      −1.00                                                                                −0.50




      −1.50
                                                                                           −1.00
              5 10      20    30      40      50     60     70      80     90 95                    5 10     20    30      40   50    60      70    80    90 95
              0.9 1.5   2.6   3.3     4.0    4.8    5.8     6.9    8.3    12.015.4                 0.0 0.0   0.7   2.0    3.0   3.8   4.5     5.5   7.0   9.612.0
                                    X axis shows the quantile (top row) and the control group value at that quantile (bottom row)
Vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for quantile treatment effects with standard errors block−bootstrapped by cluster with 1,000 replications.
                                                  Figure 6: Quantile Treatment Effects for Other Welfare Outcomes
                     6a On the depression index (higher = happier)                                                6b On the job stress index (higher = less stress)
       0.20                                                                                          0.60
       0.15                                                                                          0.40
QTE




                                                                                              QTE
       0.10                                                                                          0.20
       0.05                                                                                          0.00
       0.00
      −0.05                                                                                         −0.20

               5 10           20       30         40    50     60    70     80      90 95                    5 10       20     30      40    50          60     70     80    90 95
              −2.1−1.5       −0.8     −0.3        0.0   0.3    0.5   0.7    0.9     1.0 1.1                 −1.7−1.3   −1.0   −0.6    −0.3   0.0         0.3    0.4    1.0   1.4 1.7

                                    6c On the locus of control index                                                     6d On the trust in institutions index
       0.40                                                                                          0.40
       0.20                                                                                          0.20
QTE




                                                                                              QTE
       0.00                                                                                          0.00
      −0.20                                                                                         −0.20
      −0.40                                                                                         −0.40
               5 10           20       30      40       50     60    70     80      90 95                    5 10       20     30      40    50          60     70     80    90 95
              −1.5−1.4       −0.8     −0.3    −0.3      0.0    0.5   0.6    0.6     1.4 1.4                 −1.4−1.3   −0.8   −0.4    −0.3   0.1         0.2    0.7    0.8   1.3 1.8

                                     6e On the trust in people index                                               6f On the satisfaction (life and harmony) index
       0.20                                                                                          0.50
       0.10
QTE




                                                                                              QTE
                                                                                                     0.00
       0.00
      −0.10                                                                                         −0.50
               5 10           20       30      40        50    60    70     80      90 95                    5 10       20     30      40     50          60    70     80    90 95
              −1.7−1.2       −0.8     −0.5    −0.2      −0.0   0.2   0.5    0.8     1.3 1.6                 −1.6−1.4   −0.7   −0.0    −0.0   −0.0        −0.0   0.7    0.9   1.6 1.6

                     6g On # of household issues she has a say on                                                6h On # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0.06                                                                                          0.02
       0.04                                                                                          0.01
AIT




                                                                                              AIT


       0.02                                                                                          0.00
       0.00                                                                                         −0.01
      −0.02                                                                                         −0.02
               0         9      19           33                57                                            0                       34             52            71         88
               0         1      2            3                 4                                             0                        1             2              3          4
                                             X axis shows the quantile (top row) and the control group value at that quantile (bottom row)
For continuous variables, vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for quantile treatment effects with standard errors block−bootstrapped by
cluster with 1,000 replications. For count variables, vertical lines show 90% confidence intervals for the AIT estimate of the likelihood of treatment
group respondents having the value on the x axis for that outcome relative to the control group respondents having that value. Standard errors are
clustered by the unit of randomization. A + sign indicates that the value of the variable is at or above that number.
                                                             Figure 7: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Business Ownership
                              Don’t Show                                   a. Prior business owner (24.4%)                b. Not a prior business owner (75.6%)                                c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos
                                    Amount from Compartamos
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group                                                                                [ns]
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                     [ns]
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income                                [ns]
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity                                                                               [ns]
                             Amount of remittances received
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week                                                                                   [ns]
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years              [ns]                                                              [ns]
                                          Did not sell an asset
                                    Made home improvement                                                                                    [ns]
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−.5             0               .5             1    −.5            0              .5             1    −.5             0                .5          1
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                                      Figure 8: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Education
                              Don’t Show                                    a. Education > Primary (71.0%)                     b. Education <= Primary (29.0%)                               c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos
                                    Amount from Compartamos
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group                                                                                                                                              [ns]
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                    [ns]
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                      [ns]
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs                                                                                         [ns]                                                       [ns]
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week                                                                                                                                                 [ns]
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year                                                                                                                                                          [ns]
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years                     [ns]                                                              [ns]
                                          Did not sell an asset
                                    Made home improvement                                        [ns]
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−.5                     0                      .5   −.5                    0                     .5   −.5                    0                          .5
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                                      Figure 9: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Location
                              Don’t Show                                         a. In rural area (27.4%)                         b. In urban area (72.6%)                                   c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos
                                    Amount from Compartamos
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                    [ns]
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week                                       [ns]
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years                  [ns]
                                          Did not sell an asset
                                    Made home improvement                                                                                           [ns]
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−.5                     0                      .5   −.5                    0                     .5   −.5                    0                   .5
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                             Figure 10: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Household Income
                              Don’t Show                                       a. Above Median (50.2%)                           b. Below Median (49.8%)                                       c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos                                   [ns]
                                    Amount from Compartamos
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                             [ns]
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks                                                  [ns]
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received                              [ns]
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks                                                              [ns]                                                                                   [ns]
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years
                                          Did not sell an asset
                                    Made home improvement
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−.5             0                 .5            1   −.5             0             .5             1    −.5             0                .5                 1
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                              Figure 11: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Credit Experience
                              Don’t Show                                         a. Experience (31.5%)                           b. No Experience (68.5%)                                    c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos                                       [ns]
                                    Amount from Compartamos
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop                                                                                                                                        [ns]
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group                                                                                  [ns]
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                      [ns]
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week                                  [ns]                                                                                                   [ns]
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year                                [ns]                                                                                                  [ns]
               Amount spent on family events in the last year                                [ns]
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years
                                          Did not sell an asset                                                                                 [ns]
                                    Made home improvement
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−1       −.5       0             .5   1       1.5 −1        −.5       0           .5    1       1.5 −1         −.5       0            .5   1          1.5
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                      Figure 12: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Formal Account Experience
                              Don’t Show                                         a. Experience (19.8%)                           b. No Experience (80.2%)                                    c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos                                       [ns]
                                    Amount from Compartamos                                                [ns]
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group                                                                                  [ns]
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received                                  [ns]
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                                 [ns]
                                     Nights did not go hungry                                                                                                                                         [ns]
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years                                                                                  [ns]
                                          Did not sell an asset                                                                                [ns]
                                    Made home improvement                                                                                                                                                    [ns]
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−1       −.5       0            .5      1     1.5 −1        −.5       0          .5     1       1.5 −1         −.5       0       .5            1   1.5
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                      Figure 13: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Informal Savings Experience
                              Don’t Show                                         a. Experience (23.8%)                           b. No Experience (76.2%)                                    c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos                                            [ns]
                                    Amount from Compartamos                                                       [ns]
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit                                                                                  [ns]
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received                                       [ns]                                                                                                [ns]
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years                                    [ns]                                                                                                 [ns]
                                          Did not sell an asset
                                    Made home improvement
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−1         −.5          0              .5      1    −1         −.5         0          .5         1    −1         −.5         0            .5   1
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                                Figure 14: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Risk Tolerance
                              Don’t Show                                        a. Risk Tolerant (28.4%)                         b. Risk Intolerant (71.6%)                                  c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos                                                                                          [ns]
                                    Amount from Compartamos                                                                                                                                                         [ns]
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)                                [ns]
                             Member of informal savings group
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                           [ns]
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received                                                                                         [ns]
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks                                     [ns]
                                     Nights did not go hungry                                                                                              [ns]                                       [ns]
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years
                                          Did not sell an asset
                                    Made home improvement
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−1         −.5          0          .5          1    −1         −.5         0                 .5          1   −1   −.5        0            .5          1
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                                      Figure 15: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Patience
                              Don’t Show                                            a. Patient (55.5%)                              b. Impatient (44.5%)                                     c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos
                                    Amount from Compartamos
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit                               [ns]                                                                                                 [ns]
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group                                                                                       [ns]
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                                                           [ns]
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks                                                                                                             [ns]
                       Household business income last month
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received                                                                                         [ns]
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year                                                                                                                                                   [ns]
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years
                                          Did not sell an asset                                  [ns]
                                    Made home improvement
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−1         −.5          0          .5          1    −1         −.5         0          .5         1    −1         −.5         0            .5     1
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
                                                       Figure 16: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Present−biased Preference
                              Don’t Show                                       a. Present−biased (30.0%)                       b. Not Present−biased (70.0%)                                   c. (a − b)
            CREDIT & OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
                                                          Total #
                                                   Total amount
                                           # from Compartamos
                                    Amount from Compartamos                                              [ns]
                            # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                    Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                            Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                   Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                             Member of informal savings group
                                                      BUSINESS
                                               Has a business
                                 Has ever owned a business
                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                      Number of employees
                               Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                            Expenditures in the last 2 weeks
                                   Profits in the last 2 weeks
                       Household business income last month                                                                                          [ns]                 [ns]
     No financial problems managing business in the last year
                               INCOME & CONSUMPTION
                                                  Total income
                 Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                         Participated in an economic activity
                             Amount of remittances received
                   Income greater than or equal to expenses
                   Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                 Used a loan to buy any asset
         Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
               Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                     Nights did not go hungry
Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
               Amount spent on family events in the last year
        Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years
                                          Did not sell an asset                                                                              [ns]
                                    Made home improvement
                                           OTHER WELFARE
                            Depression index (higher = happier)
                          Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                            Locus of control index
                                        Trust in institutions index
                                             Trust in people index
                           Satisfaction (life and harmony) index
                               Satisfied with economic situation
                                               Good health status
                           Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                          Participates in any financial decisions
                        # of household issues she has a say on
                  # of household issues in which conflict arises
       0                             .5                             1−.5             0              .5              1    −.5             0             .5             1     −.5            0                .5   1
        Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
     Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for the outcome on the left and group at the top. Panel C shows the estimate for the difference between the coefficients in panels A
     and B. Here treatment effects are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Effects that
     are significant at p < . 10 are in black. For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is
     not significant [ns] at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level.
Appendix Table 1: Attrition

                                                      Baseline Sample Targeted for Endline Surveying
Outcome:                                     Surveyed                   Surveyed                   Surveyed
                                                 (1)                        (2)                        (3)
Treatment Assignment                           -0.002                     -0.012                      0.036
                                              (0.031)                    (0.029)                    (0.079)
Age                                                                     0.004***                   0.005***
                                                                         (0.001)                    (0.001)
Married (omitted: single)                                                0.056**                    0.054**
                                                                         (0.022)                    (0.025)
Separated                                                                 -0.044                     -0.079
                                                                         (0.049)                    (0.068)
Prior business owner                                                     0.058**                    0.066**
                                                                         (0.021)                    (0.029)
Household income per adult in
the last 30 days (000s)                                                   -0.020***                     -0.023***
                                                                           (0.003)                       (0.003)
High risk aversion                                                          -0.004                        -0.002
                                                                           (0.019)                       (0.018)
High formal credit experience                                               -0.002                         0.014
                                                                           (0.018)                       (0.023)
Impatient now                                                                0.014                         0.002
                                                                           (0.022)                       (0.029)
Present bias                                                                -0.027                        -0.019
                                                                           (0.023)                       (0.029)
Has had a formal account                                                  -0.096***                     -0.109***
                                                                           (0.019)                       (0.022)
Has been a member of an
informal savings group                                                       -0.017                       -0.009
                                                                            (0.018)                      (0.021)
Above variables interacted with
Treatment                                       No                            No                           Yes
N                                              2912                          2853                         2853
Number of clusters                              33                            33                           33
Outcome mean                                   0.626                         0.627                        0.627
p-value from test that Treatment
and all other variables above
interacted with Treatment are
jointly 0                                                                                                  0.145
Respondents are Mexican women aged 18-60 and all reside in outlying areas of Nogales. Column 1 reports the
coefficient on treatment assignment when it is included in a regression with a binary variable for survey response (1=yes,
0=no) as the outcome variable. Column 2 reports the coefficient on each variable in the row when they are all included
in one regression with survey response as the outcome. Column 3 reports the results of the test for unbalanced attrition
between treatment and control groups. The cells show the coefficient for each variable when they are all included in one
regression along with each of their interactions with treatment, with survey response as the outcome. The coefficients on
the interaction terms (not shown) are each not significant. All regressions include supercluster fixed effects and standard
errors are clustered by the unit of randomization. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<.01.
Appendix Table 2: Data Appendix
Variable                                     Description                                                                                            Time of measurement

                                                                            Credit outcomes
Total # of household loans                   The number of loans taken out by members of the household                                              Last 2 years
Total amount of household loans              The amount (in pesos) of the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the respondent, or if she has     Last 2 years
                                             had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other members of the household.

# of household loans from Compartamos        The number of loans taken from Compartamos of the 3 most recent loans belonging either to the          Last 2 years
                                             respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her and other
                                             members of the household.
Amount of household loans from               The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from Compartamos of the 3 most recent loans belonging             Last 2 years
Compartamos                                  either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her
                                             and other members of the household.
# of household loans from a moneylender or   The number of loans taken from a money lender or pawnshop of the 3 most recent loans belonging         Last 2 years
pawnshop                                     either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years, belonging to her
                                             and other members of the household.
Amount of household loans from a             The amount (in pesos) of loans taken from a money lender or pawnshop of the 3 most recent loans        Last 2 years
moneylender or pawnshop                      belonging either to the respondent, or if she has had fewer than 3 loans in the last 2 years,
                                             belonging to her and other members of the household.
Formal credit is 1st choice for credit       Binary variable equal to one if the respondent said that a formal source--either a bank or a caja--    At survey
                                             would be the first source she would go to if she needed a loan of 6,000 pesos tomorrow

Satisfied w/access to financial services     Binary variable, taken from a question asking respondents to rank their satisfaction with access to    At survey
                                             financial services on a five point scale. A response of "satisfied" or "very satisfied" was coded as
                                             one.
Member of informal savings group             Binary variable equal to one if the respondent was a member of an informal savings group               Last 2 years

                                                                          Business outcomes
Has a business                               Binary variable equal to one if the respondent has a business                                          At survey
Has ever owned a business                    Binary variable equal to one if the respondent has ever owned a business                               At survey
Used a loan to grow a business               Binary variable equal to one if the respondent has used a loan to grow any of their businesses         Ever
Number of employees                          The sum of the number of paid and unpaid employees across all of the respondent's businesses           At survey

Revenues in the last 2 weeks                 Total revenues (pesos) from all of the respondent's businesses                                         Last 2 weeks
Expenditures in the last 2 weeks             Total expenditures (pesos) from all of the respondent's businesses                                     Last 2 weeks
Profits in the last 2 weeks                    Total profits (pesos), calculated as total revenues minus total expenditures from all of the        Last 2 weeks
                                               respondent's businesses
Household business income last month           Total household income (pesos) from business or productive activity, asked as an independent        Last month
                                               question
No financial problems managing business in     Binary variable equal to one if the respondent said that she had no financial problems managing     Last year
the last year                                  her business

                                                                         Consumption outcomes
Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan   Binary variable equal to one if the respondent sold any asset to help pay off a loan                Last 2 years
Used a loan to buy any asset                   Binary variable equal to one if the respondent used a loan to buy an asset                          Last 2 years
Amount spent on temptation goods               Total consumption of sweets, soda, and cigarettes (pesos)                                           Last week
Amount spent on groceries                      Total consumption of groceries (pesos)                                                              Last 2 weeks
Nights did not go hungry                       The number of nights that the respondent did not go hungry                                          Last 30 days
Amount spent on school and medical             Total spent on school or medical expenses by the household (pesos)                                  Last year
expenses
Amount spent on family events                  Total spent on family events such as weddings, funerals, or birthdays by the household (pesos)      Last year

Asset categories bought item from              The number of asset categories (of a total of 6) from which the household bought an item from       Last 2 years

Did not sell an asset                          Binary variable equal to one if someone in the household sold an asset                              Last 2 years
Made home improvement                          Binary variable equal to one if an improvement was made to the respondent's home                    Last 2 years

                                                                          Income outcomes
Total income                                   Total household income (pesos)                                                                      Last month
Income from salaried and non-salaried jobs     Household income (pesos) from salaried and non-salaried jobs                                        Last month

Participated in an economic activity           Binary variable equal to one if the respondent had a business at the time of the survey or worked in -
                                               the last 30 days
Amount of remittances received                 Total remittances (pesos) received                                                                    Last 6 months
Income greater than or equal to expenses       Binary variable equal to one if after excluding a purchase of a house or a car or a big investment or Last 6 months
                                               debt, the respondent's income was greater than her expenses

                                                                         Other welfare outcomes
Depression index (higher = happier)       An index of a standard battery of 20 questions that ask about the respondent's mood and thoughts        At survey
                                          over the last week. The feelings and thoughts include: being bothered by things that do not
                                          normally bother you, having a poor appetite, not being able to shake off the blues even with
                                          support from friends and family, feeling just as good as other people, having trouble focusing,
                                          feeling depressed, feeling like everything required extra effort, being hopeful about the future,
                                          thinking your life was a failure, feeling fearful, having restless sleep, feeling happy, talking less
                                          than usual, being lonely, thinking people were unfriendly, having crying spells, enjoying life,
                                          feeling sad, thinking people dislike you, feeling like you couldn’t keep going on.


Job stress index (higher = less stress)   An index of three questions that ask about stress related to work over the last 30 days. The          At survey
                                          questions were answered on a five point scale. They included: Did you feel stressed by your job or
                                          economic activity? Did you find your job or economic activity prevented you from giving time to
                                          your partner or family? Did you feel too tired after work to enjoy the things you would like to do at
                                          home?
Locus of control index                    An index of five questions that ask about the respondent's feelings of control. The first four        At survey
                                          questions presented respondents with two phrases and they were asked which one they agree with
                                          the most. The choices were: What happens to me is my own doing vs. sometimes I feel that I dont
                                          have enough control over the direction my life is taking; when I make plans, I am almost certain
                                          that I can make them work vs. it is not always wise to plan too far ahead, because many things turn
                                          out to be a matter of good or bad fortune anyhow; in my case, getting what I want has little or
                                          nothing to do with luck vs. many times we might just as well decide what to do by flipping a coin;
                                          many times I feel that I have little influence over the things that happen to me vs. it is impossible
                                          for me to believe that chance or luck plays an important role in my life. The fifth question asked
                                          respondents on a five point scale how much they agreed with the following phrase: In the long run,
                                          hard work will bring you a better life.


Trust in institutions index               An index of 3 questions that ask about trust in government workers, financial workers, and banks        At survey
                                          on a five point scale from "complete distrust" to "complete trust"
Trust in people index                     An index of trust in family, neighbors, personal acquaintances, people just met, business               At survey
                                          acquaintances, people who borrow money and strangers on a five point scale from "complete
                                          distrust" to "complete trust" and a question about whether people would be generally fair.

Satisfaction (life and harmony) index     An index of one question about satisfaction with life on a five point scale from "very unsatisfied"     At survey
                                          to "very satisfied" and another about harmony with others on a five point scale from "very
                                          unsatisfied" to "very satisfied".
Satisfied with economic situation         A binary variable equal to one if the respondent said she was either "very satisfied" or "satisfied"    At survey
                                          with her economic situation on a five point scale.
Good health status                            A binary variable equal to one if the respondent said she her health was either "very good" or    At survey
                                              "good" on a five point scale.
Fraction of children 4-17 not working         The fraction of children in the household aged 4-17 who the respondent says are not working.      At survey

Participates in any financial decisions       A binary variable equal to one if the respondent reports participating in any financial decision   At survey
                                              making, based on a question that asked for how many financial decisions she participates in the
                                              decision making, allowing answers from "none" to "all" on a five point scale. The variable is only
                                              measured for married respondents living with another adult.
# of household issues she has a say on        The number of household issues (of 4) in which the respondent reports having some decision         At survey
                                              power on, including always making the decision, making the decision for herself, or if she makes
                                              the decision with another person, having some role in deciding disagreements. The variable is only
                                              measured for married respondents living with another adult.
# of household issues in which conflict arises The number of household issues (of 4) in which the respondent reports making the decision with   At survey
                                               another person and at least sometimes having a disagreement. The variable is only measured for
                                               married respondents living with another adult.
Appendix Table 3: Sample Sizes
Analysis                                                         Location                     Sample                                             Sample Size*
Balance                                                          Table 1, Panel A             Endline                                                          16,560
Balance                                                          Table 1, Panel B             Panel                                                             1,823
Takeup                                                           Table 2, Panel A             Endline                                                          16,560
Takeup                                                           Table 2, Panel B             Panel                                                             1,823
Average Intent to Treat Effects                                  Tables 3-7, Panel A          Endline                                                          16,560
Equality of Standard Deviations and Distributions                Tables 3-7, Panel A          Endline                                                          16,560
Average Likelihood of Increase/Decrease from Baseline            Tables 3-7, Panels B & C     Panel                                                             1,823


Quantile Treatment Effects - Business Outcomes                   Figure 3                     Endline business owners                                           3,957
Quantile Treatment Effects - All Other Outcomes                  Figures 4-6                  Endline                                                          16,560
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects by Prior Business Ownership,
Education, Location                                          Figures 7-9                      Endline                                                          16,560
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects - All Other Sub-Groups           Figures 10-16                Panel                                                             1,823


Attrition                                                        Appendix Table 1             Baseline                                                          2,912
Average Intent to Treat Effects for the Panel Sample             Appendix Figure 1            Endline                                                          16,560

Loans per client                                                 Appendix Figure 2            Treatment group in administrative data                            1,565



Sample by Outcome
Job stress                                                                                    Endline respondents with a business or job                        7,772
Fraction of children not working                                                              Endline respondents with children aged 4-17                      12,305
                                                                                            Endline respondents that are married and live
Intra-household decision power variables                                                    with another adult                                                  12,439
All other outcomes                                                                          Endline                                                             16,560
* Sample sizes refer to the maximum possible number of respondents within the sample. In particular parts of the analysis, the sample size will be smaller than shown
in this column because respondents may have answered "I don't know" or "No response" for the outcome in question.
                                   Appendix Figure 1: Average Intent−to−Treat Effects for the Panel Sample (compare to Figure 2)
   Credit & Other Financial Services
                                                                                                    Total #
                                                                                                        Total amount
                                                                                                                  # from Compartamos
                                                                                                                          Amount from Compartamos                                                         <<<
                                                                                         # from a moneylender or pawnshop
                                                               Amount from a moneylender or pawnshop
                                                             Formal credit is 1st choice for credit
                             Satisfied w/access to financial services (1/0)
                                                                   Member of informal savings group                              [ns]

   Business
                                                                                      Has a business
                                                                                Has ever owned a business
                                                                                             Used a loan to grow a business
                                                                                            Number of employees
                                                                                           Revenues in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                                Expenditures in the last 2 weeks                                                                       [ns]
                                                          Profits in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                  Household business income last month
                                         No financial problems managing business in the last year
   Income & Consumption
                                                                                         Total income
                                                   Income from salaried and non−salaried jobs
                                                                Participated in an economic activity
                                                                       Amount of remittances received
                                                                      Income greater than or equal to expenses
                                                                    Did not sell an asset to help pay for a loan
                                                                      Used a loan to buy any asset
                                       Amount spent on temptation goods in the last week
                                      Amount spent on groceries in the last 2 weeks
                                                                                               Nights did not go hungry
                                   Amount spent on school and medical expenses in the last year
                                                       Amount spent on family events in the last year
                                                                           [ns]                                                         Asset categories bought item from in the last 2 years
                                                                    Did not sell an asset                                                 [ns]
                                                                             Made home improvement
   Other Welfare
                                                                           Depression index (higher = happier)
                                                   Job stress index (higher = less stress)
                                                  Locus of control index                                                   <<<
                                                       Trust in institutions index
                                                                                   Trust in people index
                                                  Satisfaction (life and harmony) index                                                          <
                                                  Satisfied with economic situation
                                                                                                    Good health status
                                                                     Fraction of children 4−17 not working
                                                                                              Participates in any financial decisions
                                                                           # of household issues she has a say on
                                                              # of household issues in which conflict arises

−0.6               −0.5             −0.4             −0.3              −0.2              −0.1            0.0                0.1          0.2             0.3            0.4
       Effect size in standard deviations of the control group or in # of loans for the borrowing outcomes ("Total #", "# from Compartamos" and "# from a moneylender")
 This figure summarizes the treatment effects for the panel sample. Here treatment effects on continuous variables are presented in standard deviation units or in # of loans for the borrowing
 outcomes (Total #, # from Compartamos, and # from a moneylender or pawnshop). Each line shows the OLS point estimate and 90% confidence interval for that outcome.
 For some outcomes, we adjust the critical level following the Benjamini and Hochberg approach. In brackets, we then indicate whether the treatment effect is not significant [ns]
 at this level if it is significant at the unadjusted level. A > symbol on an end of a confidence interval signifies that this coefficient is greater than the same coefficient for the full sample.
 A < symbol means that it is less than in the full sample. The number of symbols reflects the significance of the difference using adjusted critical values.
 One p < .10, two < . 05 and three < . 01.
                                    Appendix Figure 2: Number of Compartamos Loans by Client
                         .3


                        .25
Proportion of clients




                         .2


                        .15


                         .1


                        .05


                         0
                              0      1     2      3     4      5  6   7     8   9 10 11                    12     13    14     15
                                                               Number of loans per client
                              The figure shows the distribution of number of loans per client for all clients in the administrative
                              data and in the treatment group (1,514). The loans are either joint liability loans, or individual
                              liability loans which clients can take out after successful completion of the first joint−liability loan
                              cycle.
