                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE SLOWDOWN IN THE ECONOMIC ASSIMILATION OF IMMIGRANTS:
                AGING AND COHORT EFFECTS REVISITED AGAIN

                                            George J. Borjas

                                         Working Paper 19116
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19116


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




I am grateful to Daniel Hamermesh, Lawrence Kahn, James Smith and Stephen Trejo for valuable
comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and to the MacArthur Foundation for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Slowdown in the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants: Aging and Cohort Effects Revisited
Again
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 19116
June 2013, Revised May 2014
JEL No. J24,J60,J61

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the evolution of immigrant earnings in the United States between 1970 and 2010.
There are cohort effects not only in wage levels, with more recent cohorts having lower entry wages
through 1990, but also in the rate of wage growth, with more recent cohorts experiencing less economic
assimilation. The slowdown in assimilation is partly related to a concurrent decline in the rate at which
the new immigrants add to their human capital stock, as measured by English language proficiency.
The data also suggest that the rate of economic assimilation is significantly lower for larger national
origin groups.


George J. Borjas
Harvard Kennedy School
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
                                                     2


              The Slowdown in the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants:
                      Aging and Cohort Effects Revisited Again

                                          George J. Borjas*

I. Introduction
        The economic impact of immigration ultimately depends on the skill composition of the
immigrant population. Not surprisingly, much of the research in the economics of immigration
focuses on examining the evolution of skills in the foreign-born workforce, both in terms of their
pre-existing human capital (which depends on the decision rule that selects the immigrants from
the population of the source countries) and in terms of the rate at which immigrants acquire
additional skills in the post-migration period.
        Beginning with Chiswick (1978), there has been a great deal of empirical research that
attempts to measure the extent of economic assimilation, defined as the rate of wage
convergence between immigrants and natives. The initial studies in this literature used cross-
section data sets to compare the age-earnings profiles of immigrants and natives, and typically
found a very rapid rate of wage convergence. Borjas (1985, 1995) emphasized that the cross-
section comparison may not properly measure the true rate of assimilation because there may be
substantial differences in earnings potential across immigrant cohorts. In fact, the Borjas studies
documented the presence of sizable “cohort effects”: newly arrived immigrant cohorts in the
United States (at least through 1990) had relatively lower entry earnings than earlier cohorts. Not
surprisingly, accounting for these cohort effects in wage levels substantially reduces the rate of
economic assimilation implied by the cross-section comparison.
        This paper uses data from the 1970-2010 decennial censuses to examine the evolution of
immigrant earnings in the United States. The long-term trends in the data clearly reveal a
potentially important new finding. There are cohort effects not only in the level of earnings, with
more recent cohorts having relatively lower entry wages (through 1990), but there also exist
cohort effects in the rate of growth of earnings, with more recent cohorts having a smaller rate of
economic assimilation than earlier cohorts. Immigrants who entered the country before the 1980s
typically found that their initial wage disadvantage (relative to natives) narrowed by 15
percentage points during their first two decades in the United States. In contrast, the immigrants
who entered the country after the 1980s have a much lower rate of wage convergence. In fact,
the evidence suggests that there has not been any economic assimilation for the cohorts that
entered the country in the 1990s.
        The paper evaluates a number of alternative hypotheses that may explain the onset of
these cohort effects in the rate of wage convergence. These hypotheses include the possibility
that changes in macroeconomic conditions affect the immigrant and native wage structures
differently, precluding the possibility of much earnings growth for immigrant workers; the
hypothesis that the changing national origin composition of the immigrant population may lead,
on average, to lower assimilation rates; the premise that the geographic settlement of newer
immigrant waves in different regions of the United States may have affected assimilation trends;

        *   Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, Harvard Kennedy School; Research
Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research; and Research Fellow, IZA. I am grateful to Edward Glaeser,
Daniel Hamermesh, Lawrence Kahn, Lawrence Katz, James Smith, and Stephen Trejo for valuable comments on an
earlier draft of this paper, and to the MacArthur Foundation for financial support.
                                                          3


and the possibility that the labor supply effects of the Great Recession generate selection biases
that differentially affect the rates of wage growth for immigrants and natives. The data
convincingly show that none of these factors can account for the severe decline in the rate of
assimilation.
        Instead, the analysis suggests that at least part of the decline in assimilation reflects a
detectable reduction in the actual rate of human capital accumulation. Although the available
data provides only limited information on the acquisition of human capital in the post-migration
period, the data reveal a concurrent decline in the rate at which the newer immigrant cohorts are
“picking up” English language skills. The cohorts that entered the country prior to the 1980s
typically experienced a 12-percentage point increase in their fluency rate during their first
decade, while the cohorts that entered the country after the 1980s show only a 4-percentage point
increase.
        Finally, the study identifies one factor that seems to explain part of the decline in the rate
of economic assimilation: the rapid growth in the size of specific national origin groups in the
United States. The rate of increase in English language proficiency is significantly slower for
larger national origin groups. As a result, the growth in the size of the groups accounts for about
a quarter of the concurrent declines in the rate of economic assimilation and the rate of human
capital acquisition.
        Given the potential significance of these findings, it is wise to interpret the results
cautiously. Although the evidence from the decennial census data is unambiguous, much further
analysis is required before we can assert conclusively that the economic assimilation of
immigrants slowed down dramatically in the past few decades. Perhaps most important, it is
crucial to replicate the findings in the context of longitudinal samples rather than the repeated
cross-sections available in census data. Nevertheless, if the evidence presented in this paper can
be confirmed in other data sets, the results suggest a hypothesis that is sure to attract widespread
interest: the more recent immigrant cohorts have fewer incentives to invest in U.S.-specific
human capital because the growth of the immigrant population makes those investments less
profitable than they once were, and those reduced incentives have slowed the rate of economic
assimilation.

II. Empirical Evidence on Aging and Cohort Effects
        It is instructive to begin by documenting the basic patterns revealed by the data over the
past few decades. Specifically, I use all available decennial census data between 1970 and 2000,
as well as the pooled 2009-2011 American Community Surveys.1 For expositional convenience,
I will often refer to the pooled ACS surveys as the “2010 census.” In each cross-section, the
sample consists of men aged 25-64 as of the time of the survey, who have between 1 and 40
years of labor market experience, worked at some point during the survey year, and are not
enrolled in school.2 In addition, the immigrant sample is restricted to persons who migrated to

         1 The 1970 Census cross-section represents a 3 percent random sample of the population obtained by
pooling the State, Metropolitan Area, and Neighborhood Form 1 files. The 1980-2000 cross-sections represent a 5
percent random sample, and the pooled 2009-2011 ACS represents a 3 percent random sample. The data were
downloaded from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) website in March 2013. All calculations
reported in this paper use the Census-provided sampling weights.
         2 The “survey year” refers to the calendar year prior to the census in the decennial census data, and to the
52-week period prior to the survey in the pooled ACS data. To calculate a worker’s years of experience I assume
that the age of labor market entry is 17 for high school dropouts, 19 for high school graduates, 21 for workers with
                                                           4


the United States after age 18.3 The dependent variable is the log weekly earnings of the worker,
where weekly earnings are defined by the ratio of total earned income to weeks worked.
       I estimate the following regression model in each of the census cross-sections:

(1)               log w = c + X  + ,

where w represents the weekly earnings of person  in cross-section  ; X is a vector of
variables giving the worker’s age introduced as a third-order polynomial; and c is a vector of
fixed effects indicating a specific immigrant cohort in the particular cross-section (with the
native fixed effect being excluded from the regression). Note that since the immigrant sample
only includes persons who migrated to the United States after they were 18 years old, the
tracking of specific cohorts across Censuses is not contaminated by the “late entry” in later
censuses of persons who migrated as children.
         Table 1 reports the estimated cohort fixed effects.4 An examination of these age-adjusted
wage gaps reveals two interesting findings. The first, which has received a great deal of attention
in the literature, is the existence of numerically sizable cohort effects in wage levels, with the
more recent cohorts having relatively lower earnings potential than earlier cohorts (through
1990). Consider, for example, the trend in the wage gap between the most recent cohort of
immigrants and natives in each cross-section. In 1970, the most recent immigrant wave earned
23.5 percent less than comparable natives. By 1990, the entry wag disadvantage had grown to
33.1 percent, before contracting to 27.3 percent in 2000.5 By 2010, however, the long-run trend
in level cohort effects seems to have returned, and the latest wave of immigrants earned almost
33 percent less than comparable natives. If we assume that changes in aggregate economic
conditions do not affect the relative wage of immigrants, the trend in the relative entry wage
across cross-sections can then be attributed to shifts in the relative skills of successive immigrant
cohorts.
         Define the rate of economic assimilation as the rate at which the wage gap between
immigrants and natives narrows over time. In addition to the cohort effects in wage levels, the
age-adjusted wage gaps reported in Table 1 suggest another interesting (and potentially
important) finding, one that has not yet been noted in the literature: there seems to have been a
“break” in the late 1980s in the rate of economic assimilation experienced by immigrants.
Specifically, the immigrants who arrived on or after 1985 experience far less economic
assimilation than earlier arrivals. Put differently, the data suggest the presence of cohort

some college, 23 for college graduates, and 24 for persons with a post-college education. A worker’s years of
experience is then given by the difference between age at the time of the survey and the age of entry into the labor
market.
         3A person is classified as “immigrant” if he is either a non-citizen or a naturalized citizen. All other
persons are classified as “natives.”
         4 The entry years of the cohorts defined in Table 1 are the ones that are easiest to identify consistently
across cross-sections. Note that the restriction that the sample consists of persons who worked in the survey year
implies that the immigrants must have arrived prior to the census year in the decennial census data.
         5Borjas and Friedberg (2009) analyze the uptick in the relative entry wage of the 1995-1999 cohort and
conjecture that it may be partly due to the temporary expansion of the high-tech H-1B visa program in the late
1990s.
                                                         5


differences not only in the level of immigrant earnings, but in the rate of growth of immigrant
earnings as well.6
        Suppose again that changes in aggregate economic conditions do not affect the relative
wage of immigrants. The cohort effects in the rate of economic assimilation can then be detected
by “tracking” a specific cohort across Censuses. Consider, for instance, the cohort that entered
the country between 1975 and 1979. The relative wage of this group improved from a
disadvantage of 31.4 percent at the time of entry in 1980, to 18.5 percent in 1990, and to 17.6
percent by 2000—a growth of about 14 percentage points over their first two decades in the
United States (with much of it occurring in the first 10 years). In contrast, the cohort that entered
the country between 1985 and 1989 earned 33.1 percent less than natives at the time of entry and
this wage disadvantage improved by only 4 percent points between 1990 and 2000, and by
another percentage point between 2000 and 2010. Finally, consider the cohort that entered the
country between 1995 and 1999. Their wage disadvantage stood at about 27 percent both in 2000
and 2010, so that this cohort experienced no relative wage growth whatsoever during their first
10 years in the United States.
        Figure 1 illustrates the substantive importance of the cohort effects in wage growth by
graphing the (normalized) wage gaps reported in Table 1. As the figure shows, there has been a
dramatic flattening in the slope of the (relative) age-earnings profile across subsequent
immigrant cohorts.
        The raw data, therefore, provide strong evidence of cohort effects in both the level and
rate of growth in immigrant earnings. It is well known that the separate identification of aging
and cohort effects raises difficult methodological problems in many demographic contexts.
Obviously, identification requires the availability of longitudinal data where a particular worker
is observed over time, or, equivalently, the availability of a number of randomly drawn cross-
sections so that the average member of a specific cohort can be “tracked” across survey years. It
is easy to construct a regression model that accounts for aging effects and cohort effects in both
wage levels and wage growth. To illustrate, suppose two cross-section surveys are available,
with cross-section   = 1, 2) being observed in calendar year T. Stack the data for immigrants
and natives across the cross-sections and consider the two-equation regression model:

(2a)    Immigrant earnings function:                 logw t = X t ji + a y t + bC +q( y t C )+ g i p 2 + e t .
(2b)    Native earnings function:                    logw t = X t jn + g n p 2 + e t ,

where C gives the calendar year in which the immigrant arrived in the host country; y gives
the number of years that the immigrant has resided in the host country (y = T - C); and 2 is
an indicator variable indicating if person  was drawn from cross-section .
       Since the vector X includes the worker’s age, the parameter  in the immigrant earnings
function measures the “excess” value of acquiring a year of experience in the United States, and
represents an aging effect; the coefficient  indicates how the earnings of immigrants are
changing across cohorts, and measures the cohort effect on the level of earnings potential; the

        6 Interestingly, Aydemir and Skuterud’s (2005) study of earnings trends in Canada also finds a break in the
rate of immigrant assimilation after 1990, but in the opposite direction. The post-1990 immigrants in Canada have
much lower entry earnings than earlier waves, but a faster rate of wage convergence.
                                                          6


coefficient  is positive or negative depending on whether more recent cohorts have a larger or
smaller rate of wage growth, capturing cohort effects in the rate of economic assimilation; and
the coefficients i and n give the impact of changes in aggregate economic conditions on
immigrant and native wages, respectively, and measure period effects. Although equations (2a)
and (2b) build in a simple parameterization of the aging and cohort effects, it is trivial to
incorporate a more general specification of these effects in empirical work.
        It is well known that the parameters measuring the aging, cohort, and period effects in
(2a) are not separately identified. The identification problem arises from the identity:

(3)               y t º T1 + p 2 (T2 - T1 )-C .

Equation (3) introduces perfect collinearity among the variables y, C, and 2 in the immigrant
earnings function. To identify the parameters of interest, therefore, not only is it necessary to
have a panel of data where immigrant cohorts or specific workers can be tracked over time, but
also impose some additional restriction that breaks the perfect collinearity in equation (3). Borjas
(1985) proposed the restriction that the period effects were the same for immigrants and natives:

(4)               i = n . 

Put differently, trends in aggregate economic conditions change immigrant and native wages by
the same percentage amount. A useful way of thinking about this restriction is that the period
effect for immigrants, i, is determined outside the immigrant-specific labor market.7
        The empirical analysis reported below expands the interactive framework suggested by
equation (2a) in several ways. First, the regression pools data from the five cross-sections
available between 1970 and 2010, so that the period effects are captured by a vector of fixed
effects indicating the cross-section from which a particular observation is drawn. Second, the
years-since-migration variable y is introduced as a third-order polynomial. Third, the continuous
calendar year of entry variable C is replaced by a vector of fixed effects indicating a “period” of
entry (i.e., the various entry cohorts defined in Table 1). Finally, the cohort effects in wage
growth are captured by interacting the linear term of the years-since-migration variable with each
of the period-of-entry fixed effects.8 Put differently, each entry cohort is allowed to have its own
growth path.
        The first column of Table 2 presents selected coefficients from the regression model,
Although the regression model contains the full set of cohort fixed effects listed in Table 1 (and
the interactions of these cohort fixed effects with the years-since-migration variable), I only



         7 For example, the value of the period effect n can be obtained by estimating the earnings function in the
native sample. The estimated coefficient can then be used to “solve out” the period effect from the immigrant
earnings function.
         8   For simplicity, the cohorts that entered the country prior to 1965 or after 2000 are pooled into two
separate groups when interacting with the years since migration variable. It is also possible to interact the higher-
order years-since-migration variables with the vector of cohort fixed effects, but these higher-order interactions add
little to the empirical analysis.
                                                          7


report selected coefficients that conveniently illustrate the direction and magnitude of the level
and growth cohort differences.9
         Note that the regression model produces estimates of the cohort differences in wage
levels that are closely aligned with the raw data in Table 1. For example, the regression model
predicts an entry wage disadvantage of 21.3 percent for the cohort that entered the country in the
late 1960s, while the raw data in Table 1 suggested a 23.5 percent wage disadvantage. Note also
that the regression model documents that the decline in entry wages stopped somewhere around
1990, and suggests that there may have been a slight rebound since then.
         To conveniently illustrate the trends in the rate of economic assimilation, I calculate the
extent to which the wage gap between immigrants and natives narrowed over their first decade in
the United States.10 The regression model reveals that the rate of economic assimilation began to
decline noticeably with the immigrant cohort that arrived in the 1980s. Immigrants who arrived
in the late 1960s could expect a 13-percentage point increase in relative earnings during their
first decade in the country. However, the assimilation rate of the immigrants who entered in the
late 1980s was about a third smaller (and the difference is statistically significant, with a t-
statistic of -13.9), while the assimilation rate of the immigrants who entered in the late 1990s was
close to zero.
         There are two potential explanations for this slowdown in the rate of wage convergence.
The first is that it represents a failure of the regression model to properly account for various
factors that may be leading to lower relative wages for immigrants in recent years and that have
nothing to do with the underlying process of human capital accumulation that is presumably the
defining feature of the economic assimilation process. The second is that it reflects a tangible
decline in the rate at which more recent immigrant waves accumulate marketable skills in the
post-migration period. Before proceeding to discuss the plausibility of the second hypothesis, it
is crucial to devote some effort to determining if the result “goes away” when the regression
model is confronted with various sensitivity tests that attempt to more properly account for the
evolution of wages in the native and immigrant populations.

     Period Effects
         Perhaps the most obvious explanation for the decline in the rate of economic assimilation
is that the period effects restriction in equation (4) is false. In other words, changes in
macroeconomic conditions differentially affect the earnings of immigrants and natives. It is well
known (Katz and Murphy, 1992; Lemieux, 2006) that the returns to skills dramatically increased
in the past few decades. Because the immigrant and native populations have a different skill mix,
the assumption that the period effects are the same “on average” may not capture the impact of
changing macroeconomic conditions on the two wage structures, biasing the estimates of the
aging and cohort effects.
         A straightforward way of allowing for differential period effects is to assume that the
restriction in equation (4) operates at the level of a particular skill group at a particular point in
time, rather than for the average immigrant and native worker at that point in time (Borjas, 1995;
Lubotsky, 2011). Put differently, the period effect restriction should be skill-specific: changes in

         9 The complete set of regression coefficients is available in the online appendix of the working paper
version of this paper (Borjas, 2013).
         10 The 10-year growth in the relative wage of immigrants is calculated by predicting immigrant and native
log earnings both at the time of entry, assumed to occur at age 25, and 10 years later.
                                                            8


macroeconomic conditions have the same proportionate impact on the wages of immigrants and
natives in a particular skill group.
         To examine the sensitivity of the results to the use of a skill-specific wage deflator, I
classify all workers into one of 40 narrowly defined skill groups (h) based on a worker’s
educational attainment and age.11 I use the 1970-2010 cross-sections to calculate the nominal rate
of wage growth experienced by native workers in each of these groups over the four-decade
period. Let h be the implied price index that can be used to deflate the wages of a worker in
skill group h and in cross section  calculated from the various Censuses.12 I then estimated the
regression model using the skill-specific deflator h to “solve out” the period effects from the
earnings functions in (2a) and (2b). The operational assumption, of course, is that period effects
are the same for natives and immigrants within a narrowly defined skill group.
         Column 2 of Table 2 shows that controlling for skill-specific period effects reduces the
rate of decline in the entry wage of immigrant cohorts. For example, the entry wage of the 1985-
1989 cohort is about 14 percentage points lower than that of the 1965-1969 cohort in the simpler
specification, but only 10 percentage points lower when the model adjusts for skill-specific
period effects. This finding is similar to that reported in Lubotsky (2011), who uses a structural
framework to estimate the changing price of skills over the period and concludes that changes in
the wage structure can account for about a third of the observed decline in entry earnings
typically associated with level cohort effects.13
         Note, however, that accounting for skill-specific period effects also implies that the
decline in “cohort quality” evident between 1965 and 1989 was effectively reversed in the
subsequent two decades. Table 2, in fact, suggests that the relative entry wage of the cohort that
arrived in 2005-2009 was essentially the same as that of the cohort that arrived in 1965-1970,
with both of these groups having a relative entry wage disadvantage of about 21 percent. As will
be seen below, these trends in relative entry wages are partially explained by the changing
national origin mix of the immigrant cohorts during the period.
         Although the trend in immigrant entry wages is sensitive to the period effects assumption,
the regression in column 2 shows that the finding of a decline in the rate of economic
assimilation is impervious to the use of skill-specific wage deflators. In particular, the growth
rate in the relative wage during the first decade is still about 5.0 percentage points lower for the
1985-1989 cohort (relative to the immigrants who entered in the late 1960s) and is not
significantly different from zero for the cohort that entered in the late 1990s.14
         The regression reported in column 3 of Table 2 controls for the variation in period effects
across skill groups in a more general way. Instead of solving out the period effects by using the

          11 Specifically, workers are classified into one of 5 education groups and into one of 8 age groups, for a
total of 40 skill groups. The five education groups are: high school dropouts, high school graduates, workers with
some college, college graduates, and workers with more than a college education. The eight age brackets are given
by: 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, and 60-64.
         12  Suppose that a particular cross-section is used as the baseline, then the implied price deflator for a
specific skill group in cross-section  would be given by j ht = wht / wh0 , where wht gives the mean earnings of
native workers in group h in cross section . The empirical analysis uses the 2000 cross-section as the baseline.
         13   See also Barth, Bratsberg and Raaum (2004).
         14 The t-statistic for the test of the difference in the 10-year relative growth rate between the 1965-1969
cohort and the 1985-1999 cohort is -22.3.
                                                          9


skill-specific wage deflators, the regression instead introduces the vector of 40 education-age
fixed effects as regressors. This adjustment method, of course, controls both for differential
period effects between immigrants and natives as well as for differences in skills among the
groups, so that the resulting estimates of aging and cohort effects are not directly comparable to
those that use the skill-specific wage deflators. Although adjusting for skill differences “flattens
out” the variation in entry wages across cohorts, the regression coefficients still reveal a
substantial decline in the rate of economic assimilation even within narrowly defined skill
groups.
        An alternative method of adjusting the data for skill-specific period effects is to define
the skill groups in terms of their placement in the (weekly) earnings distribution. In particular, I
classify all workers into one of 100 skill groups depending on the worker’s percentile ranking in
the native wage distribution.15 I then use the 1970-2010 cross-sections to measure the wage
growth experienced by each percentile of the earnings distribution, and calculate the implied
price index h that can be used to deflate the earnings of a worker in percentile ranking h and in
cross section . Note that the use of this particular wage deflator ensures that the variance of the
adjusted earnings distribution is constant over time. Column 4 of Table 2 shows that defining the
skill groups in terms of a worker’s percentile ranking produces results that closely resemble
those obtained from using the education-age wage deflators in column 2.16
        Finally, the last column of the table introduces a method that purges the data from any
potential contamination caused by differential period effects in the native and immigrant wage
distributions. In particular, I exploit the fact that, in each cross-section, the IPUMS provides a
consistently defined measure of the worker’s occupation using the 1990 occupational coding
scheme. I used the 1990 Census to calculate the average log weekly wage associated with each
occupation code.17 I then assigned each worker in the entire 1970-2010 pooled data this measure
of “occupational earnings” (i.e., the average 1990 log weekly wage in the occupation). By
construction, the change in the average occupational earnings of an immigrant cohort over time
can only be attributed to a shift in the occupational distribution of the group.
        Column 5 of Table 2 reports the estimated coefficients when the regression model uses
the worker’s log occupational earnings as the dependent variable. As in the regressions that use
the worker’s actual weekly earnings, the occupational earnings data suggest a decline in the
relative entry wage of immigrants through 1990 (with a very slight rebound in the past two
decades). The occupational earnings data also reveal a decline in the rate of “occupational
assimilation” experienced by the more recent immigrant cohorts. The immigrants who arrived in
the late 1960s experienced a 5-percentage point narrowing in the relative occupational wage
during their first decade in the United States. The extent of occupational assimilation declined to




         15 To minimize the potential problems caused by outlying or top-coded observations, the bottom 3 and top
3 percentiles are merged into two separate skill groups.
         16It would not be instructive to generalize this regression by adding the fixed effects indicating the
worker’s percentile as regressors since those fixed effects are essentially a nonlinear transformation of the dependent
variable.
          17 The calculation of the average log weekly wage in each occupation uses the sample of native men who
report a valid occupation code.
                                                          10


about 3 percent for the immigrants who entered in the late 1980s, and declined further to a
statistically insignificant one percent for those who entered in the late 1990s.18

    The Changing Composition of the Immigrant Population
        It is evident that accounting for differential period effects cannot explain why the rate of
economic assimilation declined so dramatically for the immigrant cohorts that entered the United
States after the mid-1980s. There are, however, two obvious “compositional” changes that could
potentially account for the declining assimilation rate. Specifically, the growth cohort effects
may be attributable to the changing national origin mix of immigrants or to changes in the
geographic sorting of immigrants across regions of the United States.
        It is well known that a substantial part of the decline in the entry wage of successive
immigrant cohorts through 1990 can be explained by the changing national origin mix of the
immigrant population (Borjas, 1992). The national origin mix of the immigrant workforce, of
course, is highly correlated with the skill composition of immigrant workers, and the changing
national origin mix (i.e., away from developed countries in Western Europe to developing
countries in Latin America and Asia) inevitably led to an immigrant population that was, on
average, relatively less skilled. It seems possible that the changing national origin mix influences
not only the wage level of the average immigrant, but the rate of growth in earnings as well.
        Table 3 examines if the changing national origin mix of immigrants can account for the
decline in assimilation rates. In particular, the second column of the table re-estimates the basic
regression model after including a vector of national origin fixed effects (using the three-digit
birthplace classification in the IPUMS that can be consistently defined between 1970 and
2010).19 Controlling for the changing national origin mix of immigrant by including a vector of
around 100 national origin fixed effects does, in fact, greatly attenuate the shifts in entry wages
observed across successive immigrant cohorts. Note, however, that the inclusion of national
origin fixed effects barely affects the estimated rates of assimilation. Even within national origin
groups, the 10-year growth in relative wages is around 10 percent for the late 1960s cohort,
around 7 percent for the late 1980s cohort, and slightly negative for the late 1990s cohort.
        The changing rate of assimilation could also be due to the changing geography of
immigrant settlement in the United States. Fewer immigrants are now settling in the traditional
immigrant-receiving states, and parts of the country where immigration was relatively rare
historically (e.g., Arkansas and Georgia) now receive large numbers of foreign-born workers.
This geographic diffusion could, in theory, alter the rate of economic progress of immigrants
because there are dramatic geographic differences in the industrial and occupational mix of jobs,
and these differences may stimulate or dampen the economic assimilation of newcomers.
Column 3 of Table 3 adds a vector of state-of-residence fixed effects to the regression model to
determine if the results are sensitive to controlling for geographic location. It is evident that the
inclusion of the state fixed effects does not alter any of the substantive findings.
        The last column of Table 3 adds the education-age fixed effects defined earlier as
regressors. The regression continues to reveal a substantial decline in the rate of economic

         18 The t-statistic for the test of the difference in the 10-year relative growth rate between the 1965-1969
cohort and the 1985-1999 cohort is -13.3.
         19  The IPUMS also provides a five-digit birthplace classification. I do not use the more detailed
classification because the national origin information provided by the 1970 Census data is less detailed than that
provided by subsequent censuses.
                                                          11


assimilation even within skill groups, within national origin groups, and within geographic areas
of settlement. In short, there does not seem to be a mechanical reason arising from changes in
sample composition that can easily explain the cohort differences in the rate of assimilation that
are so evident in the raw data.

     Selection into Employment
         As noted earlier, the “2010 census” data is drawn from the 2009-2011 pooled American
Community Surveys. The use of the 2009-2011 ACS data can be problematic since the wage
data in these surveys are likely to be contaminated by the substantial decline in work propensities
associated with the Great Recession. Put differently, the labor supply effects of the severe
economic downturn could generate selection biases that differentially affect the average wages of
immigrant and native workers.20
         The Great Recession had a particular adverse effect on the employment propensities of
natives. The fraction of native men aged 25-64 who worked at least one week in the survey year
declined from 90.8 percent in the 2000 census, to 89.6 percent in the pooled 2005-2007 ACS, to
86.1 in the pooled 2009-2011 ACS. In contrast, the fraction of immigrant men who worked at
least one week in the year was more stable during the period: 89.3 percent in the 2000 census,
93.5 percent in the pooled 2005-2007 ACS, and 91.4 percent in the pooled 2009-2011 ACS. The
relative decline in native employment propensities concurrent with the Great Recession could
potentially generate a spurious slowdown in the rate of economic assimilation since the
“surviving” natives in the workforce will likely have a higher average wage.21
         It is easy to document that the relative decline in native employment after 2008 cannot
account for the slowdown in the rate of economic assimilation. The simplest way of showing this
is to redefine what is meant by the “2010 census.” In particular, the availability of annual ACS
surveys (each comprising 1 percent of the population) suggests that I can re-estimate the
regression model by defining the pooled 2005-2007 ACS surveys as the “2010 census” cross-
section. This redefinition implies that the most recent data used in the empirical analysis was
collected before the precipitous decline in native employment propensities.22
         The second column of Table 4 shows that estimating the regression model using the
pooled 2005-2007 ACS as the alternative sample yields almost identical results to those obtained
when using the 2009-2011 ACS.23 The implied rate of economic assimilation experienced by the

        20 This point, of course, is related to the analogous discussion of how differential employment trends
between black and white workers affect the secular trend in the racial wage gap; see Butler and Heckman (1977) and
Neal (2004).
         21 It is important to add that there was a long-term, but similar, decline in the employment propensities of
immigrant and native men between 1970 and 2000. In 1970, 96.7 and 96.2 percent of immigrant and native men,
respectively, worked during the survey year. In 2000, the respective statistics are 90.3 and 89.3 percent. The
widening of the native-immigrant employment gap occurs mostly during the Great Recession.
         22 Although the employment rates implied by the variable used in the analysis (whether the person works
during the survey year) is somewhat stable across concurrent ACS and census surveys (e.g., in 2000), the
employment and unemployment rates implied by other variables (particularly those referring to activity during the
survey week) sometimes differ dramatically between the ACS, the decennial census, and the Current Population
Surveys. To address these inconsistencies, the Bureau of the Census recently changed the way in which it collects
employment information in the ACS (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2009).
         23 The regression that uses the 2005-2007 pooled ACS excludes the small sample of immigrants who
entered the United States after 2005. These immigrants have been in the country for only about a year by the time
                                                          12


various immigrant cohorts is roughly the same regardless of the data used. For example, the
relative wage of the 1975-1979 cohort grew by 8.6 percentage points in the first 10 years in
column 1 (which uses the 2009-2011 ACS), and by 8.9 percentage points in column 2 (which
uses the 2005-2007 ACS). Similarly, the relative wage of the 1995-1999 cohort grew by about 2
to 4 percentage points in the first 10 years regardless of which data set is used.24 In short, the
changing sample composition resulting from the relative decline in native employment cannot
account for the decline in the rate of economic assimilation experienced by the most recent
immigrant cohorts.
         In fact, the data can be used in a more judicious way to further document that
employment selectivity has little to do with the underlying trends in economic assimilation. I
have already introduced a variable giving the (log) occupational earnings of a worker by
assigning each worker the mean occupational earnings (measured as of 1990) of that worker’s
occupation at time t. It turns out that a person’s occupation is reported not only for the sample of
workers (i.e., persons who worked during the survey year), but also for persons who have
worked at any time in the prior 5 years.25 Hence it is possible to re-estimate the occupational
earnings regression by adding to the sample a large fraction of the men who were not working in
the survey year.
         Not surprisingly, a much greater and much more stable fraction of men aged 25-64
worked at some point in the prior 5 years, so that the changes in employment propensities across
data sets are far smaller when using this alternative employment measure. The fraction of native
men reporting an occupation, for example, declines from 94.8 percent in the 2000 Census, to
94.1 percent in the pooled 2005-2007 ACS, to 92.7 percent in the 2009-2011 ACS. Among
immigrants, the respective statistics are 95.0 percent, 96.3 percent, and 95.6 percent.
         The third column of Table 4 reproduces, for expositional convenience, the basic
regression using log occupational earnings in the sample of current workers first reported in
Table 2. Column 4 re-estimates the regression using the entire sample of persons who report an
occupation in each cross-section, so that the sample now includes all persons who worked at
some point in the prior 5 years. It is evident that the regression coefficients are similar to those
obtained in column 3. Most important, the regression still documents a significant decline in the
rate of economic assimilation over the first 10 years, from 5.1 percent for the 1965-1969 cohort
to 2.3 percent for the 1995-1999 cohort (and the difference is statistically significant with a t-
statistic of -7.5). Finally, column 5 re-estimates the regression using the 2005-2007 pooled ACS
as the data for the “2010 census,” so that there cannot be any impact of the Great Recession on
employment propensities. The regression coefficients reported in the last two columns of Table 4
are essentially identical.
         The evidence documented in Tables 2-4, therefore, suggest that it is unlikely that the
decline in the rate of economic assimilation can be attributed to differential period effects
between immigrants and natives, to compositional changes in the immigrant population, or to
selection effects resulting from differential rates of withdrawal from the labor force during the

they are observed in the ACS. The results presented in this section are essentially identical if the regression were re-
estimated including this sample of immigrants.
         24 In both regressions, there is a statistically significant difference between the rate of economic
assimilation experienced by the 1965-1969 and the 1995-1999 cohorts. The t-statistic in columns 1 and 2 are -4.5
and -3.9, respectively.
         25   The 1970 Census reports occupation for persons who have worked at any time in the past 10 years.
                                                           13


Great Recession. The evidence instead suggests that there may have been a tangible slowdown in
the rate at which immigrants accumulate human capital after they migrate to the United States.26

    Human Capital Acquisition
        In fact, the Census data itself shows that such a slowdown in human capital acquisition
may have occurred. The various surveys contain one variable that partially measures the
changing human capital stock of immigrants during the assimilation period—the attainment of
English language proficiency. Beginning with the 1980 Census, the data provides self-reported
information on each immigrant’s level of English proficiency. I use these data to define an
indicator variable set to unity if the immigrant speaks only English or speaks English very well. I
then estimated a descriptive regression model similar to that given by equation (1) to calculate
the age-adjusted English language proficiency rate of each immigrant cohort in each cross-
section.27 To ensure that it is possible to observe an increase in the rate of English language
proficiency, the sample excludes both natives and immigrants who originated in one of the
countries in the British “sphere of influence” where English is widely spoken by the foreign-born
population at the time of entry.28
        Table 5 reports the trends in the (age-adjusted) fraction of immigrants who are English-
proficient, both across cohorts and for a single cohort over time. Because the Census reports
English language proficiency for all persons, regardless of whether a person is working or not,
the trends on language proficiency can also be used to document the extent to which selection
into employment may be driving the underlying evidence. The top panel of the table reports the
trends in English language proficiency for the sample of men who worked during the survey
year, while the bottom panel reports the trends using the entire sample of men. A comparison of
the two panels shows that the trends are essentially identical regardless of the sample definition,
so that selection into employment plays little role in determining the observed rate of human
capital acquisition as measured by English language proficiency. I limit the discussion of the
evidence to the trends reported in Panel B.

         26  It is important to emphasize that the rate of economic assimilation that can be estimated from repeated
cross sections suffers from a potentially important flaw. In particular, a fraction of the immigrants in a particular
cohort are likely to return to their source countries (or migrate elsewhere), and the rate of economic assimilation is
necessarily calculated from a sample that contains all immigrants at the beginning of the period and only the
survivors at the end. Some studies in the literature use longitudinal samples to examine how non-random return
migration affects the rate of economic assimilation implied by the repeated cross-section method. Hu (2000) and
Lubotsky (2007), for example, employ datasets that match, at the individual level, demographic information from
(relatively small) census-type surveys with the complete earnings histories of workers maintained by the Social
Security Administration. These studies typically find that, at least in the pre-1990 period, the method of repeated
cross-sections overestimates the rate of economic assimilation. See also Beenstock, Chiswick, and Paltiel (2010) and
Duleep and Dowhan (2002).
         27   The regression includes the worker’s age, introduced as a third-order polynomial.
         28 The excluded countries are Canada, Bermuda, Belize-British Honduras, Jamaica, Antigua-Barbuda,
Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts-Nevis, St. Vincent, Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana/British Guiana,
the United Kingdom, Ireland, Northern Ireland, Liberia, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand. These countries
were selected because English was the modal language spoken at home by immigrants from these countries even at
the time of arrival. These countries account for 7.7 percent of all immigration and the fraction of newly arrived
immigrants originating in these countries who speak English very well is 97.0 percent. The sample includes persons
enrolled in school to capture the possibility that some of the English language investments are occurring in a formal
environment.
                                                           14


         There was a clear break in the extent to which a particular cohort “picks up” English
language skills beginning with the cohort that entered the United States around 1990. In
particular, 30.4 percent of the immigrants who arrived in the country between 1975 and 1980
were English proficient at the time of arrival, and this fraction increased to 42.4 percent (or a
12.0 percentage point increase) by 1990. The proportion of English-proficient immigrants in this
cohort increased further to 46.2 (another 4 percentage points) between 1990 and 2000.
         In contrast, even though the immigrants who entered the country between 1985 and 1989
had similar initial conditions in terms of English proficiency (31.7 percent were English
proficient at the time of arrival), the proficiency rate of this cohort increased by only about 4
percentage points during the first 10 years, far less than the 12 percentage increase experienced
by the 1975-1979 cohort. Finally, note that the English proficiency rate of the cohort that arrived
in 1995-2000 was essentially the same at the starting line (at 32.2 percent), but increased by only
three percentage points during their first decade in the United States.29 Figure 1 dramatically
illustrates the flattening in the slope of the age-language proficiency profile across subsequent
immigrant cohorts. In short, there seems to be a potentially important link between the slowdown
in the rate of economic assimilation and the slowdown in the rate at which immigrants acquire
human capital in the post-migration period.

IV. A Model of Human Capital Accumulation and Economic Assimilation
        The available evidence suggests that the observed decline in the rate of economic
assimilation is not a spurious finding resulting from changes in the wage structure, changes in the
demographic composition of the immigrant population, or selectivity issues related to the decline
in native employment propensities associated with the Great Recession. Instead, it seems to
reflect a significant slowdown in the rate at which immigrants accumulate human capital after
arriving in the United States. In order to identify the cause of the slowdown, therefore, it is useful
to derive the implications of a model of optimal human capital accumulation for the rate of
economic assimilation of immigrants.
        A two-period model of the life cycle provides a simple framework for thinking about
these questions.30 Let K be the number of efficiency units an immigrant acquired in the source
country. A fraction  of these efficiency units are specific to the source country’s labor market,
so that the worker’s marketable human capital in the post-migration period is E = (1 - K. Note
that the value of the depreciation parameter  provides a simple way for contrasting the
investment incentives faced by comparable immigrants and natives in the United States. The
typical native can sell all of his K efficiency units in the labor market, so that  = 0 for natives
and 0 <  < 1 for immigrants.
        An immigrant lives for two periods after migrating. During the investment period, the
immigrant devotes a fraction  of his human capital to the production of additional human
capital, and this investment increases the number of marketable efficiency units in the payoff


          29 The implicit assumption made in comparing the trends in the English language proficiency rate across
cross-sections is that there are no period effects. Since there is no native baseline, it is difficult to imagine which
deflator could be used to adjust the data.
         30The model presented below adapts the framework introduced in Borjas (2000). A more general theory
would jointly consider the human capital investment decision, the decision to emigrate, and the possibility that the
worker may reconsider the migration decision after “testing” the host country’s labor market.
                                                         15


period by g  100 percent. If the market-determined rental rate for an efficiency unit in the host
country is one dollar, the present value of the post-migration income stream is:

(5)               PV = (1 - ) K (1 - ) +  [(1 - ) K (1 + g)],

where  is the discounting factor.
       The human capital production function that generates the increase in the number of
marketable efficiency units is:

(6)               gE = (pK)a K b ,

with  < 1. The production function in (6) is a simple adaptation of the one in the classic Ben-
Porath (1967) model of human capital accumulation. In that framework, a worker produces
human capital by using part of his current human capital stock for the production of additional
efficiency units. In equation (6), the worker uses a fraction of his entire human capital stock (or
K) as an input in production. Therefore, even though part of the pre-existing human capital may
not be marketable in the United States, it is still useful in the production of additional human
capital.31 As an extreme example, an immigrant with highly specialized medical training may not
be able to market his skills in the U.S. labor market due to licensing restrictions. Nevertheless,
those skills do not entirely disappear; that knowledge is imbedded in the worker and would
certainly be useful in the production of additional human capital.
        As in the Ben-Porath model, the production function in equation (6) allows for the
possibility that the worker’s pre-existing human capital stock K is an independent input in the
production process. It may be the case, for instance, that immigrants with higher levels of pre-
existing human capital may be more efficient at acquiring additional human capital. It is
analytically convenient to rewrite the human capital production function as:

(7)               g = (1- d)-1 pa K a+b-1.

Equation (7) directly relates the rate of human capital accumulation of marketable skills (g) to
the fraction of efficiency units used for investment purposes (). Define “relative neutrality” as
the case where the rate of human capital accumulation of marketable skills is independent of the
initial level of human capital, so +  = 1. If  +  > 1, the rate of human capital accumulation
is positively related to initial skills, or “relative complementarity.” If +  < 1, there is a
negative relationship, or “relative substitutability.”32
         Workers choose the value of  that maximizes the present value of post-migration
earnings. The implied optimal rate of accumulation of marketable efficiency units in the post-
migration period is then given by:


         31 This formulation implies that πK units of human capital are “used up” in the production of additional
human capital. The marketable human capital available to sell in the U.S. labor market during the investment period
then equals (1 – δ)(K – πK) = (1 – δ)K(1 – π), as specified in equation (7).
        32 The special case of “relative neutrality” is, of course, analogous to the neutrality assumption in the Ben-
Porath model, where the marginal cost curve of producing human capital is independent of the worker’s initial stock.
                                                        16

                                         1
                            a                a+b-1
                                 æ 1 ö 1-a 1-a
(8)              g = (ar)  1-a
                                 çè      ÷ K       .
                                    1- d ø

If there is relative complementarity, highly skilled immigrants acquire more human capital; if
there is relative substitutability, the more skilled acquire less. Equation (8) also implies a positive
relation between the rate of human capital accumulation g and the depreciation parameter . In
fact, because  for native workers, the model implies that immigrants are accumulating
human capital at a faster rate than comparable natives. The intuition is obvious: For comparable
levels of “true” skills, immigrants face lower forgone earnings (a fraction  of the pre-existing
human capital is not marketable in the United States), and hence have a greater incentive to
acquire more skills. In short, the income-maximization hypothesis implies that immigrants
devote a larger fraction of their resources to investment activities than comparable natives.
Finally, equation (8) implies a positive relation between the rate of human capital accumulation
and the discounting factor . As a result, immigrants who discount their future U.S. earnings less
heavily (i.e., a higher ) would invest more.
        Let w be the rate of wage growth experienced by an immigrant in the United States. This
rate of wage growth is given by:33

                         æ (1- d)K (1+ g) ö
(9)              w = log ç                   » g + p.
                         è (1- d)K (1- p) ÷ø

It is easy to show that:

                 ¶w
(10a)                > 0,
                 ¶d
                      ¶w
(10b)            sign     = sign(a +b-1),
                      ¶K
                      æ ¶w        ¶w    ö
(10c)            sign ç         -       ÷ = sign(a +b-1).
                      è ¶K d>0 ¶K d=0 ø
                 ¶w
(10d)                > 0,
                 ¶r

        Equation (10a) shows that the predicted rate of wage growth in the United States is larger
for workers who have a larger . This result immediately implies that immigrants will experience
faster wage growth than comparable natives, so that optimal human capital investment behavior
predicts a positive rate of economic assimilation. Interestingly, the model generates a positive
rate of economic assimilation because, on average, immigrants are “different” from natives:
immigrants start their working life in the host country at a disadvantage (some of their skills have
depreciated because  > 0) and have an incentive to catch up. Equation (10a) also implies that

        33 The rate of economic assimilation is given by the difference between w and the rate of wage growth
experienced by comparable native workers (or w evaluated at δ = 0).
                                                          17


within the immigrant population, those immigrants originating in countries where the pre-
existing skills are least transferable to the host country will experience a faster rate of post-
migration wage growth.
        Equation (10b) implies that the sign of the correlation between the rate of wage growth
and the pre-existing human capital stock depends on whether there is relative substitution
between pre- and post-migration human capital ( + 0), or relative complementarity ( +
  1 > 0). Equation (10c) reports the analogous result in terms of the rate of economic
assimilation: high-skill immigrants assimilate faster only if there is relative complementarity in
the production of human capital.
        Finally, equation (10d) implies that immigrants who are less likely to discount their
future earnings in the U.S. labor market (i.e., have a higher ) will experience a higher rate of
wage growth. This result suggests, for example, that immigrants who face higher costs for return
migration will assimilate more quickly.

V. Determinants of Economic Assimilation
        The analysis uses the 1980-2010 census extracts described earlier.34 By definition, an
immigrant cohort now comprises a group of foreign-born persons who migrated to the United
States at age i, from country k, at a particular calendar time t.35 For each (i, k, t) cell, I calculate
the mean log weekly wage as well as the fraction of persons in the group who are English
proficient. The calculation of the mean log weekly wage uses the education-age deflator
introduced earlier to allow for differential period effects across skill groups. The wage growth
experienced by this cohort across censuses—relative to the wage growth experienced by a
comparably aged group of native workers over the same period—measures the rate of economic
assimilation for each cohort. The change in the rate of English proficiency across Censuses is
one measure of the volume of human capital investments undertaken in the post-migration
period.
        The empirical analysis uses the sample of immigrant men originating in the largest 80
sending countries. These countries accounted for 93.5 percent of the foreign-born workforce in
2000. The analysis uses three age-at-migration “windows” to construct the cohorts: persons who
were 25-34, 35-44, and 45-54 as of the time of arrival. The analysis also uses six year-of-arrival
groups: immigrants who arrived in 1970-1974, 1975-1979, 1980-1984, 1985-1989, 1990-1994,
and 1995-1999. The construction of the aggregate data ensures that the assimilation process is
being observed among immigrants who arrived in the United States as adults. Each (i, k, t) cohort
is then tracked over the first ten years after arrival by “jumping” to the next cross-section and
observing the now-older group at that point.
        It is well known that there are sizable wage differences across immigrants belonging to
different national origin groups. Not surprisingly, there are equally large differences in the rates
of economic assimilation and human capital accumulation. The first three columns of Table 6
report the first-decade wage growth experienced by immigrants in the 10 largest national origin



         34 The 1970 Census data is not used in this section because it lacks information on English language
proficiency and offers a much less detailed classification of country of origin than subsequent censuses.
        35 More precisely, the age-at-migration is given by the age of the immigrant at the time that he is first
enumerated in a U.S. Census.
                                                          18


groups who were 25-34 years old when they entered the country (relative to that experienced by
comparably aged natives).
        Chinese immigrants who arrived in the United States between 1995 and 1999
experienced a relative wage increase of 23.0 percentage points during their first 10 years in the
country. In contrast, the growth rate was -4.4 percent for Cuban immigrants, -6.3 percent for
Mexican immigrants, +10.2 percent for Filipino immigrants, and +11.6 percent for Indian
immigrants. Interestingly, all of these large national origin groups exhibit a decline in the rate of
assimilation between the cohorts that entered in the late 1980s and the late 1990s. Among
Indians, for example, the rate of assimilation for those who entered in the late 1980s was 13
percentage points greater than for those who entered in the late 1990s.
        The last three columns of Table 6 also reveal sizable differences in the rate of human
capital accumulation, as measured by the change in the English proficiency rate.36 For example,
the fraction of immigrants who speak English very well increased by 3.3 percentage points for
persons who migrated from El Salvador in the late 1990s. The respective growth rate is 1.3
percent for Mexican immigrants, 9.8 percent for Cuban immigrants, and 12.4 percent for Filipino
immigrants. In addition, most of the groups (7 out of 10) exhibit a decline in the growth rate of
English language proficiency between the cohorts that entered in the late 1980s and the late
1990s. The 10-year growth rate in English language proficiency fell from 3.2 to 1.3 percent for
Mexican immigrants, 15.6 to 9.8 percent for Guatemalan immigrants, and from 5.4 percent to 0.6
percent for Vietnamese immigrants.
        The human capital model presented in the previous section provides a useful framework
for thinking about (and interpreting) the cross-country variation in the rates of human capital
accumulation and economic assimilation, and for examining the extent to which changes in the
underlying determinants can account for the slowdown in economic assimilation. The model
isolates three variables that play a central role in the investment decision: the initial human
capital stock of the cohort (K); the degree to which the pre-existing skills of the cohort are
specific to the country of origin (); and the cohort’s discounting factor (). The empirical
analysis presented below attempts to determine if empirical proxies for these variables can
explain the disparity in assimilation rates documented in Table 6.
        Consider initially the determinants of the rate of economic assimilation. The regression
model is given by:

(11)               log wik(t) = i + t + Zk(t)  + ,

where  log wik(t) gives the 10-year change in the log weekly wage of a cohort of immigrants
who arrived in the United States at age i, from country k, at time t relative to the wage growth
experienced by comparably aged natives during the same decade; Z is a vector of country
specific characteristics that may determine the rate of economic assimilation; and i and t are
vectors of fixed effects that absorb any age- and year-of-arrival-specific factors. The excluded
year-of-arrival fixed effect indicates if the immigrant cohort arrived in the United States between
1975 and 1979, so that the cohort fixed effects measure the rate of assimilation relative to this
cohort.


          36 The English language proficiency rates are calculated in the sample of all men in the relevant cohort
(rather than just workers).
                                                         19


         I first estimate a regression model that only includes the two vectors of fixed effects as
regressors. Not surprisingly, the first column of Table 7 reports sizable cohort differences (i.e.,
the values of t) in the rate of economic assimilation. Specifically, the assimilation rate of the
cohort that arrived in the late 1990s is 9.4 percentage points lower than that of the cohort that
arrived in the late 1970s. Although the table only reports the estimated cohort fixed effects for
two of the cohorts, it is worth emphasizing that the regression includes the entire vector of t.
         The empirical analysis uses the cohort’s average years of educational attainment
(measured at the time of arrival) to approximate for the pre-existing human capital stock K. The
second column of Table 7 shows that this variable has a strong positive impact on the rate of
economic assimilation. Each additional year of education increases the (relative) rate of wage
growth by 0.6 percentage points. The evidence, therefore, supports the conjecture of relative
complementarity in the production of human capital: more skilled immigrants invest more in
U.S.-specific human capital and experience a higher rate of economic assimilation subsequently.
         The regression in column 2 also includes a variable measuring the log per-capita GDP in
the country of origin at the time of migration.37 It is well known that there exists a strong positive
correlation between immigrant earnings and per-capita GDP in the source country. This
correlation is typically explained by arguing that the skills of immigrants from high-income
countries are more easily transferable to the U.S. labor market, so that per-capita GDP may be an
inverse proxy for the rate of depreciation . Table 7 shows that the per-capita GDP variable has a
negative impact on relative wage growth. The negative effect is consistent with the theoretical
prediction. Holding initial skills constant, the immigrants who can most easily transfer their
skills from one industrialized economy to another are also the immigrants who find it most
expensive to invest in the post-migration period.
         Note, however, that controlling for the cohort’s educational attainment and per-capita
GDP of the country of origin does not “explain” the decline in assimilation rates observed across
cohorts. The cohort that entered the country in the late 1990s is still predicted to have a rate of
assimilation that is 9.1 percentage points lower than that of the cohort that entered in the late
1970s.
         The third column of Table 7 adds variables that proxy for the discounting factor . First,
immigrants originating in countries that are at least 3,000 miles away from the United States
have a faster rate of assimilation (although the coefficient is not statistically significant). One
potential explanation is that these immigrants face a higher cost of return migration, so that they
are less likely to discount their future earnings in the United States. Similarly, the regression
includes a civil liberties index constructed by Freedom House (2011).38 Immigrants from
countries with repressive regimes have a larger rate of economic assimilation, presumably again
because they are less likely to engage in return migration and do not heavily discount their future
earnings in the United States. Note, however, that the inclusion of these additional variables in
the regression model does not explain the lower assimilation rate of the cohort that arrived in the


        37 The per-capita GDP variable is drawn from the Penn World Table (Heston et al. 2012) and gives the
(PPP-adjusted) real per-capita GDP at the start of the five-year period that defines a year-of-entry cohort.
         38 Freedom House (2011) constructs an index of civil liberties annually for each country in the world. The
index ranges from 1 to 7, with seven being assigned to the countries with the most oppressive regimes. The variable
used in the regression classifies a country as “repressive” if the index is 4 or greater, and is evaluated during the
decade when the immigrant cohort arrived.
                                                             20


United States in the late 1990s. The relative decline experienced by this cohort stands stubbornly
at 9.3 percentage points.
        The payoff for immigrants to learning the English language (and perhaps engaging in
other forms of U.S.-specific human capital investments) likely depends on the frequency with
which they will use those skills in their everyday interactions (Lazear, 1999). Immigrants who
find relatively few of their compatriots living in the United States typically have a stronger
incentive to make the U.S.-specific investments that will allow a wider range of social and
economic exchanges. In contrast, immigrants who enter the country and find a large welcoming
ethnic enclave have much less incentive to engage in these types of investments since they will
find a large market for their pre-existing skills.
        The human capital model presented in the previous section defines the human capital
stock that an immigrant can market in the United States as (1 – )K. It is easy to imagine that the
fraction of the human capital stock that survives in the post-migration period depends on the size
of the “audience” that will value the cohort’s skills in the United States. An increase in the pre-
existing size of the national origin group likely implies that a larger fraction of the skills of new
immigrant arrivals will survive the move.
        I use two variables to test the hypothesis that “group size” influences the cohort’s rate of
assimilation. The first is the “effective” number of immigrants from that country who already
reside in the United States, where the effective size of national origin group k gives the expected
number of immigrants that a randomly chosen newcomer from that country can potentially
interact with in the marketplace. Obviously, the effective size of a national origin group depends
not only on the actual size of the pre-existing group of immigrants, but on their geographic
distribution as well. After all, for any given stock, economic and social exchanges are far more
likely to occur if type-k immigrants cluster in a small number of localities. Let skr(t) be the share
of pre-existing immigrants from group k who reside in state r at time t, and Nkr(t) be the number
of such immigrants. The expected number of type-k immigrants that “surround” a randomly
chosen newcomer can then be defined by:39

(12)               N k (t) = å skr (t)N kr (t).
                               r


        The second variable gives the “effective” number of immigrants who are in the same
linguistic group, where a linguistic group is defined by the set of immigrants who share the same
mother tongue.40 Suppose immigrants from country k are in linguistic group g, and that there are
Agr(t) pre-existing immigrants from that linguistic group residing in state r. The effective number
of linguistically compatible immigrants is then given by:

(13)               Ak (t) = å skr (t)Agr (t).
                              r




         39It is easy to show that N k (t) = N k (t) H k (t) , where Nk(t) is the total size of the national origin group and
H is the Herfindahl index measuring the geographic clustering of type-k immigrants.
         40 A country’s “mother tongue” is defined as the language that most newly arrived immigrants from that
country speak at home.
                                                          21


To an important extent, the variable measuring the size of the linguistic group differs from the
variable measuring the size of the national origin group only for Hispanic immigrants. The size
of the national origin group within the Hispanic population may be small in some cases (e.g.,
immigrants from Ecuador), but the size of the linguistic group is much larger because there exists
a numerically sizable audience with whom Hispanic immigrants can use their pre-existing
language skills to frequently and cheaply carry out social and economic exchanges.41
        Column 4 of Table 7 introduces the vector (N k , Ak ) into the cross-country regression and
shows that the effective size of the national origin group has a strong negative effect on the rate
of economic assimilation, but the impact of the size of the linguistic group, although negative, is
numerically weaker and insignificant.42 The magnitude of the impact of “own” group size on
economic assimilation is sizable: If the size of the effective group increases by 1 million persons,
the rate of economic assimilation falls by 3.8 percentage points.43 Equally important, the
introduction of these variables “nudges” the size of the cohort effects. After controlling for group
size, the relative decline in the rate of economic assimilation experienced by the cohort that
entered in the late 1990s falls from 9.3 to 7.2 percentage points. In other words, the increasing
size of the immigrant national origin group accounts for about 20 percent of the decline in the
rate of economic assimilation. It seems, therefore, that the increasing size of immigrant groups is
correlated with the decline in the rate of economic assimilation observed across successive entry
cohorts.44
        To demonstrate the link between the determinants of the rate of economic assimilation
and the rate of human capital acquisition, I estimated a similar set of cross-country regressions
using the growth rate in the fraction of the group that is English proficient as the dependent
variable. More precisely, I estimate the regression model in equation (13) using the dependent
variable  pik(t), which gives the 10-year change in the probability that immigrants who arrived
in the United States at age i, from country k, at time t speak only English or speak English very
well.
        To ensure that the growth rate in English proficiency is a sensible measure of human
capital accumulation for the immigrant cohort, I limit the regression to cohorts originating in
countries outside the British “sphere of influence,” so that, at least in principle, there could have

         41 The calculation of the variables Nkr(t) and Agr(t) only use immigrants who arrived prior to the cohort
that entered the country in year t. The geographic sorting of type-k immigrants is obtained from the census cross-
section in which the immigrant cohort is first enumerated. These statistics are calculated using the entire population
of native- and foreign-born persons, regardless of age.
         42 I also estimated regression specifications that separated the two components of the effective size of a
group. Both the actual size of the group and the group’s Herfindahl index tend to have negative effects on the rate of
economic assimilation. The coefficients in the specification analogous to that reported in column 4 of Table 7 are:
national origin group size: -.012 (.004); linguistic group size: -.004 (.002); Herfindahl index: -.168 (.070). In
addition, the coefficient measuring the fixed effect for the 1995-1999 entry cohort is -.065 (.021).
        43 For the cohort that arrived between 1995 and 2000, there were 113,000 “effective” immigrants from
Jamaica; 301,000 from the Philippines; 389,000 from Cuba; and 1.8 million from Mexico.
         44  It could be argued that the size of the national origin group may be reflecting a labor demand effect: the
wage falls as the group’s size increases. Note, however, that the neoclassical labor demand model would imply that
it is the change in the size of the group that leads to a change in the wage. The regressions reported in Table 7
conduct a different conceptual experiment, correlating the future change in the wage with the pre-existing size of the
group.
                                                          22


been an increase in the English language proficiency rate of the immigrant cohort. This
restriction reduces the number of countries in the data from 80 to 69.
         Table 8 summarizes the regression results. The first column again reports the coefficients
of the cohort fixed effects t. It is evident that the immigrants who entered the country in the late
1980s or 1990s have around a 7-percentage point lower rate of increase in the English
proficiency rate than those who entered in the late 1970s. As the second column of Table 8
shows, the group’s initial human capital (as measured by educational attainment) has a positive
impact on the rate of English language acquisition. Each additional year of pre-acquired
education increases the growth in the English proficiency rate by nearly 1 percentage point. The
evidence, therefore, again supports the conjecture of relative complementarity in the production
of human capital.
         Finally, as the regression in the last column shows, the inclusion of the group size
variables attenuates the magnitude of the cohort effects in the rate of human capital
accumulation.45 Note that the (national origin) group size variable has a strong negative effect: a
one million-person increase in the size of the effective national origin group reduces the growth
rate in English proficiency by 5.0 percentage points. The size of the linguistic group again has a
negative, but weaker, effect. Finally, the coefficient of the relative cohort effect for the
immigrants who entered in the late 1990s declines from -7.2 percent to -4.8 percent, so that the
increasing size of the effective national origin group (and presumably the corresponding
reduction in the incentives to invest in human capital) accounts for about a third of the decline in
the rate of human capital investments across the cohorts.46
         It is easy to demonstrate that the results are not driven solely by the remarkable growth of
Hispanic immigration in the United States. Table 9 reports selected coefficients when the
regressions exclude either Mexican immigrants (in Panel A) or all Hispanic immigrants (in Panel
B). Since Mexicans account for nearly a third of all immigrants in the United States and the
regressions are (approximately) weighted by the sample size of a cohort, the massive size of the
Mexican cohorts could easily be distorting the results. As the coefficients reported in Panel A
show, however, the evidence is generally robust to the exclusion of Mexican immigrants from
the analysis.
         Panel B of the table goes a step further and excludes all Hispanic immigrants. The sample
of 80 countries of origin now becomes a sample of 62 countries in the regressions on the rate of
economic assimilation, and of 51 countries in the regressions on the rate of language acquisition

         45  I also estimated country-level regression models using the rate of “occupational assimilation” introduced
earlier as the dependent variable. The coefficients from these regressions tell a consistent story. In particular, the
coefficient of the 1995-1999 cohort effect in column 3 is -.016 (.007), and falls to -.006 (.009) when the group size
variables are included. The coefficients of the group size variables are: effective size of national origin group: -.009
(.006); effective size of linguistic group: -.010 (.007).
         46  The regression results reported in Tables 8 and 8 can be interpreted as reduced-form coefficients from a
structural model that relates the rate of economic assimilation to the rate of human capital accumulation. The key
coefficient in the structural model would measure the rate of return to English proficiency. Unfortunately, none of
the country-specific variables used in the reduced-form regressions provide valid instruments to estimate the
structural parameter. The rate of wage growth in the model of human capital accumulation presented earlier is given
by w = g + p , where g is the rate of human capital accumulation and  measures the fraction of human capital freed
up for labor market uses as the individual ages. Both g and  depend on all the key parameters of the model (i.e., the
initial human capital stock, K; the depreciation rate, ; and the discounting factor, ). Hence none of the country-
specific variables that proxy for these underlying parameters can be a valid instrument in a regression of w on g.
                                                         23


(since these regressions also exclude countries in the British sphere of influence). The results are
somewhat robust to this major specification change. In view of the evidence reported in previous
sections, it is not surprising that there is a slowdown in both the rate of assimilation and the rate
of language acquisition even among non-Hispanic immigrants. However, it seems that group size
plays a weaker role in accounting for the decline in the rate of human capital acquisition.
        In sum, the regressions consistently identify one factor—namely, national origin group
size—that is partly responsible for the observed decline in the rate of economic assimilation. As
a result, the evidence suggests a potentially important hypothesis that is certain to become the
focus of much research: the more recent immigrant cohorts have fewer incentives to invest in
U.S.-specific human capital because the growth of the immigrant population makes those
investments less profitable than they once were, and those reduced incentives have slowed the
rate of economic assimilation.47

VI. Summary
         This paper uses data drawn from the 1970-2010 decennial U.S. censuses to document and
examine the long-run trends in immigrant earnings over the past few decades. Perhaps the main
finding of the paper is that there are cohort effects not only in the entry wage of immigrants, with
more recent cohorts having relatively lower entry wages, but there are also cohort effects in the
rate of growth of earnings, with more recent cohorts having a much smaller rate of economic
assimilation.
         The crucial question, of course, is whether the decline in the rate of wage convergence
represents a “true” decline in the rate of human capital accumulation or a spurious correlation
caused by other factors. The analysis reported in this paper conducted a number of sensitivity
tests to establish that the decline in the rate of economic assimilation was not due to the
possibility that: (1) period effects change the wage structures of immigrants and natives
differently; (2) the changing national origin composition of immigrants may lead to an
immigrant population where the “average” immigrant is now less likely to assimilate; (3) the
changing geographic settlement of immigrants in the United States has reduced the assimilation
rate of the typical immigrant; and (4) the employment effects of the Great Recession generate
selection biases that differentially contaminate the growth rate of average earnings for
immigrants and natives.
         Instead, the data seem to suggest that at least part of the decline in assimilation reflects a
measurable reduction in the actual rate of human capital accumulation. In particular, the more
recent immigrant cohorts are improving their English language skills at a far slower rate than
earlier cohorts. In fact, the study identifies one factor that seems to explain part of the decline in
both the rate of economic assimilation and the rate of English language acquisition: the rapid
growth in the size of specific national origin groups in the United States. New immigrants are
less likely to assimilate and to invest in human capital the larger the pre-existing size of the
national origin group in the United States. The growth in the size of national origin groups

         47  It would be interesting to examine the trends in other types of human capital investments undertaken by
the immigrant workforce. After all, English language proficiency only plays a limited (though important) role in
determining the value of the stock of marketable human capital. The decennial censuses contain one other variable
(i.e., educational attainment) that could be used to examine such trends. Unfortunately, the coding of the education
variable changes capriciously from one census to the next. As a result, it cannot be used to construct a consistently
defined measure of “average years of education” that could be differenced within a cohort to measure the volume of
educational investments.
                                                24


accounts for about a quarter of the decline in the rates of human capital acquisition and economic
assimilation.
        Because of the potential significance of the evidence, it is prudent to conclude by
stressing the need for caution in the interpretation of the findings and the need for replication of
the results before we can unequivocally assert that the trends revealed by the Census data
describe an important part of the immigrant experience in the U.S. labor market. Moreover,
although the analysis conducted a large number of sensitivity tests to determine if the decline in
economic assimilation arises “spuriously,” I suspect that many other such tests can be (and
should be) designed and carried out. It is obviously important to determine precisely the extent to
which the earnings trends reported in this paper can be attributed to concurrent changes in the
rate of human capital acquisition.
                                               25


                                          References

Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. A nation of immigrants:
Assimilation and economic outcomes in the age of mass migration. Stanford University.

Antecol, Heather, Peter J. Kuhn, and Stephen J. Trejo. 2006. Assimilation via prices or
quantities? Sources of immigrant earnings growth in Australia, Canada, and the United States.
Journal of Human Resources 41: 821-840.

Aydemir, Abdurrahman, and Mikal Skuterud. 2005. Explaining the deteriorating entry earnings
of Canada’s immigrant cohorts, 1966–2000. Canadian Journal of Economics 38: 641-672.

Baker, Michael, and Dwayne Benjamin. 1994. The performance of immigrants in the Canadian
labor market. Journal of Labor Economics 12: 369–405.

Barth, Erling, Bernt Bratsberg and Oddbjørn Raaum. 2004. Identifying earnings assimilation of
immigrants under changing macroeconomic conditions. Scandinavian Journal of Economics
106: 1-22.

Beenstock, Michael, Barry R. Chiswick, and Ari Paltiel. 2010. Testing the immigrant
assimilation hypothesis with longitudinal data. Review of the Economics of the Household 8: 7-
27.

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings.
Journal of Political Economy 75: 352-365.

Borjas, George J. 1985. Assimilation, changes in cohort quality, and the earnings of immigrants.
Journal of Labor Economics 3: 463-489.

Borjas, George J. 1992. National Origin and the Skills of Immigrants in the Postwar Period. In:
George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the work force: Economic
consequences for the United States and source areas, 17-47. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Borjas, George J. 1995. Assimilation and changes in cohort quality revisited: What happened to
immigrant earnings in the 1980s? Journal of Labor Economics 13: 201-245.

Borjas, George J. 2000. The economic progress of immigrants. In: George J. Borjas, ed., Issues
in the economics of immigration, 15-49. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Borjas, George J. 2013. The Slowdown in the Economic Assimilation of Immigrants: Aging and
Cohort Effects Revisited Again. NBER Working Paper No. 19116.

Borjas, George J., and Rachel M. Friedberg. 2009. Recent trends in the earnings of new
immigrants to the United States. NBER Working Paper no. 15406.
                                               26


Butler, Richard and James J. Heckman, 1977. “The Government’s Impact on the Labor
Market Status of Black Americans: A Critical Review,” in Equal Rights and Industrial
Relations, Leonard J. Hausman et al. (Eds.). (Madison, WI: Industrial Relations Research
Association): 235-281.

Chiswick, Barry R. 1978. The effect of Americanization on the earnings of foreign-born men.
Journal of Political Economy 86: 897-921.

Chiswick, Barry R. 1986. Is the new immigration less skilled than the old? Journal of Labor
Economics 4:168-192.

Chiswick, Barry R., and Paul W. Miller. 1999. English language fluency among immigrants in
the United States. Research in labor economics 17: 151-200.

Chiswick, Barry R., and Paul W. Miller. 2005. Linguistic distance: A quantitative measure of the
distance between English and other languages. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural
Development 26: 1–11.

Douglas, Paul H. 1919. Is the new immigration more unskilled than the old? Journal of the
American Statistical Association 16: 393-403.

Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, and Daniel J. Dowhan 2002. Insights from longitudinal data on the
earnings growth of U.S. foreign-born men. Demography 39: 485-506.

Duleep, Harriet Orcutt, and Mark C. Regets. 1997. Immigrant entry earnings and human capital
growth: Evidence from the 1960–1980 censuses. Research in Labor Economics 16: 297-317.

Edin, Per Anders, Robert J. LaLonde, and Olof Åslund. 2000. Emigration of immigrants and
measures of immigrant assimilation: Evidence from Sweden. Swedish Economic Policy Review
7: 163–204.

Freedom House. 2011. Freedom in the world 2011: Tables, graphs, and other supporting
documents. Washington, DC: Freedom House.

Funkhouser, Edward, and Stephen J. Trejo. 1995. The labor market skills of recent male
immigrants: Evidence from the Current Population Survey. Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 48: 792-811.

Green, David A. 1999. Immigrant occupational attainment: Assimilation and mobility over time.
Journal of Labor Economics 17: 49-79.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2009. Cultural biases in economic exchange.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124: 1095–1131.
                                               27


Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten. 2012. Penn world table version 7.1.
Philadelphia, PA: Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the
University of Pennsylvania.

Hu, Wei-Yin. 2000. Immigrant earnings assimilation: Estimates from longitudinal data.
American Economic Review 90: 368-372.

Isphording, Ingo E., and Sebastian Otten. 2012. The costs of Babylon: Linguistic distance in
applied economics. Ruhr Economic Paper no. 337.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy. 1992. Changes in the wage structure, 1963-87:
Supply and demand factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 35-78.

LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel. 1992. The assimilation of immigrants in the U.S. labor
market. In: George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the work force:
Economic consequences for the United States and source areas, 67-92. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Lazear, Edward P. 1999. Culture and language. Journal of Political Economy 107: S95-S126.

Lemieux, Thomas. 2006. Increasing residual wage inequality: Composition effects, noisy data, or
rising demand for skill? American Economic Review 96: 461-498.

Lubotsky, Darren. 2007. Chutes or ladders? A longitudinal analysis of immigrant earnings.
Journal of Political Economy 115: 820-867.

Lubotsky, Darren. 2011. The effect of changes in the U.S. wage structure on recent immigrants’
earnings. Review of Economics and Statistics 93: 59-71.

Neal, Derek. 2004. “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap among Women is Too Small,”
Journal of Political Economy 112 (February): S1-S28.

Schoeni, Robert F. 1997b. New evidence on the economic progress of foreign-born men in the
1970s and 1980s. Journal of Human Resources 32: 683–740.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2009. Changes to the American Community Survey between 2007
and 2008 and the Effect on the Estimates of Employment and Unemployment. Washington, DC.
                                                                         28


                                    Figure 1. Aging profile for the relative wage of immigrants, by cohort

                            0.25

                                                                         1965-69 arrivals
                            0.20
                                                                                                 1975-79 arrivals
  Rela ve log weekly wage




                            0.15


                            0.10
                                                                     1985-89 arrivals

                            0.05

                                                      1995-99 arrivals
                            0.00


                            -0.05
                                    0           5           10                15            20            25        30
                                                                 Years since migra on


Notes: The aging profiles are obtained from the data reported in Table 2. The relative log weekly wage of each
immigrant cohort is normalized to zero at the time of entry.
                                                                                29


                                                Figure 2. Aging profile of English language proficiency, by cohort

                                         0.20

                                                                                            1975-79 arrivals
  Rate of English language proficiency




                                         0.15




                                         0.10
                                                                                                        1985-89 arrivals



                                         0.05

                                                                         1995-99 arrivals

                                         0.00
                                                0          5           10            15          20               25       30
                                                                            Years since migra on


Notes: The aging profiles are obtained from the data reported in Table 6. The rate of English language proficiency of
each immigrant cohort is normalized to zero at the time of entry and is calculated in then sample of immigrants
originating in countries outside the British sphere of influence.
                                                         30



              Table 1. Age-adjusted relative weekly earnings of immigrant cohorts,
                                     by census cross-section


        Cohort:                               1970         1980          1990         2000          2010
         2005-2009 arrivals                    ---          ---           ---          ---          -.326
                                                                                                   (.004)
          2000-2004 arrivals                   ---            ---         ---           ---         -.349
                                                                                                   (.003)
          1995-1999 arrivals                   ---            ---         ---          -.273        -.278
                                                                                      (.004)       (.001)
          1990-1994 arrivals                   ---            ---         ---          -.269        -.271
                                                                                      (.003)       (.003)
          1985-1989 arrivals                   ---            ---        -.331         -.269        -.259
                                                                        (.001)        (.002)       (.005)
          1980-1984 arrivals                   ---            ---        -.285         -.236        -.206
                                                                        (.001)        (.002)       (.006)
          1975-1979 arrivals                   ---          -.314        -.185         -.176        -.134
                                                           (.001)       (.001)        (.005)       (.004)
          1970-1974 arrivals                   ---          -.223        -.124         -.128        -.053
                                                           (.001)       (.002)        (.006)       (.004)
          1965-1969 arrivals                  -.235         -.122        -.020         -.014        .205
                                             (.001)        (.001)       (.003)        (.005)       (.010)
          1960-1964 arrivals                  -.058         -.041        .046          .074          ---
                                             (.001)        (.001)       (.004)        (.004)
          1950-1959 arrivals                  .037          .032         .100          .147          ---
                                             (.001)        (.001)       (.003)        (.010)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the cohort level. The age-adjusted wage
differentials between each immigrant cohort and natives are calculated from a regression estimated separately in
each cross-section where the dependent variable gives the log weekly earnings of a worker and the regressors
include the worker’s age (introduced as a third-order polynomial). The age-adjusted relative wages are calculated at
the mean level of age. The regressions also include a fixed effect for the residual immigrant cohort that arrived
before 1950. The “2010” data is composed of the pooled 2009-2011 American Community Surveys. The
“alternative 2010 data” is composed of the pooled 2005-2007 ACS. The number of observations in the regressions
are: 1970, 945,579; 1980, 2,002,074; 1990, 2,373,285; 2000, 2,708,438; and 2010, 1,653,425.
                                                          31


                 Table 2. Generalized regression model allowing for cohort effects
                            in both wage levels and wage growth rates

                                               2 Using                 3. Using           4. Using          5. Using
                                 1. Basic     education-              education-         percentile       occupational
Cohort:                        specification age deflator              age fixed          deflator          earnings
                                                                        effects
Relative entry wage:
 1965-1969 arrivals                  -.213              -.206              -.153              -.227            -.108
                                     (.020)             (.028)             (.018)             (.026)           (.012)
 1975-1979 arrivals                  -.301              -.261              -.191              -.279            -.138
                                     (.020)             (.029)             (.017)             (.027)           (.012)
 1985-1989 arrivals                  -.349              -.303              -.198              -.326            -.201
                                     (.019)             (.028)             (.018)             (.026)           (.012)
 1995-1999 arrivals                  -.270              -.251              -.133              -.259            -.171
                                     (.016)             (.021)             (.018)             (.021)           (.011)
 2005-2009 arrivals                  -.300              -.212              -.163              -.231            -.188
                                     (.037)             (.033)             (.018)             (.036)           (.036)
Relative wage growth
in first 10 years:
  1965-1969 arrivals                  .132               .112               .123               .132             .048
                                     (.024)             (.038)             (.019)             (.036)           (.015)
 1975-1979 arrivals                   .111               .086               .105               .088             .031
                                     (.025)             (.039)             (.019)             (.037)           (.015)
 1985-1989 arrivals                   .090               .063               .076               .064             .034
                                     (.024)             (.038)             (.019)             (.035)           (.015)
 1995-1999 arrivals                   .025               .039               .007               .019             .011
                                     (.020)             (.025)             (.019)             (.026)           (.013)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the cohort level. The regressions have
9,682,801 observations. The dependent variable in columns 1-4 uses the worker’s log weekly wage; the dependent
variable in column 5 is the worker’s log occupational wage, given by the average log weekly earnings (measured as
of 1990) in the worker’s occupation. All regressions include the worker’s age (introduced as a third-order
polynomial) fully interacted with a variable indicating if the person is foreign- or native-born. The calculation of the
relative wage growth in the first 10 years assumes that the immigrant arrives in the United States at age 25.
                                                         32


            Table 3. Sensitivity of estimated cohort effects to compositional changes

       Cohort:                                       (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)
       Relative entry wage:
        1965-1969 arrivals                         -.206            -.296           -.356           -.319
                                                   (.028)           (.067)          (.081)          (.096)
         1975-1979 arrivals                        -.261            -.298           -.380           -.295
                                                   (.029)           (.066)          (.079)          (.095)
         1985-1989 arrivals                        -.303            -.310           -.404           -.292
                                                   (.028)           (.067)          (.077)          (.095)
         1995-1999 arrivals                        -.251            -.226           -.277           -.193
                                                   (.021)           (.071)          (.079)          (.097)
         2005-2009 arrivals                        -.212            -.208           -.301           -.215
                                                   (.033)           (.071)          (.078)          (.093)
       Relative wage growth in first
       10 years:
        1965-1969 arrivals                          .112             .078            .072            .140
                                                   (.038)           (.024)          (.017)          (.017)
         1975-1979 arrivals                         .086             .061            .062            .112
                                                   (.039)           (.024)          (.017)          (.016)
         1985-1989 arrivals                         .063             .045            .047            .082
                                                   (.038)           (.024)          (.017)          (.016)
         1995-1999 arrivals                         .039            -.011           -.042            .005
                                                   (.025)           (.019)          (.017)          (.019)

       Controls for:
        Country of origin                            No               Yes             Yes            Yes
        State of residence                           No               No              Yes            Yes
        Education-age deflator                       Yes              Yes             Yes            No
        Education-age fixed effects                  No               No              No             Yes

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the cohort level. The regressions in columns 1
and 2 have 9,682,801 observations; the regressions in columns 3 and 4 have 9,367,529 observations. All regressions
include the worker’s age (introduced as a third-order polynomial) fully interacted with a variable indicating if the
person is foreign- or native-born. The calculation of the relative wage growth in the first 10 years assumes that the
immigrant arrives in the United States at age 25.
                                                         33


           Table 4. Sensitivity of estimated cohort effects to selectivity in employment

                                         Actual earnings                       Occupational Earnings
Cohort:                                  (1)        (2)                    (3)         (4)          (5)
Relative entry wage:
 1965-1969 arrivals                      -.206         -.208              -.108           -.109            -.111
                                         (.028)        (.032)             (.012)          (.011)           (.008)
 1975-1979 arrivals                      -.261         -.261              -.138           -.138            -.145
                                         (.029)        (.032)             (.012)          (.010)           (.008)
 1985-1989 arrivals                      -.303         -.301              -.201           -.201            -.206
                                         (.028)        (.028)             (.012)          (.011)           (.007)
 1995-1999 arrivals                      -.251         -.249              -.171           -.178            -.180
                                         (.021)        (.024)             (.011)          (.011)           (.007)
 2005-2009 arrivals                      -.212           ---              -.188           -.175               ---
                                         (.033)                           (.036)          (.037)
Relative wage growth in
first 10 years:
  1965-1969 arrivals                      .112          .117               .048            .051             .053
                                         (.038)        (.042)             (.015)          (.013)           (.012)
 1975-1979 arrivals                       .086          .089               .031            .035             .043
                                         (.039)        (.043)             (.015)          (.013)           (.013)
 1985-1989 arrivals                       .063          .062               .034            .038             .046
                                         (.038)        (.036)             (.015)          (.013)           (.010)
 1995-1999 arrivals                       .039          .019               .011            .023             .022
                                         (.025)        (.026)             (.013)          (.012)           (.008)

Sample:
 Uses 2009-2011 ACS                       Yes           No                 Yes             Yes               No
 Uses 2005-2007 ACS                       No            Yes                No              No                Yes
 Includes non-workers                     No            No                 No              Yes               Yes
 who report an occupation

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the cohort level. The dependent variable in
columns 1-2 uses the worker’s log weekly wage, deflated by the education-age deflator; the dependent variable in
column 3-5 is the worker’s log occupational wage, given by the average log weekly earnings (measured as of 1990)
in the worker’s occupation. The regressions reported in columns (2) and (5) exclude the immigrants who entered the
United States after 2005. The number of observations in the regressions are: columns 1 and 3, 9,682,801; column 2,
9,731,901; column 4, 10,268,321; and column 5, 10,282,258. All regressions include the worker’s age (introduced
as a third-order polynomial) fully interacted with a variable indicating if the person is foreign- or native-born. The
regression in column 5 includes the worker’s years of educational attainment interacted with a variable indicating if
the person is foreign- or native-born. The calculation of the relative wage growth in the first 10 years assumes that
the immigrant arrives in the United States at age 25.
                                                          34


           Table 5. Age-adjusted probabilities of speaking English very well, by year

    Sample                                             1980              1990            2000            2010
    A. Working men
     2005-2009 arrivals                                  ---              ---             ---            .326
     2000-2004 arrivals                                  ---              ---             ---            .321
     1995-1999 arrivals                                  ---              ---            .339            .360
     1990-1994 arrivals                                  ---              ---            .353            .383
     1985-1989 arrivals                                  ---             .336            .363            .403
     1980-1984 arrivals                                  ---             .376            .416            .458
     1975-1979 arrivals                                 .322             .433            .471            .502
     1970-1974 arrivals                                 .376             .487            .527            .579

    B. All men
     2005-2009 arrivals                                  ---              ---             ---            .313
     2000-2004 arrivals                                  ---              ---             ---            .313
     1995-1999 arrivals                                  ---              ---            .322            .352
     1990-1994 arrivals                                  ---              ---            .345            .375
     1985-1989 arrivals                                  ---             .317            .356            .395
     1980-1984 arrivals                                  ---             .364            .407            .450
     1975-1979 arrivals                                 .304             .424            .462            .495
     1970-1974 arrivals                                 .370             .478            .517            .575

Notes: The age-adjusted probability of speaking English very well is calculated from a linear probability model
estimated separately in each cross-section. The dependent variable is a dummy variable set to unity if the immigrant
speaks only English or speaks English very well and zero otherwise, and the regressors include the worker’s age
(introduced as a third-order polynomial). The sample consists of immigrants originating in countries outside the
British sphere of influence. The age-adjusted probabilities are calculated at the mean level of age. Although the
standard errors are not reported, they typically lie between .01 and .02, even after clustering at the cohort level. The
number of observations in the regressions reported in the top panel are: 1980, 97,910; 1990, 164,399; 2000, 284,790;
2010, 190,935. The respective numbers of observations in the bottom panel are: 109,320; 184,626; 322,341; and
210,374.
                                                        35


   Table 6. Summary statistics for immigrants arriving in the United States at ages 25-34
                       (by country of origin and year-of-arrival)

                                                                                 Increase in rate of English
                      Rate of economic assimilation                                 language proficiency
National origin:    1975-79      1985-89    1995-99                            1975-79 1985-89 1995-99
 Mexico              0.025         0.060     -0.063                              0.085       0.032       0.013
 El Salvador         0.128         0.112      0.036                              0.067       0.070       0.033
 Guatemala           0.119         0.073     -0.020                              0.204       0.076       0.018
 Cuba                0.150         0.179     -0.044                              0.119       0.156       0.098
 Dominican Republic  0.095        -0.087     -0.159                              0.158      -0.004      -0.001
 China               0.102         0.430      0.230                              0.039       0.137       0.112
 Korea               0.265         0.121     -0.078                              0.109       0.011       0.100
 Philippines         0.203         0.178      0.102                              0.142       0.097       0.124
 Vietnam             0.183         0.157     -0.099                              0.122       0.054       0.006
 India               0.333         0.246      0.116                              0.136       0.087       0.059

Notes: The rate of economic assimilation gives the rate of wage growth experienced by the immigrant cohort during
the first decade in the United States relative to that experienced by comparably aged native workers, using the
education-age specific deflator. The rate of English language acquisition gives the increase in the fraction of the
cohort that speaks only English or speaks English very well over the first decade in the United States and is
calculated using the sample of all men in the relevant cohort.
                                                         36


                 Table 7. Determinants of economic assimilation in first 10 years

Variable:                                                            (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)
Arrived in 1985-1989                                                -.026        -.020        -.025           -.022
                                                                    (.023)       (.022)       (.020)         (.021)
Arrived in 1995-1999                                                -.094        -.091        -.093           -.072
                                                                    (.016)       (.016)       (.017)         (.021)
Educational attainment of cohort at time of entry                 ---              .006         .004           .001
                                                                                 (.002)       (.003)         (.004)
Log per-capita GDP of source country                              ---            -.024        -.019           -.014
                                                                                 (.007)       (.009)         (.011)
Repressive government in source country                           ---          ---              .022           .039
                                                                                              (.015)         (.023)
Geographic distance from U.S. (=1 if > 3000 miles)                                              .024           .009
                                                                                              (.020)         (.022)
Effective number of immigrants from source country                ---          ---          ---               -.038
   (in millions)                                                                                             (.015)
Effective number of linguistic compatriots                        ---          ---          ---               -.009
   (in millions)                                                                                             (.013)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the source country level. The unit of
observation in the regression is an immigrant cohort defined by age at arrival, source country, and year of arrival.
The regressions are weighted by n0n1/(n0 + n1), where n0 is the sample size used to calculate the cohort’s mean log
wage at the beginning of the decade and n1 is the respective sample size at the end of the decade. The regressions
have 1,430 observations and include vectors of fixed effects indicating the age at arrival and the calendar year of
entry. The excluded cohort fixed effect indicates if the immigrants arrived between 1975 and 1979. The rate of
economic assimilation gives the rate of wage growth experienced by the immigrant cohort during the first decade in
the United States relative to that experienced by comparably aged native workers, using the education-age deflator.
                                                           37


      Table 8. Determinants of increase in English language proficiency in first 10 years

Variable:                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)             (4)
Arrived in 1985-1989                                                    -.064         -.066         -.066          -.061
                                                                       (.008)        (.007)        (.008)         (.008)
Arrived in 1995-1999                                                    -.065         -.074         -.072          -.048
                                                                       (.010)        (.010)        (.010)         (.010)
Educational attainment of cohort at time of entry                         ---         .007          .006            .002
                                                                                     (.001)        (.002)         (.001)
Log per-capita GDP of source country                                     ---          .011          .012            .018
                                                                                     (.004)        (.004)         (.003)
Repressive government in source country                                  ---            ---         .004            .022
                                                                                                   (.010)         (.006)
Geographic distance from U.S. (=1 if > 3000 miles)                       ---           ---          .013           -.007
                                                                                                   (.014)         (.014)
Effective number of immigrants from source country                       ---           ---            ---          -.050
   (in millions)                                                                                                  (.007)
Effective number of linguistic compatriots                               ---           ---           ---           -.006
   (in millions)                                                                                                  (.009)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the source country level. The unit of
observation in the regression is an immigrant cohort defined by age at arrival, source country, and year of arrival.
The regressions are weighted by n0n1/(n0 + n1), where n0 is the sample size used to calculate the cohort’s English
proficiency rate at the beginning of the decade, n1 is the respective sample size at the end of the decade, and the
English proficiency rate is calculated using the sample of all men in the relevant cohort. The regressions exclude
source countries in the British sphere of influence. The regressions have 1,233 observations and include vectors of
fixed effects indicating the age at arrival and the calendar year of entry. The omitted cohort fixed effect indicates if
the immigrants arrived between 1975 and 1979.
                                                          38


               Table 9. Sensitivity of results to the growth of Hispanic immigration

                                                            Rate of economic                    English language
                                                              assimilation                          proficiency
Variable:                                                   (1)          (2)                    (1)           (2)

A. Excluding Mexicans
Arrived in 1985-1989                                        -.044           -.036              -.063           -.060
                                                           (.019)          (.019)             (.010)          (.010)
Arrived in 1995-1999                                        -.084           -.066              -.055           -.048
                                                           (.021)          (.022)             (.011)          (.010)
Size of national origin group (in millions)                   ---           -.217                ---           -.123
                                                                           (.078)                             (.035)
Size of linguistic compatriots (in millions)                   ---          -.014               ---            -.011
                                                                           (.015)                             (.009)

B. Excluding Hispanics
Arrived in 1985-1989                                        -.037           -.032              -.060           -.058
                                                           (.022)          (.022)             (.018)          (.012)
Arrived in 1995-1999                                        -.068           -.061              -.048           -.043
                                                           (.026)          (.024)             (.013)          (.012)
Size of national origin group (in millions)                   ---           -.306                ---           -.079
                                                                           (.171)                             (.136)
Size of linguistic compatriots (in millions)                   ---           .101               ---            -.041
                                                                           (.115)                             (.114)

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are clustered at the source country level. The unit of
observation in the regression is an immigrant cohort defined by age at arrival, source country, and year of arrival.
The regressions are weighted by n0n1/(n0 + n1), where n0 is the sample size used to calculate the cohort’s log wage or
English proficiency rate at the beginning of the decade, n1 is the respective sample size at the end of the decade, and
the English proficiency rate is calculated using the sample of all men in the relevant cohort. The regressions on the
English language proficiency rate exclude source countries in the British sphere of influence. The regressions that
exclude the Mexican national origin group have 1,412 observations when the dependent variable is the rate of
economic assimilation and 1,215 observations when the dependent variable is the rate of English language
acquisition. The sample sizes in the non-Hispanic sample are 1,107 and 910 observations, respectively. All
regressions include vectors of fixed effects indicating the age at arrival and the calendar year of entry, the cohort’s
educational attainment at the time of entry, the log per capita GDP of the source country, a variable indicating
whether the source country had a repressive regime, and a variable indicating if the country is “far” from the United
States (i.e., more than 3,000 miles). The omitted cohort fixed effect indicates if the immigrants arrived between
1975 and 1979.
