                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SPATIAL EQUILIBRIUM WITH UNEMPLOYMENT AND WAGE BARGAINING:
                        THEORY AND ESTIMATION

                                            Paul Beaudry
                                           David A. Green
                                          Benjamin M. Sand

                                         Working Paper 19118
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19118


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




This paper will appear in a special issue of the Journal of Urban Economics focusing on local labour
markets. We are grateful to Gilles Duranton for very helpful comments and suggestions. We also benefited
from comments by seminar participants at the St. Louis Federal Reserve and at the Universite du Quebec
a Montreal. Beaudry acknowleges support from the SSHRC of Canada and the Bank of Canada Fellowship
Program. Green acknowledge support from the SSHRC of Canada. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Paul Beaudry, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Spatial Equilibrium with Unemployment and Wage Bargaining: Theory and Estimation
Paul Beaudry, David A. Green, and Benjamin M. Sand
NBER Working Paper No. 19118
June 2013
JEL No. J01,J2,J3,J6

                                               ABSTRACT

In this paper, we present a spatial equilibrium model where search frictions hinder the immediate reallocation
of workers both within and across local labour markets. Because of the frictions, firms and workers
find themselves in bilateral monopoly positions when determining wages. Although workers are not
at each instant perfectly mobile across cities, in the baseline model we assume that workers flows are
sufficient to equate expected utility across markets. We use the model to explore the joint determination
of wages, unemployment, house prices and city size (or migration). A key role of the model is to clarify
conditions under which this type of spatial equilibrium setup can be estimated. We then use U.S. data
over the period 1970-2007 to explore the fit of model and it quantitative properties of the model. Our
main goal is to highlight forces that influence spatial equilibria at 10 year intervals.


Paul Beaudry                                          Benjamin M. Sand
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of British Columbia                        York University
997-1873 East Mall                                    Canada
Vancouver, B.C.                                       bmsand@yorku.ca
Canada, V6T 1Z1
and University of British Columbia
and also NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca

David A. Green
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
Canada, V6T 1Z1
green@econ.ubc.ca
       Introduction
       In this paper, we embed a search and bargaining model of the labour market into a
       spatial equilibrium setting in order to provide a simple framework where one can dis-
       cuss the joint determinants of local wages, unemployment rates, housing prices and
       migration. While unemployment is typically abstracted from in the canonical spatial
       equilibrium model,1 our goal is to explore the insights that can be gained from shift-
       ing from a Walrasian approach to one in which wage bargaining and unemployment
       play a central role.
           We begin the paper by presenting a spatial equilibrium model in which search
       frictions hinder the immediate reallocation of workers within and between local la-
       bor markets, which we refer to as cities. The search frictions imply that unemploy-
       ment arises as an equilibrium phenomenon. Following Pissarides (2000), wages are
       determined by Nash bargaining between firms and workers. We assume that cities
       have exogenous differences in terms of productivity, amenities and land availability.
       Further, we allow cities to be subject to agglomeration externalities and congestion
       externalities. Much of this (including equating of worker utility across cities, free en-
       try of firms, and differences in productivity and amenities across cities) is the same
       as in the classic Roback (1982) paper and the literature that has followed. However,
       as we will see, the shift in the labour market component of the model to include fric-
       tions has important implications and allows us to examine issues such as whether
       worker mobility is more responsive to wage or employment rate changes within a
       consistent framework.
           An important element of the model is the presence of many industries within
       each city. Unemployed individuals search for a job across these industries and can
       also randomly receive an option to search in another city of their choice where the
       industrial mix will be different. Households will move to cities with either higher
       wages or lower unemployment, implying increases in the demand for land in those
       cities. Accordingly, in the spatial equilibrium, house prices will adjust to make house-
       holds indifferent among cities. Differences in industrial mix across cities will play an
       important role in helping us identify the effects of wages on housing costs and mo-
       bility decisions. In particular, we will be able to examine the sensitivity of household
       mobility decisions with respect to both wages and unemployment.2
           The paper builds on our previous work, Beaudry et al. (2012, 2013), in which
       we present a tractable model of search and bargaining with multiple industries and
       cities. However, in those papers, cities are not assumed to be subject to either ag-
       glomeration or congestion externalities. The result is a spatial equilibrium with a
   1
     Two recent references include Glaeser and Gottlieb (2009) and Moretti (2011). See Amior (2012)
for a recent paper that takes a related but different approach to introducing mobility into a search and
bargaining model.
   2
      The basic model gives rise to a system of 3 + 2N equations where N in the number of industries.
The system determines wages for each industry-city pair, the share of employment in each industry in
each city, the employment rate in the city, city house prices and the city size (the labor force). However,
for most of the analysis, we can focus on a reduced system of 4 equations which determines average city
wage, the employment rate, house prices and city size.



                                                    1
      particular block recursive system of equations whereby wages and employment rates
      can be determined independently of house prices and city size, allowing us to focus
      on wage and employment determination without being explicit about the determi-
      nation of house prices and city size. In contrast, the basic model of this paper is not
      block recursive and, accordingly, the simultaneous determination of house prices and
      migration decisions becomes the central focus.
          In order to make the presentation more transparent, we first present a baseline
      model which abstracts from several features that are then introduced progressively.
      The baseline model has the advantage of allowing for a clear discussion of the main
      identification issues.3 The second main section of the paper focuses on estimating the
      model using data drawn from the U.S. Census and the ACS over 10 year windows.
          Our estimations allow us to address a set of issues central to the intersection of
      urban and labor economics. These include: (i) the relative importance of wages ver-
      sus unemployment in affecting migration decisions, (ii) the strength of the housing-
      cost-wage interaction, (iii) the relevance of agglomeration effects over the medium
      run and (iv) the nature of the spatial equilibrium process. We find that migration
      decisions are much more responsive to changes in local employment opportunities
      than to wages: a one percent increase in a city’s employment rate causes an inflow of
      worker three times greater than a one percent increase in real wages. We also find
      that the effect of wages on the determination of housing cost is much stronger that
      the effect of higher house prices on the determination of wages. For these relation-
      ships, we find that a 1% increase in housing cost has the direct effect of increasing
      wages by approximately 0.25%, while an increase in the average city wage gener-
      ates higher housing cost in an approximately 1-to-1 fashion. With respect to the
      importance of agglomeration effects on productivity, we do not find any significant
      evidence of such forces over the 10-year periods we focus upon. In fact, our estimates
      of the wage and employment processes suggest that migration neither increases nor
      decreases marginal productivity over the medium run. In addition to finding that
      variation in city size has very little direct effect on wages and employment rates,
      we also find that for most cities, house prices appear quasi-invariant to migration.
      More specifically, house prices are invariant to migration in all cities except those
      with very limited available land, where house prices respond strongly to migration
      flows. For the land elastic cities, our estimates put into question the role of house
      prices in equating utility across localities. We offer two alternative interpretations
      of this observation. The first being that some form of congestion externality affects
      the desirability of different cities, and this acts as the key equilibrium force insuring
      that agents receive equal utility across locations. The second interpretation is that
      migration frictions are sufficiently prevalent to hinder the equalization of utility over
      10 year periods.
          The paper is structured as follows. In the next section we present our spatial
      equilibrium model with multiple industries and wage bargaining. We use the model
  3
    As we are working with observational data, identification will rely on restrictions on unobservables.
Given the model is over-identified, the joint validity of the model and the implied restrictions can be
evaluated using standard tests.



                                                   2
       to derive four estimating equations and to discuss how the parameters of these rela-
       tionships can be identified. In Section 3 we present the data we use for estimation.
       In Section 4 we report our estimates for the four equation model and discuss their
       implications for urban-labour issues.



       1     Theoretical Framework
       In this section, we set out to extend a standard search and bargaining model to in-
       clude multiple sectors, multiple cities, endogenous migration decisions and endoge-
       nous housing costs. Our goal is to derive an empirically tractable spatial equilib-
       rium model with unemployment and wage bargaining. Given that goal, our model is
       highly stylized, but we will show that this simple model provides a reasonable fit to
       the data.4
            Consider an environment where there are C cities and a mass 1 of households,
       with each household having 1 unit of labour. As we will specify more precisely later,
       households will have the opportunity to move between cities, and we will be aiming
       to characterize both the stationary equilibrium, where households are indifferent be-
       tween living in different cities, and changes in the stationary equilibrium induced by
       changes in exogenous factors. The mass of households located in city c at time t is
       denoted by Lct , and we will also refer to Lct as the city size. Households have prefer-
       ences defined over the consumption of a final good, X, the consumption of housing,
       H, and the consumption of city specific amenities, Act . The final good is an aggregate
       of output from I industries. The price of the final good, X, is normalized to 1 and
       the price of intermediate/industrial good i is given by pit . The i ∈ {1, .., I} industrial
       goods can be produced in each of the C cities, and employers in a city take the prices,
       pit , as given.5
            For now, we will consider all households to be ex-ante identical. Later we will dis-
       cuss how household skill heterogeneity can be introduced into the model. Cities, in
       contrast, are heterogeneous ex-ante and ex-post, as they will differ in terms of their
       productivities, their amenities and the available land. As will be made clear, city-
       level productivity terms and amenities will have an exogenously given component
       and an endogenous component which reflects agglomeration and congestion exter-
       nalities.


       1.1    Search
       We assume that search frictions characterize the labor markets in all cities. Each
       local economy unfolds in continuous time. Note that to simplify notation, and since
       we are searching for the stationary equilibrium, we will suppress the dependence of
       variables on time until we focus on changes in stationary equilibria. At each point
   4
    Our model exposition shares much with that in Beaudry et al. (2012).
   5
    We can model the endogenous determination of prices, but for our purposes this is not necessary. All
that is needed is that prices, pit , be subject to an exogenous shifter which can reflect changes in technology
or tastes.



                                                      3
in time, cities are populated by risk-neutral firms that maximize discounted prof-
its and by worker-households who have per-period indirect utility functions given
by: y − γ1 phc + γ2 Ac , where y is the income received by the worker, phc is the price
of housing in city c, Ac is the public amenity in city c, and γ1 and γ2 are parame-
ters. Households take the the value of amenities as given, but these can affected by
congestion externalities such that:

                                    Ac = 1c − γ3 Lc

where 1c represents the exogenous amenity draw of city c and γ3 captures a potential
congestion externality.
   Both employers and workers discount the future at a rate r. Firms and workers
come together in pairs according to a matching technology, and matches end at an ex-
ogenous rate, δ. Define Eic and Nic as the number of employed workers (or matches),
and the number of available jobs in industry i in city c, respectively. The number of
matches produced per unit of time is governed by the matching function:

                              M = M ((Lc − Ec ), (Nc − Ec )) ,                            (1)

where the inputs are the available pool of unemployed workers in the city, Lc − Ec ,
and the number of vacancies, Nc − Ec . As is standard in the search and bargaining
literature, we assume the matching technology exhibits constant returns to scale
and is increasing in both arguments. Given this matching technology, we can write
the probability that a worker encounters a vacancy and the probability a firm fills a
vacancy as:
                M ((Lc − Ec ), (Nc − Ec ))                M ((Lc − Ec ), (Nc − Ec ))
         ψc =                                and   φc =                              ,    (2)
                        Lc − Ec                                   Nc − Ec
respectively. In steady state, the flow of workers leaving unemployment must equal
the flow of workers exiting employment, implying the equilibrium condition:
                                                        
                              Ec            Ec Nc Ec
                            δ    =M 1−        ,    −       .                   (3)
                              Lc            Lc Lc     Lc

1.2    Bellman Equations
Firms can open jobs in any industry and city, but once open, a vacancy is industry
and city specific. To create a vacancy in industry i in city c, a firm must pay a cost, kic ,
the value of which depends on the city and the industry and will be determined by
an equilibrium free-entry condition to be specified later. Denote by Vicv the present-
discounted value of a vacancy in industry i and city c. In steady-state, Vicv must
satisfy the Bellman equation:
                                                          
                               rVicv = −hi + φc Vicf − Vicv ,                           (4)

where hi is the flow cost of maintaining the vacancy, and with probability φc the
vacancy is converted into a filled job, which has a present-discounted value of Vicf . In
equilibrium, the value to the employer of a filled job value must satisfy
                                                              
                         rVicf = pi − wic + ρic + δ Vicv − Vicf ,                     (5)


                                              4
       where wic is the wage paid to workers in industry i in city c, and ρic is an industry-city
       cost advantage.Thus, once a match occurs, a firm enjoys a profit flow of pi − wic + ρic ,
       and with probability δ the match is broken. Employers take the productivity term ρic
       as given and to allow for agglomeration externalities we allow ρic to be determined
       endogenously according to:

                                           ρic = 2ic + γ4 Lc

       where 2ic represents the exogenous draw of productivity across industries-cities, and
                                                                                      P
       γ4 Lc represents the agglomeration effect. We define the 2ic ’s such that c 2ic =
       0. For now we assume a very simple form for the agglomeration effect, but in the
       empirical section we will explore richer formulations.6
           Workers can either be employed or unemployed. Denote the present-discounted
       value of employment in industry i in city c as Uice and the value of unemployment in
       city c as Uicu . The value of being employed Uice must satisfy the Bellman relationship:

                                rUice = wic − γ1 phc + γ2 Ac + δ(Ucu − Uice ).                   (6)

           When an individual is unemployed, he receives income from an unemployment
       benefit, b. Moreover, an unemployed worker is subject to two types of shocks. On
       the one hand, with a probability ψc , the worker is randomly matched with a firm
       in one of the industries within the city. In addition, the unemployed worker can
       receive, with probability ψ0 , the possibility of moving to another city. Thus, the value
       of unemployment must satisfy:
                                                               
                                               X                                     
                  u          h                           e     u              u    u
               rUc = b − γ1 pc + γ2 Ac + ψc ·
                                                   ηjc Ujc − Uc + ψ0 max 0
                                                                             Uc0 − Uc ,       (7)
                                                                                 c
                                                   j

       where ηit is the ratio of vacant jobs in industry i to the total number of vacancies
                  ic −Eic
       (ηic = P N(N ic −Eic )
                              ).7 Without frictions, individuals would search simultaneously in
                i
       all markets and the cross-city variation that we use for identification would be elim-
       inated. Embedded in (7) is the notion that unemployed workers find jobs across
       industries in proportion to the relative size of that industry. 8 Given this matching
       assumption for the unemployed, workers flows will need to satisfy
                                                    
                                           Nic − Eic
                                  δEic =               M (Lc − Ec , Nc − Ec ) .             (8)
                                           Nc − Ec
   6
      Combes et al. (2012) show that positive agglomeration effects on firm productivity in French data are
not related to a Melitz-type selecting out of less productive firms due to increased competition in larger
markets. This is partially supportive of our simple specification, though in their model city size has more
complex effects on the productivity distribution.
    7
      In equilibrium, ηic will equal PEic   , which allows ηic to be calculated from observed data.
                                      i Eic
    8
      We assume that workers only search while unemployed, which is clearly a strong assumption. This
assumption is very useful for clarifying how we identify the wage effect on different outcomes. Moreover,
it fits with findings in Pissarides and Wadsworth (1989) that the unemployed are much more likely to
undertake regional migration than the employed. Amior (2012) presents a model of search and bargaining
with migration in which the migration decision is modeled as actively searching for jobs in other cities.
He uses this framework to study the relationship between variation in local housing costs and earnings
inequality.

                                                       5
           The term maxc0 Ucu0 in (7) represents the fact that unemployed workers are allowed
       to choose where best to move when they receive the option of moving. We will assume
       mobility shocks are sufficiently frequent such that, in equilibrium, utility will be
       equalized across cities. That is,

                                        Ucu = Ucu0 , for all {c, c0 }.                           (9)

       Therefore, the term max0c Ucu0 − Ucu will be zero in equilibrium and the value of unem-
       ployment in city c will satisfy
                                                                            
                                                            X
                         rUcu = b − γ1 Pch + γ2 Ac + ψc ·          e
                                                               ηjc Ujc − Ucu  .           (10)
                                                                 j

          In writing the above equations, note that we have assumed that there are always
       gains from trade between workers and firms in all jobs created in equilibrium. Once
       a match is made, workers and firms bargain a wage, which is set according to the
       bargaining rule
                                               
                                     Vicf − Vicv = (Uice − Ucu ) · κ,                  (11)

       where κ is a parameter governing the relative bargaining power of workers and firms.
          Finally, the number of jobs created in industry i in city c, denoted Nic , is deter-
       mined by a free-entry condition. In much of the search and bargaining literature,
       the entry cost is treated as a fixed factor, which is a very restrictive assumption. In-
       stead, we want to allow for the possibility of the entry cost increasing as the industry
       grows in order to capture the scarcity of some hidden factor, such as entrepreneurial
       talent.9 Accordingly, we specify the entry cost in industry i in c, kic as

                                           Nic γ5
                                             
                                  kic =           3ic    γ5 > 0.
                                           Lc

           where 3ic represents a city-industry specific exogenous draw in the cost of cre-
       ating jobs. However, by allowing γ5 to differ from zero, we allow the entry cost to
       increase with an increase in job creation. If γ5 equals zero, we have the fixed-cost of
       entry formulation, whichis implicitly allowed at a limiting case. We view the most
       likely scarce factor to be entrepreneurial talent and believe that such talent is likely
       proportional to the population of a city.10 Based on this, we allow the entry cost to
       increase with the ratio NLicc .
           Free entry implies that

                                                 kic = Vicv .                                   (12)

          The assumption that firms are heterogeneous in their costs of opening vacancies
       plays a critical role in our derivations and the interpretation of our estimates. In
       the most common form of the Mortensen-Pissarides model, firms are homogeneous
   9
     Our formulation is similar to that adopted in Fonseca et al. (2001) which views potential job creators
as being drawn from the population and differing in terms of their capacity to manage many jobs.
  10
     Behrens et al. (2012)) show that variation in the proportion of workers who are self-employed across
U.S. cities is invariant to city size.

                                                      6
and enter until V v is driven to zero. This, together with short observed durations of
vacancies in the US (see, for example, Rogerson et al. (2005)), implies a very elastic
Job Creation curve. With the specification used here, how job creation responds to
wage changes depends on the responsiveness of entrepreneurs to profits, with the
infinitely elasticitic response being the limiting case.


1.3     Housing market
So far, we have set out a model where wages are determined by Nash bargaining,
jobs are created until there are zero expected profits at the margin, employment is
determined by the matching function and households migrate across cities until ex-
pected utility is equalized. The only remaining element that needs to be specified
is the determination of the cost of housing. Our specifications of the worker Bell-
man equations incorporate an assumption that each worker inelastically demands
one unit of housing. Given this, the implicit demand for housing is just proportional
to the number of workers in the city. This allows us to focus on the supply of hous-
ing services in determining the cost of housing. We will begin with the case where
housing relates only to the use of land, so that we can focus on the supply function
for land. There is now a substantial literature indicating that cities differ greatly in
the extent to which the local supply of land can respond to changes in demand, and
we want to allow for such heterogeneity (Saiz, 2010). Based on this, we use a simple
specification in which the elasticity of the supply of housing services with respect to
the price of housing, phc , is allowed to vary by city. This elasticity will be given by e1c ,
and we incorporate proxies for ec in our empirical work. We also allow for there to be
an exogenous shock to housing supply in city c, 4c , reflecting potentially time vary-
ing changes in local regulations. Given these assumptions, we can write the supply
function for housing as,


                                                     1
                                   Housesc = (phc ) ec · 4c ,                           (13)

Then, given that each worker demands one housing unit, we can set Housesc equal to
Lc and solve for the equilibrium price of housing relationship:
                                           ec
                                     h     Lc
                                    pc =         .                           (14)
                                           4c

    This formulation of the housing price equations is quite restrictive as it does not
allow for wage costs to have any direct effects on housing costs. In particular, it would
be reasonable have wages affect the equilibrium price of housing through either sup-
ply effects or demand effects. For example, if land is not the only input into housing,
when wages increase this likely increases the cost of building housing and, there-
fore, the price of housing. Alternatively, wages can affect the demand for housing.
For both these reasons, it appears desirable to consider the following, (admittedly ad
hoc), equilibrium house price equation:
                                              ec
                                    h     ew   Lc
                                  p c = wc           ,                               (15)
                                               4c


                                               7
       where ew is the elasticity of house prices to wages and wc could be either the average
       wage in the city (to capture demand effects) or the wage paid in the construction
       industry (to capture supply effects).
           This completes the model specification. Note that the main exogenous driving
       forces of the model which govern the city-level outcomes are the city-industry pro-
       ductivity terms 2ic and 3ic , the amenity term 1c , the land supply term 4c and the
       land elasticity ec .


       1.4    Model Solution
       A stationary spatial equilibrium for this economy is a set of prices {wic , phc }, a set of
       quantities {Nic , Eic , Lc } and a set of value functions {Uice , Ucu , Vicv , Vicf } such that11
         1. Uice , Ucu , Vicv , Vicf satisfy the Bellman equations.
                                                                   
         2. The wages wic satisfy the bargaining rule Vicf − Vicv = (Uice − Ucu ) · κ.
                                                                            γ5
         3. The number of jobs Nic satisfy the free entry condition Vicv = NLicc     3ic .
         4. The city size Lc is such that Ucu is equalised across cities.
                                                                 1
         5. The cost of housing satisfies Pch = wcew ( L4cc ) ec .
                                                                   
                                                    ic −Eic
         6. The worker flows satisfy δEic = P N
                                                                           P        P        P
                                                               Eic M (Lc −  i Eic ,  i Nic −  i Ei ).
                                                         P
                                                  Nic −
                                                     i       i




           While we could focus on all the elements of this spatial equilibrium, our goal
       will be more limited as we will direct our attention mainly to the determination of
       city aggregates. In particular, we will focus on the determination
                                                                  P
                                                                          of city size Lc , the
                               h                                    Ei
       local cost of housing pc , the city-level employment rate Li c and the average city
       wage i PEiEj wic . Since the worker-flow condition implies that ηi = PEiEi , we will
             P
                   j                                                         P i
       now refer to ηic as the employment share in industry i in city c, and i ηic wic as the
       average wage in a city.


       1.5     Deriving the City Size Equation
       A central element of the spatial equilibrium concept is the idea that labour will move
       across localities until expected utility is equalized. Although, in our setup, there are
       frictions to mobility, as long as these frictions are small enough, the distribution of
       labor across localities will be determined by the indifference condition, Ucu = Ū u for
       all c, where U¯u is the common level of utility. We can use this condition to derive
       an expression for equilibrium city sizes, Lc . This first requires using the Bellman
       equations for Ucu and Uice to get the following explicit expression for Ucu

                                b − γ1 phc + γ2 1c − γ2 γ3 Lc ψc ( i ηic wic − b)
                                                                   P
                           u
                         Uc =                                 +                    .
                                              r                  r(r + δ + ψc )

          Note that, in the above expression, the expected utility associated with a city is
       increasing in the average city wage, decreasing in the price of housing, increasing in
  11
    To be complete, we should add intermediate goods prices pi to the definition of equilibrium. However,
since these prices are common across cities, we can disregard their determination.

                                                         8
the amenity, 1c , and decreasing in the city size due to congestion. Furthermore, it
can be verified that through ψc , expected utility is increasing in the city-employment
rate E                                             u      ¯u
      L c . Using the equilibrium condition Uc = U , we can solve for the city size, Lc ,
to recover
                                               P                                 
                       1                    ψc (  i ηic wic − b)
                Lc =          (b − U¯u r) +                      − γ1 phc + γ2 1c .
                      γ2 γ3                    (r + δ + ψc )
    This city size equation captures the notion that cities will tend to be larger when
the average wage is high relative to the price of housing, with the error term of
the equation reflecting unmeasured amenities. However, this equation only gives
implicit recognition of the dependence of city size on unemployment through ψc . In
order to get an explicit expression of this link, we take a log-linear approximation
to the equation, where the linearization is taken around a point where cities are
identical (that is, all the s are set to 1, and the land elasticity is the same) and
we use the worker flow relationships, 2) and 3), to link ψc to the employment rate.
Furthermore, we express the equations as a difference between two steady states
which differ in terms of the s. This leads to the following baseline city-size equation
we use in our empirical investigation:
                                     X                  E
            ∆ ln Lc = α10 + α11 ∆ ln    ηic wic + α12 ∆    − α13 ∆ ln phc + ∆1c ,  (16)
                                                        Lc
                                       i

where the parameters α can be expressed as functions of the more fundamental pa-
rameters of the model. However, since we will not try to recover these more funda-
mental parameters, this link is omitted. Equation (16) now explicitly captures the
potential effects of all three of the aggregate variables on city size. Moreover, the er-
ror in this equation has a structural interpretation since it changes with city-amenity
values. Hence, to estimate this equation it will be necessary to find instruments for
the different regressors which are uncorrelated with changes in amenities.


1.6     The Housing Cost Equation
The housing cost equation is the easiest to derive among our four basic equations as
it follows directly from equation (15). In our baseline specification, we include the
the possibility that the average wage in a city may directly affect the cost of housing.
To make the equation comparable to the others, we log-linearize and take first dif-
ferences to express changes over time in stationary outcomes induced by changes in
the s. This leads to a housing cost equation of the form:
                                    X
          ∆ ln phc = α20 + α21 ∆ ln   ηic wic + α22 ∆ ln Lc + α23 ec ∆ ln Lc + ∆4c . (17)
                                   i

    In the above equation, we see that housing costs increase with the population of
the city and city wages. Note that the assumption that the elasticity of land is po-
tentially different across cities leads us to express the link between housing cost and
city size as depending on the elasticity ec . In our empirical work, we will use mea-
surable proxies for this elasticity. In this equation, the error term reflects changes
in the local cost of housing supply. To estimate the housing cost equation we will
therefore need to identify data variation that affects wages and city size which are
independent of local changes in construction costs.

                                            9
       1.7      The Employment Rate Equation
       The third equation we want to derive is an employment rate equation. In order to
       derive this equation we need to proceed in steps. We can first derive an equation for
       job creation by using the equilibrium condition Vicv = kic which states that jobs in a
       city-industry will be created until the value of a vacant job equals the cost of creating
       the marginal job. Then we can use the worker flow equations to map job creation to
       employment. Using the Bellman equations for Vicv and Vice , we can express the value
       of a vacancy as

                                      (r + δ)             φc
                        rVicv = −              · hi +            · (pi − wic + 3ic + γ4 Lc ),
                                    r + δ + φc        r + δ + φc

       where the value of a vacancy is higher if the price of the good is high relative to
       wages, and if the city is large (because of agglomeration effects). This relationship
       also leaves the link between the value of a vacancy and the employment rate within
       a city implicit as the effect runs through φc .
           To get to
                    γ5our employment rate equation, we now use the free-entry relationship
         v      Nic
       Vic = Lc         3ic , where we have replaced the cost of job creation kic by its determi-
       nants. We will use the equilibrium worker-flow relationship, (3) (which must hold
       for each industry), to back out an expression for Nic as a function of Eic then sub-
       stitute this expression into the free-entry relationship. This gives an equilibrium
       relationship between a city’s employment rate within an industry, the wage paid in
       the industry, the employment rate in the city (because of search frictions), the size
       of the city (because of agglomeration) and the productivity in the industry-city cell.
       Taking a log-linear approximation of the resulting equation, and taking a first dif-
       ference to emphasize changes in equilibrium outcomes, we obtain an equation of the
       form
                        Eic                               Ec
                 ∆ ln       = ϕ0i − ϕ1 ∆ ln wic + ϕ2 ∆ ln    + ϕ3 ∆ ln Lc + ϕ4 2ic − ϕ5 3ic ,
                        Lc                                Lc
       where the ϕ parameters can be linked to the fundamental parameters. Since we
       are interested in deriving an equation for the employment rate for a city, we can
       sum over the different industry employment rates and use the association between
       changes in industry prices and industry growth to obtain an equation for the change
       in the employment rate for a city:12
              E              X                X
       ∆ ln      = α30 + α31   ηic · gi − α32   ηic (∆ ln wic − ∆ ln wi ) + α33 ∆ ln Lc + α34 ∆5c ,
              Lc
                                    i                 i
                                                                                                  (18)

       where 5c corresponds to a share weighted sum of 2ic and 3ic , gi is the rate of growth
       of employment in industry i at the national level, and wi is the average wage in
       industry i across all cities.
           From Equation (18) we see that the employment rate in a city is negatively af-
       fected by the local cost of labor and positively affected by city size. However, these
  12
    See Beaudry et al. (2013) for details of this derivation. In deriving this equation we also used the
approximation i ηic ∆ ln ELicc ≈ ∆ ln E
             P
                                      Lc .
                                       c




                                                          10
                                                       P
       two effects are obtained conditioning on the i ηic · gi term. The easiest interpreta-
       tion of the latter term is as a local aggregate demand shifter; it reflects the effect
       on local employment from an industrial mix that is concentrated in industries that
       grow well at the national level. This term corresponds to a variable that is often
       used in the regional economics literature (Bartik, 1991; Blanchard and Katz, 1992,
       for example) to capture demand shifts. Interestingly, the term arises naturally in
       our setting and, we argue, this justifies it as an instrument for the employment rate
       when estimating other equations in the model. Note that the error term in equation
       (18) is composed of changes in productivity terms that affect variable and fixed costs.
       Accordingly, to estimate (18), we need to isolate data variation which is unrelated to
       such local productivity changes.


       1.8      The Wage Equation
       The last equation we derive is an equation for the average wage within a city.13
       Recall that wages are set to split the surplus between the employer and the worker.
       Using the Bellman equations to calculate the surplus, one obtains the following equa-
       tion for industry-specific wages:
                                                      X
                           wic = γc0 + γc1 pi + γc2       ηjc wjc + γc1 (2ic + γ4 Lc ).               (19)
                                                      j

           Equation (19) links wages in industry i in city c to the national price of the indus-
       trial good, pi , the average level of wages in city c, and the city size. The coefficients in
       (19) are, again, functions of more fundamental parameters and the city employment
       rate. Equation (19) contains a classic reflection problem in that the sectoral wage
       depends on the average of such wages in the city. One can respond to this, in part,
       by using the model to show that the average wage can be replaced by a function of
       national-level wage premia. In particular, through a series of simple derivations, we
       can rewrite the wage equation (19) as
                                                                                            X
              ˜          γc2      γc1 X                                                    γc2
       wic = dic +                         ηjc (wi − w1 ) + γc1 γ4 Lc + γc1 2ic + γc1              η2jc jc ,
                       1 − γc2    γ1                                                     1 − γc2
                                         j                                                         j
                                                                                                       (20)

       where wi − w1 is the wage premium relative to an arbitrary, baseline industry at
       the national level, and d˜ic is a function of pi and of γc0 , γc1 , γc2 from equation (19).
       Equation (20) states that wages within an industry-city cell depend on the industrial
                                                        P
       composition of a city as captured by the index j ηjc (wi − w1 ). We denote this index
       by Rc and refer to it as average city rent. A high value of this index indicates that
       a city’s employment is concentrated in high-paying industries. Thus, the specific
       composition effect captured in (20) is one related to the proportion of “good jobs”
       in a city, where, by good jobs we mean jobs in industries that pay a relative wage
       premium.
  13
     This equation is the central focus of Beaudry et al. (2012), and the reader interested in a detailed
derivation should consult that paper.



                                                      11
           As with previous equations, it is useful to make the dependence of wages on the
       city’s employment rate explicit by taking a log-linear approximation of (20), then
       taking the first difference to look at changes over time, and finally aggregating over
       industries in order to get a specification for the change in the average city wage. This
       is given by equation (21):
             X                                          E                           X
                 ηic ∆ ln wic = α40 + α41 ∆Rc − α42 ∆      + α43 ∆ ln Lc + α44 ∆ ln   i2c .   (21)
                                                        Lc
             i

           It is worth pausing at this point to highlight the importance of the R index in
       our approach. The index captures a central idea in the paper: when workers in
       a given sector bargain with their employers, their outside option depends, in part,
       on the wages paid in other sectors in their city. If the city has a high proportion
       of employment in high rent industries then the value to workers of leaving their
       current industry and becoming unemployed is higher because unemployed searchers
       have a higher probability of getting a high paid job.14 This enables them to bargain a
       higher wage. Importantly for our identification strategy, equation (21) indicates that
       this effect is purely about industrial composition and not the level of employment
       since the employment rate is included as an additional control variable. This raises
       the possibility that industrial composition (weighted by industry rents) can be used
       as an instrument for wages, allowing us to identify the effect of wage changes on
       other key variables (employment rates, city size, and house prices) separately from
       productivity shifts. As we discuss in the next section, however, R is unlikely to be a
       valid instrument in its own right and we have to work with indexes related to R.
           Equation (21) indicates that average wages within a city will be higher if the in-
       dustrial composition of a city is weighted toward high-paying industries and will be
       lower if the city has a low employment rate. Both of these effects are due to the fact
       that wages are bargained, as both of these factors affect the bargaining position of
       workers. City size can also affect wages through an agglomeration externality which
       affects productivity. One element that may appear as missing from Equation (21) is
       housing costs, which one might also expect to affect the bargaining position of work-
       ers. While this would be true if expected utility was different across cities, when
       utility is equalized across cities workers can’t use local housing costs to bargain up
       wages since, in equilibrium, high housing costs reflect a compensating differential.
       In our baseline specification we maintain this assumption, but we also report ro-
       bustness results where we add housing prices to Equation (21). Finally, note that
       the error term in Equation (21) reflects changes in local productivity effects and, ac-
       cordingly, estimation of this equation requires isolating variation in the data that is
       unrelated to such changes.


       1.9    Endogeneity Considerations
       The main advantage of spelling out the theoretical model is that we specify the con-
       tents of the error terms in each equation and, from that, can be precise about the
  14
   We assume, in particular, that the probability of an unemployed worker getting a job in a particular
industry is proportional to the proportion of all workers in that industry in their city.


                                                   12
       nature of any endogeneity concerns. Fortunately, the model also provides potential
       suggestions for instrumental variables and the conditions under which they will be
       valid. We term this approach “structural-IV” estimation since it combines positive
       features of both full structural and standard IV estimation. From the structure, we
       obtain a clear notion of what we are estimating and the required identification con-
       ditions but, by using first-order approximations to key structural equations, we also
       follow the standard IV estimation literature in being clear on the nature of our iden-
       tifying variation. It is worth reiterating that our derviations are in terms of changes
       between steady states and our instruments will have the same interpretation: with
       them we can, for example, estimate the effect in changing the steady state employ-
       ment rate of an exogenous shift in the wage rate.


       1.9.1   Wage Equation
       We begin by discussing the nature of potential endogeneity in the wage equation.
       Once the main issues are described for this equation, the others follow easily. As
       we discussed in the previous section, the R index only enters the wage equation and
       therefore appears to be a potential instrument for wages. However, an inspection
       of the error term in the wage equation and the nature of the R index indicates that
       the R index could raise endogeneity concerns of its own. The error term in the city-
       aggregate wage equation, (21), consists of the change in the log of the city-specific
       sum of local productivity shocks.15 To understand the relationship of this error term
       with ∆Rc , it is useful to decompose the changes in ∆Rc as:
                                X                                X
                       ∆Rct =       (ηict − ηict−1 ) · νit−1 +       ηict · (νit − νit−1 ) ,   (22)
                                i                                i

       where νict = wit − w1t is the wage premium and we have introduced t subscripts to
       make the timing clear.
          From (22), ∆Rct is a function of levels and changes in νit and ηict . The former are
       national-level variables and, as such, do not vary across cities. Endogeneity issues,
       though, are concerned with cross-city correlations between ∆Rc and the error term,
       which is a city-level average of local productivity shocks. Thus, the νit elements in
       (22) do not raise identification problems. On the other hand, the first term on the
       right-hand side of (22) shows that changes in the city-level rent variable depend on
       changes in the city’s industrial composition. Not surprisingly, one can write the ηict
       terms as functions of the city-industry productivity shocks, 2ict , that are aggregated
       together in the error term. This raises potential endogeneity concerns to the extent
       that cities that undergo specific composition shifts also tend to be cities with improv-
       ing productivity overall.
          While this reasoning suggests that ∆Rct cannot be used as an instrument for
       wage changes, an inspection of equation (22) reveals that a version of the second
       component of the decomposition of ∆Rct is a potential instrument. In particular,
       consider an index given by,
  15
                                  P
    Recall that we assume that c 2ic = 0, since any national-level component of productivity shocks in
an industry will be reflected in the industry price, pi .


                                                     13
                                                X
                                     IV 2ct =           ηict−1 · (νit − νit−1 ).                  (23)
                                                i

       This index captures changes in the average city rent resulting from changes in in-
       dustrial wage premia. Within the context of the model, the index reflects the idea
       that workers in cities that are concentrated in industries where wage premia fall will
       see their bargaining power, and with it their wages, fall - even if they are not in a sec-
       tor with falling national level rents. IV 2 is potentially useful because its cross-city
       variation comes from cross-city variation in start-of-period industrial composition.
       This breaks the direct link between changes in city-level productivity and changes
       in city-level industrial composition that arises from the first component in the ∆Rct
       decomposition in equation (22). IV 2 is also a function of national-level wage premia
       but, as argued earlier, the latter do not vary across city and so are not a source of
       potential correlation with the error term. Thus, for IV 2 to be a valid instrument,
       we require start-of-period local productivity shocks to be uncorrelated with changes
       in those shocks.16 This is the same assumption that underlies what are sometimes
       called Bartik-style instruments (Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992)). As
       we will discuss momentarily, in our case an over-identification restriction allows us
       to test this assumption.
           Building on the same logic, we can also construct a Bartik-style instrument re-
       lated to the first component in the ∆Rct decomposition in equation (22). Specifically,
       following Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992), we form predicted values for
       employment in industry i, in city c, in period t as:
                                                              
                                                          Eit
                                        Êict = Eict−1           .
                                                         Eit−1

       In other words, we predict period t employment using employment in the industry-
       city cell in period t − 1 multiplied by the national-level growth rate for the industry.
       Using these predicted values, we can then form predicted industry-specific employ-
       ment shares, η̂ict = PÊict , for the city in period t and, finally, form our instrument
                                i Êict
       as:
                               X                                 X
                                                                              ∗
                      IV 1ct =       νit−1 · (η̂ict − ηict−1 ) =   ηict−1 · (git − 1) · νit−1 , (24)
                                i                                  i

               ∗ = P 1+git
       where git                      and git is the growth rate in employment in industry i at
                      k ηkct (1+gkt )
                           17
       the national level. IV 1 is very similar to the first component in the decomposition
       of ∆Rct except that we break the direct link to the growth in local productivity by
  16
     This is actually somewhat stronger than the minimal condition needed for IV 2 to provide consistent
estimates. For a complete derivation of the conditions see Beaudry et al. (2012).
  17
     Having defined ηˆict , we can now give the precise definition of the IV 2 variable we actually use in our
estimation:
                                                  X
                                         IV 2ct =    ηˆict · (νit − νit−1 ).                              (25)
                                                    i

We use this rather than what is shown in equation (23) so that our instruments relate precisely to the
components in equation (22).

                                                          14
       using national-level changes. The intuition from the model is that in cities with an
       initial concentration in industries that grow well at the national level, workers in all
       industries will have better outside options and will be able to bargain better wages.
            As with IV 2, the cross-city variation in IV 1 comes from cross-city variation in in-
       dustrial composition and, so, the instrument is valid under the same condition: that
       start of period productivity is uncorrelated with productivity changes. In Beaudry
       et al. (2012), we argue that this provides an over-identifying restriction from the
       model that can be tested, and we show that this restriction cannot be rejected at
       any conventional significance level.18 We also show that the two instruments are
       not strongly correlated across cities (their correlation is only 0.18). One is built on
       changes in ∆Rct arising because of shifts in industrial composition while the other
       emphasizes shifts in wage premia. Under the model, these two forces should provide
       the same estimated effects: it doesn’t matter in bargaining whether the average-city
       wage changes because a high-paying industry leaves the city or because that indus-
       try stops paying a premium. We argue that the fact that this implication is confirmed
       in the data is strongly supportive of this model, providing a rationale for our building
       our discussion in this paper around it.
            The employment rate variable, ∆ E     L c on the right side of (21) raises similar endo-
       geneity concerns because it is clearly related to the productivity changes in the error
       term. We respond to this by using an instrument that we call IV 3, constructed as
       P
          i ηict−1 · git . This is what we called the local aggregate demand shifter in equation
       (18). It is similar in nature to IV 1 in that it consists of start-of-period city-level in-
       dustrial shares multiplied by national-level growth rates, but in this case the wage
       premia do not play a role. A city that has a strong weight on an industry that turns
       out to grow well at the national level will have a high value for this instrument.
       Once again, the consistency condition for the instrument is that start-of-period local
       productivity shocks are not correlated with growth in those shocks.
            Finally, we also need to consider endogeneity issues related to ∆ ln Lc since we
       would expect labor inflows and outflows (and, thus, city size) to be related to the
       aggregate productivity shocks in the wage equation error term. To obtain potential
       instruments within the context of the model, consider substituting the equations for
       wages (21), the employment rate (18), and the housing price (17) into the city-size
       equation (16) to obtain a reduced form equation. The resulting reduced form has
       the potential instruments we have discussed so far (instruments related to ∆Rct and
       IV 3) on the right-hand side, but we clearly need additional instruments to satisfy
       both rank and order conditions. The reduced form also has on the right-hand side
       the interaction between IV 3 and a measure of the elasticity of land supply. As we
       discuss in our Data section, we use a measure of the fraction of land available for
       residential development to form this interaction and use it as an additional instru-
       ment. As we will see, issues of collinearity between this constructed variable and
  18
    Note that the two instruments consist of different weightings of the start-of-period industrial composi-
tion and, therefore, of the start-of-period values for the productivity shocks. If the identifying assumption
that those start of period values are uncorrelated with growth in the shocks were violated then we would
expect the two instruments, with their different weightings on the resulting non-zero correlation, to pro-
vide very different estimates.


                                                    15
IV 3 result in poorly defined estimates. For that reason, we will also present spec-
ifications in which we use variables related to climate conditions as additional in-
struments. These conditions (average temperature and precipitation) can be seen as
components of the amenity shifter, 1c , for a city. The direct implication of the model
is that it is changes in these amenities that matter for the change in city size, but
qualities such as climate conditions tend to change very little over time. Instead, we
use levels in the climate conditions variables, which are valid if the amenities have
changed in their value over time. Given, as we will see, that the climate variables
are significant predictors of city size, this does seem to be the case. This fits with
Rappaport (2007)’s argument that people have been increasingly moving to places
with nice weather and with Dahl (2002)’s findings in an examination of the return
to education and worker mobility across U.S. States. For the climate variables to
be valid instruments, it must be the case that city changes in average productivity
and climate level are uncorrelated. We recognize that this is an assumption that
might be reasonably challenged if, for example, the instrument is really picking up
improvements in productivity in the South.


1.9.2   Employment Rate, Housing Cost, and City Size Equations
The identification considerations for the employment rate equation are very similar
to those of the wage equation, since the error term in (18) also includes the change in
the city-aggregate productivity along with changes in the city-level cost of creating
jobs. Equation (18) has what we call IV 3 on the right-hand side and, therefore, does
not imply any endogeneity issues as long as initial values for the productivity shocks
are not correlated with changes in the productivity and job creation cost shocks. For
the right-hand side wage terms, we have IV 1 and IV 2 as instruments; these require
the same type of identification assumptions as previously discussed. Finally, the
considerations for ∆ ln Lc are similar to those in the wage equation and we again
use the elasticity of land supply and, in some specifications, the climate variables as
instruments.
    The endogeneity considerations are somewhat different for the housing cost and
city-size equations. In these equations, the error terms do not contain average pro-
ductivity shocks, since these shocks affect city size and house prices entirely through
their impacts on wages and employment rates. Taking advantage of this identify-
ing restriction from the model and assuming that shocks to the supply of land, 4 ,
are independent of shocks to productivity, the cost of creating jobs, and amenities,
the housing price equation (17) can be consistently estimated by OLS. If 4 reflects
local political decisions about building roads or zoning regulations, however, the in-
dependence assumption may not be valid; development decisions may be related to
perceived industrial growth. Given this possibility, we also estimate (17) using the
same instruments that we use for wages in other equations. For ∆ ln Lc , the local
aggregate demand shifter, IV 3, is now available as an instrument, since it enters the
reduced form equation for ∆ ln Lc but not the housing cost equation. For all of these
instruments, we require that start-of-period productivity and job creation costs are
uncorrelated with changes in shocks to land supply – even if the changes in all of


                                          16
these variables are correlated. Of course, we can run a Hausman-type test, compar-
ing the OLS and IV estimates, as a test of whether ∆4 is uncorrelated with ∆1 , ∆2 ,
and ∆3 and, therefore, of whether OLS provides consistent estimates.


1.10    Worker Heterogeneity
In the model presented earlier, all workers are homogeneous. To relate this model to
actual data, we need to consider both observed and unobserved heterogeneity among
workers. In Beaudry et al. (2013), we describe an approach to introducing hetero-
geneity in observable skills in which individual workers are thought of as bundles
of efficiency units. If efficiency units are perfect substitutes in production, we show
that, within the context of our model, one can write the wage of any skill type in
reference to an arbitrarily chosen skill type. This justifies the use of regression ad-
justed wages in our empirical specifications, and we describe in detail how we make
those adjustments when we discuss our data in section 2. Further, when search is
random, the probability that a vacancy meets a worker of a given skill type is just
the product of the probability of meeting any worker and the proportion of workers
of that skill type. This allows us to separate the probability of meeting a worker
from worker-skill types and implies that (apart from a second order adjustment) it is
appropriate to use the overall (i.e., not conditional on education) employment rate in
our specifications.
    The other key issue that arises once we introduce heterogeneity is potential worker
self-selection across cities. In particular, one might be concerned that variation in
wages across cities reflects selection of workers of different skill types to the extent,
say, that more skilled workers are better able to leave under-performing cities and
move to more productive ones. In Davis and Dingel (2012), for example, more able
workers congregate in larger cities in order to take advantage of complementarities
in the exchange of ideas. If this is the case, that would affect our interpretation of
estimated patterns. If the selection is in terms of observable characteristics such
as education and experience, then the regression adjustment to wages that we de-
scribe in the Data section will allow us to focus on other sources of variation. For
unobservable characteristics of workers, however, we need some other response.
    We address potential selection based on unobserved ability across cities using a
methodology that follows Dahl (2002) in his study of differences in returns to educa-
tion across U.S. states. To make the issues involved clear, consider a version of (20)
where we explicitly introduce individual heterogeneity:

               E(wkic |dkic = 1) = α0ic + α1 Rc + α2 Lc + E(ekic |dkc = 1),         (26)

where k indexes individuals, the αs are parameters that amalgamate the relevant
parameters in (20), ekic corresponds to the error term from that equation, and dkc is
an indicator variable that equals 1 if person k is observed in city c. As is standard in
selection problems, (26) implies that estimation of the wage regression yields biased
estimates of the αs if the non-zero error mean term is correlated with the right hand
side variables. Dahl (2002) presents an approach to addressing the selection prob-
lem in the context of individuals choosing among multiple locations by forming an

                                           17
       estimate of the selection probabilities and including these probabilities in the wage
       regression. More specifically, he argues (under an index sufficiency condition) that
       one can represent the error mean as a function of the probability that people born in
       a given state choose location k and the probability that they choose not to move. He
       then proposes introducing a flexible function of these probabilities in regressions.19
          We follow this procedure with some modifications based on the fact that we are
       using cities rather than states and that we have immigrants in our wage sample.
       Once we have formed the probabilities that people either stay in their state of birth
       or move to a specific city, we introduce quadratics in these probabilities into an in-
       dividual wage regression along with education, experience, gender, and race vari-
       ables.20 We then use the residuals from this regression (which is run separately by
       year, thereby allowing for changes in returns to education, etc. over time) as the cor-
       rected wage variable in the rest of our estimations. This is the wage after removing
       observable skill effects and effects from selection on unobservables.21



       2    Data
       The data we use comes from the U.S. decennial Censuses from the years 1970 to
       2000 and from the American Community Survey (ACS) for 2007. Since the Census
       definitions of cities and industries change over time, we construct definitions of cities
       and industries that attempt to maximize consistency between Census years. Our
       sample includes individuals aged 20-65 residing in one of 142 cities that are based on
       the U.S. Census Bureau’s 1990 definition of Primary Metropolitan Statistical Areas.
       Details on how we construct the industry and city definitions are left to Appendix A.
           Our approach to dealing with worker heterogeneity is to control for observed
       characteristics via a regression framework. Since our analysis takes place at the
       city level, rather than the individual level, we use a common two-step procedure.
       Specifically, we run regressions separately by year of log weekly wage on a vector
  19
     Identification in this approach is based on the assumption that the person i’s underlying unobserved
productivity in industry k in city c (ekic ) is uncorrelated with the probability people born in city d are
ultimately observed in city c. For example, people born in Portland are assumed not to be inherently
more productive in Seattle than people born in New York - though different productivity people from each
place will end up in Seattle because of different costs of moving there. Since the identifying assumption
depends on probabilities of moving not on the specific origin and destination cities, this is a weaker
assumption than one that, for example, depends on assuming that city of birth is uncorrelated with a
person’s underlying ability.
  20
     The locational probability variables enter strongly significantly in the wage regressions, implying
that selection on unobservables is present. However, estimates of our main regressions in which we use
a wage variable that is corrected for observable characteristics but not selection on unobservables yields
substantively similar results to those presented here.
  21
     Skill composition of mobility could, in principle, also affect the employment rate equation. We have
generated results using employment rates adjusted for composition in much the same way as we did for
wages but have chosen to follow common convention in the estimation of employment and unemployment
regressions by presenting non-composition adjusted results here. Using composition adjusted employ-
ment rates does not alter our key findings.




                                                    18
       of individual characteristics and a full set of city dummy variables.22 We then take
       the estimated coefficients on the city dummies as our measure of city average wages,
       eliminating all cells with fewer than 20 observations.
           Similarly, we construct the ∆Rct variable, which is a function of the national-
       industrial wage premia and the proportion of workers in each industry in a city,
       by estimating analogous regressions at the national level. We control for the same
       set of individual characteristics and a full set of industry indicators. We extract
       the coefficients on the industry dummy variables as our measure of the industrial
       premia, denoted by νi in the model.
           Finally, following Moretti (2013), we measure housing prices as the city average
       of the gross monthly rent of 2 or 3 bedroom units23 and measure city-level hous-
       ing supply elasticity using estimates developed by Saiz (2010). In his paper, Saiz
       uses satellite generated data on the availability of land that is suitable for develop-
       ment and local regulatory restrictions to estimate housing supply elasticities. Saiz
       (2010) concludes that geography is a key factor in explaining urban development and
       housing prices across U.S. metro areas. In our empirical work, we make use of two
       variables generated by Saiz. The first is the ‘elasticity of housing supply’, that we de-
       note with e in our empirical work. This variable, which is estimated by Saiz, depends
       on the geographical features of the city as well as potentially endogenous regulations
       and zoning laws. The second variable that we use is the land ‘unavailable for devel-
       opment’, which we denote u below. This variable depends only a city’s predetermined
       geographical features, such as the amount of land forgone to bodies of water or steep
       inclines.



       3     Results
       3.1    City Size
       We start our discussion of our results with the estimates of the city-size equation (16)
       and its related first-stage regressions. Recall that our key right-hand side variables
       are changes in the average-city wage, the employment rate, and the price of housing.
       In the first column of Table 1, we present OLS estimates of the coefficients on these
       variables. The estimated coefficients are all of the expected signs, with higher wages
       and employment rates being associated with larger cities (and thus net in migration)
       while higher housing prices have a negative relationship with city size. However,
       none of the estimated coefficients are significant at 5% or better levels.
           As discussed earlier, our model implies that OLS is unlikely to provide consistent
       estimates of the coefficients in this regression equation. For that reason, we turn
       to estimates using combinations of the instruments described in section 1.9. Before
       doing so, we need to establish the strength of the instruments in the first stage.
  22
     In our first-stage regression, we include indicators for education (4 categories), a quadratic in ex-
perience, interactions of the experience and education variables, a gender dummy, black, hispanic and
immigrant dummy variables, and the complete set of interactions of the gender, race and immigrant
dummies with all the education and experience variables.
  23
     See Moretti (2013) for a detailed discussion of this measure for city housing costs.


                                                   19
       Table 2 contains estimates of the first-stage regressions for each of the three right-
       hand side endogenous variables. The first set of three columns include as regressors
       IV 1 (the instrument based on changes in the city’s industrial composition), IV 3 (the
       Blanchard-Katz style instrument that captures general local-demand shifts), and the
       interaction of IV 3 with Saiz (2010)’s measure of the fraction of land that is unavail-
       able for development, denoted as u. IV 1 has a strong positive effect on wages, a
       negative effect on the employment rate and a positive effect on house prices. This
       fits with a model under which a shift in composition toward industries that tend to
       pay higher wages leads to higher wages in all industries through bargaining spill-
       over effects. Those wage increases would then imply reductions in the employment
       rate as potential entrepreneurs see the profitability of opening a vacancy reduced,
       and increases in house prices because of in-migration. The general demand measure
       has a positive effect on the employment rate, as predicted, but little impact on the
       other two outcomes. Finally, the interaction of IV 3 with land unavailability has a
       strong effect on the change in housing prices but not on the other two variables. The
       F -statistics associated with a test for weak instruments are reported at the bottom of
       the relevant column in Table 1. These show that the instruments are strong predic-
       tors for the city wage and the house price but less so for the employment rate (where
       the associated F -Statistic is 7.15). But the Angrist-Pischke statistic, which takes ac-
       count of multiple instruments, soundly rejects the hypothesis that the instruments
       do not enter the first stage for all three endogenous variables (Angrist and Pichke,
       2009). Finally, we also report the Anderson-Rubin test of weak instruments, which
       tests that the excluded instruments are jointly zero in the reduced-form structural
       equation, in the row labelled RF F -test (Anderson and Rubin, 1949).24
           The second set of three columns in Table 2 contain the first-stage estimates for
       specifications using IV 2 (the instrument constructed based on changes in national-
       level industrial wage premia) instead of IV 1. The results are similar to those in
       the first set of columns, with the main exception being that IV 3 now has stronger
       impacts on all three outcomes. The positive coefficients in all three equations fit
       with theoretical predictions since higher local demand should imply higher wages
       and (through attracting more people to the city) higher house prices. Finally, in the
       third set of columns, we include both IV 1 and IV 2 along with the other instruments.
       The results are similar to those in the other sets of columns and the F -statistics and
       Angrist-Pischke tests at the bottom of the last column in Table 1 imply that we do
       not have a weak instrument problem.
           Returning to Table 1, columns (2)-(5) contain coefficient estimates using the dif-
       ferent combinations of instruments listed in the row labelled “IV Set”. The test statis-
       tic related to the over-identification restriction that an instrument set including IV 1
       and IV 2 and one that includes only one of them but is otherwise similar generate
       the same results cannot be rejected at any standard significance level (the p-value is
       0.19). While the presence of other instruments complicates interpretation, we view
       this test result combined with the similarity of estimated wage coefficients across the
  24
    This test statistic follows the F distribution with F (3, 561) degrees of freedom and has a p-value of
zero in all specifications in Table 1.



                                                   20
       three columns as fitting with the model’s implication that these very different forms
       of variation should generate the same results. Focusing on column (4) – where all
       the instruments are used – the key result is that changes in the employment rate
       have strong effects on city size while the effects of changes in average wages and
       housing prices are not statistically significant. In fact, the point estimates indicate
       that the impact on city size is twice as large for a percentage change in employment
       rates compared to wages.25 The implication is that households have strong migration
       responses to changes in employment rates but much less strong responses to wages
       and house price changes. The greater importance of employment rates relative to
       wages fits with results in Blanchard and Katz (1992) that indicate that migration
       across U.S. states is very responsive to employment shocks. The result makes some
       intuitive sense as not being able to find employment is a shock that is discrete in
       nature and potentially large in its impact on incomes. It seems more reasonable to
       expect a large and discrete response to this (i.e., relocation) than to a change in a
       wage. To reiterate our point from the introduction, considering the migration and
       the labor market problem in a search and bargaining framework provides us with a
       consistent way to think about both employment rate and wage effects on migration.
       This, in turn, allows us to characterize endogeneity problems and solutions to them,
       which leads to the estimated causal effects showing the importance of employment
       rate shifts.
           To investigate this result further, in Table 3 we present results where we combine
       the wage and housing cost variables. This is effectively a constraint on the specifica-
       tion from Table 1 in which we assume that potential migrants care about real wages
       net-of-house price differences. To the extent that wages and house price movements
       are collinear, this allows the real wage to have its fullest effect. We form the change
       in the real wage by subtracting from the change in the nominal wage, the change in
       the house price multiplied by an assumed valued for the proportionate importance of
       house prices in household budgets. Using IV 1, IV 2 and IV 3 as instruments, we find
       that the real wage has a well identified, statistically significant effect on migration,
       compared to the specification in Table 1 where wages and housing costs had separate
       effects. However, this has little impact on the employment rate coefficient, which has
       an impact on migration that is still twice as large as wage effects. The results are
       largely unchanged when we vary the proportion of the budget dedicated to housing
       from 0.25 up to 0.45. These results imply that agents tend to respond three times
       more to employment rate changes than to wage changes. It is interesting to think
       of these results in the context of standard models of the labor market and city size
       where the labor market is assumed Walrasian. In those models, changes in the local
       economy are modelled as affecting wages which then generate a migration response.
       Our results echo those of Blanchard and Katz (1992) by suggesting that is not the
       main channel affecting migration adjustments. To put this in more standard termi-
  25
     We have made a conscious choice to report elasticity estimates rather than estimates standardized
by, for example, the standard errors of wage and employment rate shocks. Measures of the latter in the
data will be equilibrium outcomes. Thus, if responses to wage changes were very elastic, we would end
up scaling the wage coefficient down substantially since we would observe very little variation in wages
in steady state. Given this, we focus on the estimated slopes of the relationships expressed as elasticities.


                                                    21
       nology, we find that ”people follow jobs” more than wages. One way to interpret this
       pattern is that labour is very mobile, leading to quick adjustments back to steady
       state with little observed change in wages. However, in section 4 we argue that there
       are reasons to believe that adjustments are, in fact, sluggish and the economy may
       not reach a steady state quickly.


       3.2    House Costs
       We turn next to our results from estimating equation (17), which we present in Table
       4. The first column contains OLS estimates of the regression of changes in the log of
       housing prices on changes in average city wages, changes in city size, and the latter
       variable interacted with the measure of the elasticity of the supply of land. 26 We
       present these for interest’s sake but given our arguments about endogeneity, we pre-
       fer to focus our discussion on the IV specification. A Hausman test of the restriction
       that the coefficients in the IV and OLS specifications are the same (and, therefore,
       that amenity and land-supply shocks are independent of productivity shocks) rejects
       the restriction at any standard significance level.
           Column 2 of the Table contains estimates when we use our full set of instruments
       (IV 1, IV 2, IV 3 and u · IV 3). The signs on the coefficients fit with increased wages
       generating higher house prices. Note that this effect does not occur through a mi-
       gration response to higher wages, since we control for changes in city size in the
       regression. Instead, it fits with increased labor costs leading to increased building
       costs. Interestingly, the size of the wage coefficient is close to 1 and we cannot reject
       the restriction that it equals 1. The coefficient on the change in city size variable is
       positive, as we would expect, and is statistically significant. Thus, the key adjust-
       ment mechanism in the model (and in more standard models) in which increases in
       migration push up house prices is present in the data. The coefficient on the interac-
       tion of city size with the elasticity of land supply indicates, however, that that effect
       is weakened the more elastic is the supply of labor, which fits with expectations.
           It seems plausible that effects of the elasticity of the supply of land could be very
       non-linear, with changes in city size having particularly substantial effects on house
       prices when the elasticity is very low and having zero effects for a wide range of large
       elasticity values. To investigate this, in the third column we present a specification
       in which we interact the change in city size with a set of indicator variables corre-
       sponding to different ranges of the elasticity of housing supply (where the range is
       given by elasticity quintiles in our sample).27 The wage effect remains very sim-
       ilar to that in the more restrictive specification but the interactions do indicate a
       strong non-linearity. Effectively, the positive effect of increased city size on house
       prices is only present for cities with very inelastic housing supplies (cities like San
  26
     Our estimated coefficient on city size, 0.059, is quite similar to the estimate of 0.085 obtained (and
interpreted within a structural model) in Behrens et al. (2012)’s regression of house rents on city size
using U.S. Census data in 2000. However, our specification includes the interaction with land supply
elasticity while theirs does not.
  27
     In this specification, we instrument for the change in the average city wage using IV 1 and IV 2 but
we do not instrument for all of the interactions.



                                                    22
       Francisco and Boston). Once we reach even moderate values for the supply index
       (values in the second quintile of the distribution across cities which includes cities
       like Minneapolis and Pittsburgh), the city size effect is not statistically significant
       at any conventional level. These estimates suggest the migration flows only affect
       housing costs in a small fraction of cities. This observation is potentially problematic
       for simple spatial models which rely exclusively on the adjustment of house prices to
       migration flows as the mechanism generating equilibrium outcomes.


       3.3    Wage Equation
       We turn, next, to estimates of the wage equation (21). Beaudry et al. (2012) contains
       an investigation of the determination of wages in the context of a multi-sector search
       and bargaining model. The main difference in our specification here is the inclusion
       of potential agglomeration effects, and we will focus our attention on those effects.
       Column 1 of Table 5 contains OLS estimates of equation (21). Those estimates imply
       positive effects of the industrial composition variable (and, therefore, positive wage
       spill-over effects as indicated by the model), and positive effects of the employment
       rate and city size. Of course, endogeneity considerations mean that these are likely
       not consistent estimates and in column (2) we present results from estimations that
       use the main instruments derived from the model: IV 1, IV 2, IV 3, and the interac-
       tion of IV 3 with u, the fraction of land unavailable for development. Unfortunately,
       collinearity among the instruments results in quite poorly defined estimates. In the
       third column, we add to the instrument set the climate variables described earlier,
       and this allows us to obtain better defined estimates. We will focus our discussion on
       these estimates.28
           The estimated coefficient on ∆R is positive, significant at the 1% level and similar
       in magnitude to the OLS estimated coefficient. It is also similar in size to the effect
       estimated in Beaudry et al. (2012). In that paper, we show that this coefficient can
       be interpreted as a multiple of a standard “between” element in a decomposition of
       the effect of an industrial composition change on the average-city wage. Thus, we
       interpret our estimates as saying that, because of spillovers, the effect of a change in
       industrial composition is 2.5 to 3 times larger than one would predict from a simple
       decomposition exercise. The employment rate effect, in contrast, is close to zero and
       not statistically significant at conventional level. In the context of the model, this
       implies that the wage bargaining curve is rather flat.
           Our key point of focus in the wage equation is on the change in city size variable.
       The estimated coefficient on that variable is quite small and not statistically signifi-
       cant. We can view this estimated effect in the light of two different literatures. The
       first is the substantial literature estimating the impact of migration-related supply
       shocks on outcomes in local economies. Perhaps the most famous paper in this lit-
  28
    At the suggestion of a referee, we also estimated the wage equation using an alternative version of our
instruments based on industrial proportions from the start of the preceding decade (e.g., the proportions
in 1970 when constructing the instruments for the 1980 to 1990 changes). The resulting estimates are
very similar to those using the instruments presented here which we view as further support for the
conclusion from the over-identification tests that our instruments are valid.


                                                    23
       erature is the Card (1990) paper on the impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami
       economy. The Mariel Boatlift stemmed from a one-time event in which the Cuban
       government allowed a large number of people to leave. Most of these migrants set-
       tled in the Miami area, increasing the size of the population by 7% virtually over-
       night. Strikingly, Card found no impact on either wages or employment rates in
       Miami after the first few years. That paper has been followed by numerous others,
       investigating various adjustment mechanisms such as out-migration from a city and
       technological adjustment (Lewis, 2004, for example). Even papers that are quite
       critical of the initial methodology, though, tend to find quite small employment re-
       sponses to migration shocks (Borjas et al., 1996). The model presented here provides
       an explanation for these outcomes once we take into account that the agglomeration
       effects are effectively zero. Specifically, in this model, given the matching technology
       is constant returns to scale and we assume that entrepreneurs are proportional to
       the population, the size of the economy does not matter since none of the key param-
       eters in the model change with city size. That means that an economy hit with a
       migration shock effectively replicates itself, moving to a new equilibrium where the
       city size is larger but wages and the employment rate are unchanged. Our estimated
       coefficients fit with this implication of the model.
           Given the latter model implication, city size only enters our wage specification
       because of our hypothesized link between productivity and city size. This raises
       the second relevant literature: the extensive literature on agglomeration effects for
       cities (see Rosenthal and Strange (2004) and Melo et al. (2009) for reviews). Part
       of that literature documents that firms tend to cluster near other firms in the same
       industry (e.g., Rosenthal and Strange (2003) and Duranton and Overman (2005)).
       More directly relevant for us are studies examining the relationship of firm produc-
       tivity or wages to industrial concentration and/or city size.29 Melo et al. (2009), in a
       meta-analysis of that literature, show that studies tend to find significant, positive
       effects of both city size (what they call urbanization) and industrial concentration
       (what they call localization). The unweighted average of the 729 estimates of city
       size effects they examine is 0.058. Our estimated, near-zero effect does not appear to
       fit with this pattern in the earlier literature. However, when we estimate a simple
       specification similar to that in the agglomeration literature with only the change in
       city size on the right-hand side (instrumenting using climate variables and IV 3 · u,
       and including year × industry dummies), we obtain an estimated coefficient of 0.06
       (s.e. 0.039). Thus, it appears to be the inclusion of our other controls that sets our
       estimates apart. As far as we are aware, no other paper controls for our measure
       of industrial composition, which is based on the relative industrial wage not on any
       measure of productivity or other links across industries, or for the city-level employ-
       ment rate. This suggests that part of what is often estimated as an agglomeration
       effect in fact reflects the effects of these other variables, whose inclusion is theoreti-
       cally indicated in our model. In addition, though, estimates in the existing literature
  29
    Davis and Dingle(2012) derive a very interesting model in which ideas exchange results in worker
sorting by ability across cities. Larger cities have higher wages because more able workers congregate
there and generate more productive ideas due to their interactions.



                                                  24
tend to be smaller when human capital controls are included. Behrens et al. (2012),
for example, show that controlling for the level of education in a city reduces esti-
mated effects of city size on average-city earnings by about a third. Given that we
control for observable human capital variation and selection on unobserved skills,
our small measures are not greatly outside the range of existing estimates. Indeed,
the 95% confidence interval around our point estimates imply that we cannot rule
out the sort of small positive agglomeration effects found in the existing literature.


3.4    Employment Rate Equation
In Table 6, we present results from estimating equation (18). As with estimates of
the other equations, the first column contains OLS results in order to show basic
patterns. Those estimates reveal a positive and significant effect of the local de-
mand index (as predicted) but also a positive effect of the average wage variable.
The latter is the opposite of what the model predicts since it corresponds to the slope
of the job creation curve which is predicted to be negative. However, the estimate
should fit with this prediction only if endogeneity concerns are addressed. In the
second column, we present results from IV estimation using instruments implied by
the model: IV 1, IV 2, and IV 1 − 3 interacted with the measure of the unavailability
of developable land. In these estimates, the wage coefficient becomes negative and
significant (as the theory predicts). Both the local demand effect and city size have
positive coefficients but both are also poorly defined. As before, we believe this is a
result of collinearity problems among the instruments. In response, in the third col-
umn we present results using IV 1, IV 2 and the climate variables as instruments. In
this specification, the wage effect is again negative and significant with a coefficient
of −0.30. This is very similar to the estimated value for the slope of the job creation
curve obtained in Beaudry et al. (2013). The local demand index now has a positive
and significant effect, with a 10% increase in the demand index implying a 2.4% in-
crease in the city employment rate. On the other hand, the change in city size has
a coefficient which is negative, small and not significantly different from zero at any
conventional significance level. This fits with the result in the wage equation that
productivity does not respond to city size – at least once we control for the demand
index and the index of wage-related industrial composition.



4     Is Spatial Steady State the Proper Way of In-
terpreting the Cross-city Patterns?
Up to now, we have interpreted the data within a framework where mobility is as-
sumed to be sufficiently strong to always equate utility across cities. However, as
we have noted, for many cities the main mechanism which should bring about such
equalization is anemic; that is, we saw that for most U.S. cities housing costs do not
respond to migration flows. This opens up the question of whether the data are best
interpreted as reflecting points where agents are indifferent between different loca-
tions, or alternatively, as out of steady-state points – perhaps on a path toward the


                                          25
       equal utility state. In this section, we want to highlight some patterns which point
       to the possibility that mobility frictions may hinder the continuous equalization of
       utility across localities even as an approximation over 10 year periods.
           The first piece of evidence suggesting that mobility may be quite sluggish comes
       from comparing estimates of our city-size equation estimated over a window of 20
       years versus one of 10 years. As we saw in Tables 1 and 3, labor does tend to flow
       toward cities with higher wages and higher employment. However, it is worth em-
       phasizing that our estimates in these tables indicate that the elasticity of labor flows
       with respect to wage movements is far from infinite, which in itself can be interpreted
       as potential evidence against a fully mobile labour interpretation of the data. More
       to the point, when we estimate the labour flow equation over a 20 year window, as
       reported in Table 7 for both OLS and some IV specifications, we find that elasticity
       of migration to the real wage is twice as big as that found when estimating over a 10
       year window. While there can be different interpretations of this finding, it provides
       some indication that a very slow process of labour reallocation may be at play.
           Given this, it is worth re-examining our results for the wage equation from the
       perspective that short run mobility may be limited. Recall that in our derivation of
       the wage equation, we made explicit use of the assumption that worker’s mobility is
       sufficient to equalize their utility across cities. In particular, that assumption caused
       an important simplification of the worker’s Bellman equations: it implies that the
       option to move to another city has no value. This explains why the cost of local
       housing does not enter the equation for the determination of wages. Here, we want
       to allow for the possibility that utility may not always be equalized across localities
       and explore the implications that follow. 30 31
           To clarify the implications for wage determination of being out of steady-state
       in terms of equalized utility, recall that the wage equation is derived from the bar-
       gaining condition, (11), which in turn depends on the worker’s surplus from being
       employed relative to being unemployed. With utility equalized across cities, local
       amenities and house prices enter the employed and unemployed value functions in
       the same way and, as a result, play no role in the worker’s surplus. However, once we
       allow for being out of steady-state, the unemployed option has an extra component:
       the option to move to a city with higher utility. Given this, the local house prices
       and amenities remain relevant in firm-worker bargaining and the wage equation
       becomes:
                X                                        E                              X
         ∆ ln       ηic wic = α̃40 + α̃41 ∆Rc − α̃42 ∆      + α̃45 ∆ ln Pch + α̃44 ∆ ln   i2c + α̃46 ∆1c ,
                                                         Lc
                i
                                                                                                         (27)

       where we have assumed here that city-size congestion and agglomeration effects are
       zero in order to focus attention on the house price implications.
  30
      One can show that allowing for being out of steady state in terms of mobility does not affect the
specification of the employment rate equation.
   31
      This is only possible if we consider a version of the model in which utility is not fully equalized across
cities since when they are equalized, wages and house prices are perfectly co-determined and one cannot
meaningfully discuss a causal effect of house price changes on wages.


                                                          26
    Column 1 of Table 8 contains OLS coefficients from estimating equation (27). As
expected, the coefficient on ∆R is again positive but smaller than in the estimation
not including the house price. The employment rate again enters with a small and
insignificant coefficient. The change in the house price has a positive sign, which fits
with theoretical implications: when house prices rise, worker surplus from employ-
ment decreases and wage bargaining implies that they need to be compensated with
higher wages. Thus, factors that push up housing prices can push up wages when
mobility is sufficiently low and the national economy is out of steady-state.
    As in all of our estimates, we next turn to IV implementations of the equation. In
column 2 of Table 8, we present estimates using IV 1 − 3 and u · IV 3 as instruments.
Relative to the OLS estimates, the ∆R coefficient is somewhat larger, while the other
two coefficients are somewhat smaller. We get very similar results when we use the
climate variables as instruments instead of the land supply elasticity (column 3).
The smaller coefficient on ∆R when we include the house price variable fits with
a notion that a shift in industrial composition toward higher paying industries has
the effect in terms of increasing bargaining power in all sectors that we have so far
emphasized, but also has an impact on housing prices. Specifically, as we saw ear-
lier, increased wages likely lead to increased costs of house construction and, thus,
increased housing costs. We can see from estimation of (27) that those increased
housing costs, in turn, push up wages. Thus, the effect we obtain from the specifica-
tion without house prices is a total effect reflecting both the direct bargaining effect
and the indirect effect through house prices. Under the out-of-steady-state assump-
tion, we can control for the latter, indirect route, and the direct bargaining effect
therefore becomes smaller. It is interesting to note the interaction between wages
and housing costs implied by our estimates of (27) and those of the housing cost
equation. We see from these two equations that wages have a much stronger effect
on housing costs than housing costs have on wages. For example, an exogenous in-
crease in housing costs of 1% has an effect on wages of .25% while the effect of wages
on housing costs is estimated to be approximately one-for-one. If the data reflected
a spatial steady-state then wages and house prices would be perfectly co-determined
and, in principle, we could not obtain well-defined estimates of the impact of house
prices on wages. The fact that we are able to do so may be further evidence that the
economy is not well approximated by a in spatial steady-state at ten year differences.
We are, however, cautious about over-emphasizing this conclusion since econometric
shortcomings might result in such estimates even within spatial steady-state.
    Since we are suggesting that the observed cross-city patterns over a 10 year win-
dow may reflect slow movements toward a spatial steady-state – as opposed to be-
ing in a continual steady-state – it appears relevant to contrast this interpretation
with that in Blanchard and Katz (1992). A main finding in Blanchard and Katz
(1992) is that an increase in labor demand appears to be associated with offsetting
in-migration and very little change in wages. This observation has been taken as
evidence that labour is close to perfectly mobile across U.S. localities. Our empiri-
cal results are very much in line with those of Blanchard and Katz (1992), however
the proper interpretation is not so clear. First, to see how our results line up with
those in Blanchard and Katz (1992), note that their measure of labour demand corre-

                                          27
                      P
sponds to the index i ηic gi which is included in our estimation on the employment
rate equation. In column 3 of Table 8, we see that the coefficient on this index is
approximately 0.2, that is, an increase in labour demand of 1% increases the em-
ployment rate by 0.2%. We can now use this estimated effect in conjuction with our
estimate of the migration flows given by the city size equation to get an estimate of
a change in labour demand on the supply of workers. Since the impact of employ-
ment rate changes on migration flows is estimated to be around 6 (from estimates of
Equation 1), we infer the effect of a 1% increase in labour demand on the local sup-
ply of workers to be 1.2 (6 × 0.2), which is line with the previous finding. Moreover,
given that we saw that wages respond little to changes in the employment rate, this
is consistent with the pattern observed by Blanchard and Katz (1992). The issue is
how these data should be interpreted. We believe that these results are consistent
with the view that, although agents respond very aggressively to changes in labour
demand, migration flows across U.S. cities may be insufficient to equate utility over
the short run.
    The results and discussion of this section have been aimed at highlighting pat-
terns of the data that may pose some challenges to the commonly used notion of
spatial steady-state as a relevant approximation over short periods. In particular,
we have emphasized that observed labor flows and wage determination patterns are
at least suggestive of the possibility that cross-city mobility may be insufficiently re-
sponsive for the economy to be interpreted as continuously being in a spatial steady-
state. This opens up the question of whether there are other forces not included in
the model which may help the attainment of a spatial steady-state. For example, if
local technological knowledge advantages are very temporary, as such information
may flow rapidly between cities, then limited labour mobility may not be a great hin-
drance to the attainment of spatial steady-state. To examine this possibility along
one dimension, in Table 9 we provide estimates of the within industry convergence
rates of wages across-cities. In the first column, we report the OLS estimates of the
effect of initial wages (by industry-city cells) on subsequent change in wages over
a 10 year window. In the second column we instrument the initial wages with the
levels one decade earlier. From the IV results, we can see that over the period con-
sidered, there is virtually no indication that wages are converging across locality.
This fits with results in Ganong and Shoag (2013) who show that the relative lack of
convergence is a phenomenon that emerged after 1980 and argue that it is related
to the rise of housing regulations that have rendered housing supply relatively in-
elastic in some cities. The lack of convergence, combined with both the evidence that
labour flows may be sluggish and that labour flows may have very limited effects on
local housing costs, imply that city-level outcomes over the short and medium term
may reflect a very slow adjustment process toward spatial steady-state as opposed to
being in steady-state.




                                           28
5    Conclusion
In this paper, we present and empirically evaluate a search and bargaining model in
a spatial equilibrium setting. Building on previous work, Beaudry et al. (2012, 2013),
we extend a search and bargaining model with multiple industries and cities to allow
for agglomeration or congestion externalities. In contrast to Walrasian spatial equi-
librium setups, our model is characterized by search frictions and wage bargaining,
giving rise to equilibrium unemployment. We empirically evaluate the implications
gained from a spatial equilibrium model with these additional characteristics using
U.S. Census and ACS data on cities over 1970-2007.
    The structure of our model gives rise to a system of four equations that jointly
determine city size, housing costs, wages and employment rates. The model makes
clear endogeneity concerns and helps derive instruments with which can be used
to identify key parameters. Our instruments use national-level patterns to predict
industrial composition shifts that affect the outside options, and, hence, wages, of
workers at the local level. Using this idea, we are able to identify the effect of wages
on variables of interest and evaluate the relative importance of wages and employ-
ment opportunities for migration decisions. We find that, consistent with Blanchard
and Katz (1992), households are much more responsive to changes in local employ-
ment rates than to wages. Our results suggest that migration responses are nearly
three times larger for changes in employment rates compared to changes in wages.
    The relative responsiveness of migration to changes in wages and employment
rates is important since the high sensitivity of migration decisions to local unem-
ployment previously documented in the literature – and confirmed here– is often
taken as evidence that mobility is likely sufficient strong to assure that utility is al-
ways equalized across localities. However, the much smaller effect on mobility we
find for wages cast some doubt regarding the validity of such an inference. We also
found other pieces of evidence supporting the idea that utility may not be constantly
equalized across localities. In particular, we find that for the majority of the cities in
our sample, housing prices do not respond significantly to migration, with the excep-
tion of a few land constrained cities which respond strongly to worker inflows. Thus,
for the unconstrained, elastic housing supply cities, the unresponsiveness of housing
prices to migration puts into question their role for equating utility across cities. Fur-
ther, our observation that local wages respond weakly but significantly to changes in
local housing costs provides some support to an out-of-steady-state interpretation of
the data. These estimates also provide insight regarding the relative importance of
the effect of housing costs on wages versus the effect of local wages on housing cost.
We find that housing costs respond very strongly to wages – in a proportion near to
one-to-one, while the direct effect of housing cost on wages is found to be 5 times
smaller.
    Finally, although our model incorporates possible agglomeration externalities, we
find little evidence of their existence, either positive or negative, over the medium
term, ten-year windows that we examine. Taken together with our other results,
this provides insight into the nature of the spatial equilibrium process across U.S.
cities over 10-year periods. For the majority of the cities in our sample, housing


                                           29
prices do not respond to migration, implying that the spatial equilibrium has a re-
cursive structure – local technology dictates a city’s wage structure, employment rate
and housing costs. Agents relocate across cities in response to differences between
cities, but their movements have very little feedback effects. This, in turn, implies
significant migration frictions, otherwise individuals would tend to end up in only a
few cities.



References
Amior, M. (2012). Housing Costs and Local Earnings Inequality. Technical report,
 Department of Economics, University College London.

Anderson, T. and Rubin, H. (1949). Estimation of the parameters of a single equa-
  tion in a complete system of stochastic equations. The Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, 20:46–63.

Angrist, J. D. and Pichke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiri-
  cist’s Companion. Princeton University Press.

Bartik, T. J. (1991). Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Poli-
  cies? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.

Beaudry, P., Green, D. A., and Sand, B. M. (2012). Does Industrial Composition Mat-
  ter for Wages? A test of search and bargaining theory. Econometrica, 80(3):1063–
  1104.

Beaudry, P., Green, D. A., and Sand, B. M. (2013). How Elastic is the Job Creation
  Curve?

Behrens, K., Duranton, G., and Robert-Nicoud, F. (2012). Productive cities: Sorting,
  selection and agglomeration. Technical Report 7922, C.E.P.R.

Blanchard, O. and Katz, L. (1992). Regional Evolutions. Brookings Papers on Eco-
  nomic Activity. Microeconomics.

Borjas, G. J., Freeman, R. B., and Katz, L. F. (1996). Searching for the Effect of
  Immigration on the Labor Market. The American Economic Review, Papers and
  Proceedings, 86(2):246–251.

Card, D. (1990). The impact of the Mariel boatlift on the Miami labor market. Indus-
  trial and Labor Relations Review, 43(2):245–257.

Combes, P.-P., Duranton, G., Gobillon, L., Puga, D., and Roux, S. (2012). The Pro-
  ductivity Advantages of Large Cities: Distinguishing Agglomeration From Firm
  Selection. Econometrica, 80(6):2543–2594.

Dahl, G. (2002). Mobility and the return to education: Testing a Roy model with
  multiple markets. Econometrica, 70(6):2367–2420.



                                         30
Davis, D. and Dingel, J. (2012). A Spatial Knowledge Economy. Technical Report
  18188, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Deaton, A. and Lubotsky, D. (2003). Mortality, inequality and race in American cities
  and states. Social science & medicine, 56(6):1139–53.

Duranton, G. and Overman, H. G. (2005). Testing for localization using micro- ge-
 ographic data Testing for Localisation Using Micro-Geographic Data. Review of
 Economic Studies, 72(4):1077–1106.

Fonseca, R., Lopez-garcia, P., and Pissarides, C. A. (2001). Entrepreneurship, start-
  up costs and employment. European Economic Review, (45):692–705.

Ganong, P. and Shoag, D. (2013). Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S.
  Declined? Technical Report No. RWP12-028, Harvard Kennedy School.

Glaeser, E. L. and Gottlieb, J. D. (2009). The Wealth of Cities: Agglomeration
  Economies and Spatial Equilibrium in the United States. Journal of Economic
  Literature, 47(4):983–1028.

Lewis, E. (2004). How Did the Miami Labor Market Absorb the Mariel Immigrants?
  Technical Report 04-3, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Melo, P. C., Graham, D. J., and Noland, R. B. (2009). A meta-analysis of esti-
 mates of urban agglomeration economies. Regional Science and Urban Economics,
 39(3):332–342.

Moretti, E. (2011). Local labor markets. In Ashenfelter, O. and Card, D., editors,
 Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4, chapter 14. Elsevier, 1st edition.

Moretti, E. (2013). Real Wage Inequality. American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 5(1):65–103.

Park, J. H. (1994). Estimation of Sheepskin Effects and Returns to Schooling Using
  he Old and the New CPS Measures of Educational Attainment. Technical Report
  717, Princeton University, Industrial Relations Section.

Pissarides (2000). Equilibrium Unemployment Theory. 2nd ed., Cambridge (MA):
  MIT Press.

Pissarides, C. A. and Wadsworth, J. (1989). Unemployment and the Inter-Regional
  Mobility of Labour. The Economic Journal, 99(397):739–755.

Rappaport, J. (2007). Moving to nice weather. Regional Science and Urban Eco-
  nomics, 37(3):375–398.

Roback, J. (1982). Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. The Journal of Political
  Economy, 90(6):1257–1278.




                                         31
       Rogerson, R., Shimer, R., and Wright, R. (2005). Search-Theoretic Models of the
         Labor Market: A Survey. Journal of Economic Literature, XLIII(December):959–
         988.

       Rosenthal, S. S. and Strange, W. C. (2003). Geography, Industrial Organization, and
         Agglomeration. Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2):377–393.

       Rosenthal, S. S. and Strange, W. C. (2004). Evidence on the Nature and Sources of
         Agglomeration Economies. In Henderson, J. V. and Thisse, J. F., editors, Hand-
         book of Urban and Regional Economics, volume 4, chapter 49, pages 2119–2171.
         Elsevier, 1st edition.

       Ruggles, S., Alexander, T. J., Genadek, K., Goeken, R., and Schroeder, Matthew B.
         Sobek, M. (2010). Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-
         readable database]. Technical report, University of Minnesota.

       Saiz, A. (2010). The geographic determinants of housing supply. The Quarterly
         Journal of Economics, 125(3):1253–1296.



        A     Data
       The Census data was obtained with extractions done using the IPUMS system (see
       Ruggles et al. (2010). The files were the 1980 5% State (A Sample), 1990 State, 2000
       5% Census PUMS, and the 2007 American Community Survey. For 1970, Forms 1
       and 2 were used for the Metro sample. The initial extraction includes all individuals
       aged 20 - 65 not living in group quarters. All calculations are made using the sample
       weights provided. For the 1970 data, we adjust the weights for the fact that we
       combine two samples. We focus on the log of weekly wages, calculated by dividing
       wage and salary income by annual weeks worked. We impute incomes for top coded
       values by multiplying the top code value in each year by 1.5. Since top codes vary by
       State in 1990 and 2000, we impose common top-code values of 140, 000 in 1990 and
       175, 000 in 2000.
           A consistent measure of education is not available for these Census years. We use
       indicators based on the IPUMS recoded variable EDUCREC that computes comparable
       categories from the 1980 Census data on years of school completed and later Census
       years that report categorical schooling only. To calculate potential experience (age
       minus years of education minus six), we assign group mean years of education from
       Table 5 in Park (1994) to the categorical education values reported in the 1990 and
       2000 Censuses.
           Census definitions of metropolitan areas are not comparable over time since, in
       general, the geographic areas covered by them increase over time and their defini-
       tions are updated to reflect this expansion. The definition of cities we use attempts
       to maximize geographic comparability over time and roughly correspond to 1990 def-
       initions of MSAs provided by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget.32 To create
32
     See http://www.census.gov/population/estimates/pastmetro.html for details.


                                                   32
       geographically consistent MSAs, we follow a procedure based largely on Deaton and
       Lubotsky (2003) which uses the geographical equivalency files for each year to assign
       individuals to MSAs or PMSAs based on FIPs state and PUMA codes (in the case of
       1990 and 2000) and county group codes (for 1970 and 1980). Each MSA label we use
       is essentially defined by the PUMAs it spans in 1990. Once we have this information,
       the equivalency files dictate what counties to include in each city for the other years.
       Since the 1970 county group definitions are much courser than those in later years,
       the number of consistent cities we can create is dictated by the 1970 data. This pro-
       cess results in our having 152 MSAs that are consistent across all our sample years.
       Code for this exercise was generously provided by Ethan G. Lewis.
           We use an industry coding that is consistent across Censuses and is based on the
       IPUMS recoded variable IND1950, which recodes census industry codes to the 1950
       definitions. This generates 144 consistent industries.33
           Our measure of housing prices follows Moretti (2013). In particular, we use the
       IPUMs variable “gross monthly rent” called RENTGRS. This measure includes the con-
       tract rent plus utility costs, and IPUMs suggests that it is more comparable across
       individuals than “contract monthly rent”. However, we find very similar results us-
       ing either measure. As in Moretti (2013), we limit the sample to rental units with 2
       or 3 bedrooms, and we correct for top coding by multiplying top-coded values by 1.3.


        A.1     Geographic Data
       City geographic data on land availability and estimated housing supply elasticity
       were downloaded from Albert Saiz’s web page found here:
           http://real.wharton.upenn.edu/ saiz/SUPPLYDATA.zip Saiz (2010) provides a de-
       tailed description on the construction of this data.


        A.2     Climate Instruments
       The data we use for the city climate variables comes from the 1988 edition of the
       County and City Data Book.34 We extract the following metro area variables:
         1. Average daily temperature in July
         2. Average daily high temperature in July
         3. Average daily temperature in January
         4. Average daily low temperature in January
         5. Annual precipitation
         6. Annual degree cooling days
         7. Annual degree heating days
       The data are consistent with the idea that mild climates have become more desirable
       over time, consistent with our hypothesis of the changing valuation of climate as a
       city amenity.
33
     See http://usa.ipums.org/usa-action/variableDescription.do?mnemonic=IND1950 for details.
34
     Details can be found here: http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/studies/9251.

                                                  33
Table 1: Estimate of City Size Equation (16): Decadal Change in Population
                            OLS                               IV
                             (1)           (2)              (3)                 (4)
       ∆wct                  0.47       3.17∗              2.74               2.34
                            (0.28)      (1.43)            (1.51)             (1.31)
       ∆ log EL ct         0.0082       5.43∗             7.79∗              6.60∗
                           (0.30)       (2.00)            (2.38)             (1.93)
       ∆ log phct          -0.022       -1.27             -1.44              -0.94
                           (0.16)       (0.93)            (1.15)             (0.93)
       Year                  Yes          Yes               Yes                Yes
       Observations          568          568              568                 568
       R2
       IV Set:                        IV1,IV3,u· IV3   IV2,IV3,u · IV3   IV1,IV2,IV3,u· IV3

       F-Stats:
        ∆wct                             49.09            46.11               60.93
        ∆ log EL ct                       7.15            12.65               9.98
        ∆ log phct                       39.37            39.12               35.51
       RF F -test:                       12.33            12.00               9.21
       AP p.val:
        ∆wct                             0.00              0.00                0.00
        ∆ log EL ct                      0.00              0.00                0.00
        ∆ log phct                       0.00              0.00                0.00
       Over-id. p-val                      .                 .                 0.19
              N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are
              given in parentheses. (∗ ) denotes significance at the 5% level.
              All models estimated on a sample of 142 U.S cities using Cen-
              sus and ACS data for 1970-2007. The dependent variable is
              the decadal log change in adult population.




                                             34
                                                 Table 2: First Stage: Equation (16)
                                      Col (2)                             Col (3)                               Col (4)
                          (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)          (7)         (8)           (9)
                         ∆wct      ∆ log EL ct   ∆ log phct    ∆wct      ∆ log EL ct   ∆ log phct     ∆wct      ∆ log EL ct   ∆ log phct
     IV1                5.107∗        -0.960∗    7.041∗                                              4.112∗     -0.737∗       5.996∗
                        (0.520)       (0.353)    (0.929)                                             (0.512)    (0.354)       (0.967)
     IV2                                                      3.586∗     -0.781∗       3.968∗        3.091∗     -0.692∗       3.246∗
                                                              (0.411)    (0.228)       (0.577)       (0.343)    (0.241)       (0.495)
     IV3               -0.0748      0.206∗       -0.236        0.402∗     0.118∗       0.429∗       -0.000748    0.190∗        -0.158
                       (0.0765)    (0.0537)      (0.125)      (0.0615)   (0.0367)      (0.109)       (0.0726)   (0.0510)      (0.127)
     u · IV 3           0.0919      0.0251        0.457∗       0.0134     0.0407        0.356∗       0.0584      0.0326        0.421∗
                       (0.0486)    (0.0322)      (0.0874)     (0.0433)   (0.0315)      (0.0819)     (0.0414)    (0.0314)      (0.0814)




35
     Observations            568       568         568          568         568          568          568          568          568
     R2
     Standard errors in parentheses
     Table for First Stage
     ∗
         p < 0.05
Table 3: Estimate of City Size Equation (16) with Real Wages: Decadal Change in
Population
                                                         Equation 16
                                        (1)              (2)         (3)           (4)
            ∆wct − 0.25 × ∆phct       1.64∗
                                      (0.47)
            ∆wct − 0.35 × ∆phct                         2.02∗
                                                        (0.60)
            ∆wct − 0.40 × ∆phct                                    2.28∗
                                                                   (0.70)
            ∆wct − 0.45 × ∆phct                                                  2.61∗
                                                                                 (0.83)
            ∆ log EL ct               6.40∗             6.54∗      6.64∗         6.77∗
                                      (1.71)            (1.74)     (1.77)        (1.80)
            Year                        Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes
            Observations                568              568         568           568
            R2
            IV Set:                  IV1,IV2,IV3    IV1,IV2,IV3   IV1,IV2,IV3   IV1,IV2,IV3

            F-Stats:
             ∆wct − α · ∆phct         74.36             57.46      45.63         33.47
             ∆ log EL ct              12.51             12.51      12.51         12.51
            RF F -test:               11.93             11.93      11.93         11.93
            AP p.val:
             ∆wct − α · ∆phct          0.00             0.00        0.00          0.00
             ∆ log EL ct               0.00             0.00        0.00          0.00
            Over-id. p-val             0.22             0.20        0.19          0.17
                 N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are
                 given in parentheses. (∗ ) denotes significance at the 5% level.
                 All models estimated on a sample of 142 U.S cities using Cen-
                 sus and ACS data for 1970-2007. The dependent variable is
                 the decadal log change in adult population.




                                                   36
Table 4: Estimates of Housing Price Equation (17): Decadal Change in Housing Cost
                                         OLS                      IV
                                          (1)             (2)              (3)
                ∆wct                    1.27∗           1.25∗             1.28∗
                                       (0.045)         (0.093)           (0.079)
                ∆ log Lc               0.059∗           0.28∗
                                       (0.030)         (0.086)
                e · ∆ log Lc           -0.028∗          -0.12∗
                                       (0.013)         (0.028)
                e · [e < .2] · ∆Lc                                       0.057∗
                                                                         (0.027)
                e · [e < .4] · ∆Lc                                        -0.16
                                                                         (0.085)
                e · [e < .6] · ∆Lc                                        0.060
                                                                         (0.084)
                e · [e < .8] · ∆Lc                                        -0.13
                                                                         (0.077)
                e · [e < 1] · ∆Lc                                         0.017
                                                                         (0.031)
                Constant                0.76∗           0.75∗              0.76∗
                                      (0.0090)         (0.019)           (0.0086)
                Year                     Yes              Yes              Yes
                Observations             568              568              568
                R2
                IV Set:                            IV1,IV2,IV3,u · IV3    IV1,IV2

                F-Stats:
                 ∆wct                                   60.58            105.59
                 ∆ log Lc                                9.21
                 e · ∆ log Lc                           10.88
                RF F -test:                             35.51             51.36
                AP p.val:
                 ∆wct                                    0.00             0.00
                 ∆ log Lc                                0.00
                 e · ∆ log Lc                            0.00
                Over-id. p-val                           0.06             0.04
                       N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedas-
                       ticity are given in parentheses. (∗ ) denotes signif-
                       icance at the 5% level. All models estimated on
                       a sample of 142 U.S cities using Census and ACS
                       data for 1970-2007. The37dependent variable is the
                       decadal log change in the price of 2 or 3 bedroom
                       units .
Table 5: Estimates of Wage Equation (21): Decadal Change in Wages
                               OLS                         IV
                                (1)            (2)                (3)
           ∆Rct               2.53∗          4.34∗              2.80∗
                              (0.23)         (1.62)             (0.43)
           ∆ log EL           0.25∗           1.61              0.047
                             (0.061)         (1.54)             (0.25)
           ∆ log Lc           0.023           -0.25              -0.028
                             (0.016)         (0.23)             (0.038)
           Year × Ind.         Yes            Yes                Yes
           Observations       31978         31978               31978
           R2
           IV Set:                         IV1-3, u· IV3    IV1-3,u· IV3,C

           F-Stats:
            ∆Rct                            167.54              91.52
            ∆ log EL ct                      7.69                4.87
            ∆ log Lc                        16.47               21.01
           RF F -test:                      18.77               10.48
           AP p.val:
            ∆Rct                              0.00               0.00
            ∆ log EL ct                       0.33               0.00
            ∆ log Lc                          0.08               0.00
           Over-id. p-val                     0.31               0.28
             N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedas-
             ticity and clustering on cityXyear are given in
             parentheses. (∗ ) denotes significance at the 5%
             level. All models estimated on a sample of 142 U.S
             cities using Census and ACS data for 1970-2007.
             The dependent variable is the decadal change in
             regression adjusted city-industry wages.




                                      38
Table 6: Employment Rate Equation (18): Decadal Change in Employment Rate
                                        OLS                  IV
                                         (1)          (2)            (3)
                                        0.14∗       -0.27∗          -0.30∗
                P
                  i   ηi (wic − wi )
                                       (0.032)     (0.090)         (0.095)
                ∆ log Lc               -0.0063      0.010          -0.021
                                       (0.010)     (0.094)         (0.040)
                                        0.10∗                       0.24∗
                P
                  i   ηic · gi                       0.19
                                       (0.043)      (0.14)         (0.068)
                Year                    Yes          Yes            Yes
                Observations            568          568            568
                R2
                IV Set:                          IV1-2,u · IV1-3   IV1-2,C

                F-Stats:
                 ∆wct                               19.96          12.81
                 ∆ log Lc                           0.83           7.22
                RF F -test:                         4.16           2.59
                AP p.val:
                 ∆wct                                0.00           0.00
                 ∆ log Lc                            0.44           0.00
                Over-id. p-val                       0.03           0.62
                  N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedas-
                  ticity are given in parentheses. (∗ ) denotes signif-
                  icance at the 5% level. All models estimated on
                  a sample of 142 U.S cities using Census and ACS
                  data for 1970-2007. The dependent variable is the
                  decadal log change in city employment rate.




                                           39
Table 7: Estimates of City Size Equation (16) with Real Wages : 20 Year Changes in
Population
                                                           Equation 16
                                           (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)
            ∆2 wct − 0.25 × ∆2 phct      4.51∗
                                         (0.92)
            ∆2 wct − 0.35 × ∆2 phct                     5.55∗
                                                        (1.16)
            ∆2 wct − 0.40 × ∆2 phct                                   6.28∗
                                                                      (1.34)
            ∆2 wct − 0.45 × ∆2 phct                                                 7.21∗
                                                                                    (1.61)
            ∆2 log EL ct                 6.15∗          6.25∗         6.32∗         6.40∗
                                         (2.16)         (2.20)        (2.25)        (2.34)
            Year                           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes
            Observations                   426            426           426           426
            R2
            IV Set:                     IV1,IV2,IV3    IV1,IV2,IV3   IV1,IV2,IV3   IV1,IV2,IV3

            F-Stats:
             ∆2 wct − α · ∆2 phct        84.01          65.97         52.23         37.87
             ∆2 log EL ct                13.97          13.97         13.97         13.97
            RF F -test:                  22.19          22.19         22.19         22.19
            AP p.val:
             ∆2 wct − α · ∆2 phct         0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00
             ∆2 log EL ct                 0.00           0.00          0.00          0.00
            Over-id. p-val                0.19           0.16          0.15          0.14
                   N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity are
                   given in parentheses. (∗ ) denotes significance at the 5% level.
                   All models estimated on a sample of 142 U.S cities using Cen-
                   sus and ACS data for 1970-2007. The dependent variable is
                   20 year log change in adult population.




                                                  40
Table 8: Wage Determination out of Steady-State (Equation 27): Decadal Change in
Wages
                                      OLS                          IV
                                        (1)            (2)                (3)
                  ∆Rct                1.09∗          1.70∗              1.45∗
                                      (0.16)         (0.44)             (0.31)
                  ∆ log EL ct         0.092          -0.11               -0.11
                                     (0.053)         (0.29)             (0.14)
                  ∆ log phct          0.33∗          0.21∗               0.25∗
                                     (0.022)        (0.074)             (0.064)
                  Year × Ind.          Yes            Yes                Yes
                  Observations        31978         31978               31978
                  R2
                  IV Set:                          IV1-3,u · IV3    IV1-3,u · IV3,C

                  F-Stats:
                   ∆Rct                             153.27              67.27
                   ∆ log EL ct                       7.42                4.16
                   ∆ log phct                       24.06               10.44
                  RF F -test:                        19.02              8.67
                  AP p.val:
                   ∆Rct                               0.00               0.00
                   ∆ log EL ct                        0.00               0.00
                   ∆ log phct                         0.00               0.00
                  Over-id. p-val                      0.17               0.64
                     N OTES: Standard errors robust to heteroskedas-
                     ticity and clustering on cityXyear are given in
                     parentheses. (∗ ) denotes significance at the 5%
                     level. All models estimated on a sample of 152 U.S
                     cities using Census and ACS data for 1970-2007.
                     The dependent variable is the decadal change in
                     regression adjusted city-industry wages.




                                              41
Table 9: City × Industry Wage Convergence
                          OLS         IV
                            (1)       (2)
      wict−1             -0.27∗     0.033
                        (0.019)    (0.035)
      Year × Ind.           Yes       Yes
      Observations       25891      25891
      R2
      IV Set:                        wict−2

      F-Stats:
       ∆wct−1                      286.23
      AP p.val:
       ∆wct−1                        0.00
      N OTES: Standard errors robust to
      heteroskedasticity and clustering on
      cityXyear are given in parentheses.
      (∗ ) denotes significance at the 5%
      level. All models estimated on a sam-
      ple of 152 U.S cities using Census and
      ACS data for 1970-2007. The depen-
      dent variable is the decadal change
      in regression adjusted city-industry
      wages.




                       42
