NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX CHANGES AND CAPITAL
ALLOCATION IN THE 1980s

Patric H. I-1erldershott

Working Paper No. 1911

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 1986

The research reported here is part of the NBER'S
research program
in Taxation and projects
in Goverrment Budgets and Taxation and
Capital FormatHon
Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research,

NBER Working Paper #1911
April 1986

Tax Changes and Capital Allocation in the 1980s

ABSTRACT

The paper begins with presentation of
costs of capital under any tax regime.

a methodology for computing rental

Tax law over the 1980—84 period is

specified and the provisions of the Treasury and Administration tax reform

proposals and HR 3838 are described. A model is then constructed to allow
calculation of the impact of changes in tax
interest rates and the allocation of real

regimes and/or expected inflation on

capital. The model allocates a fixed

private capital stock among various classes of nonresidential and residential
capital, depending upon the rental costs for the

capital components, the price

elasticities of demand with respect to the rental costs, and the elasticities of
homeownership with respect to the cost of owning versus renting. The interest
rate adjusts in response to tax/inflation changes so as to maintain the
aggregate demand for capital at this initial level.

The model is employed to

deduce the efficiency of the allocation of real capital under various tax
regimes at different inflation rates.

Patr-ic H. Hendershott
Hagerty Hall

The Ohio State University
1775 College Road
Columbus, Ohio 43210

March 1986

Tax Changes and Capital Allocation in the l980s
Patric H. Henc3ershott

Three tax bills were enacted in the first half of the 1980s: the
Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility
Act
of 1982, and the Deficit Reduction

Act of 1984. Moreover-, major tax reform

proposals, most notably the Noventher 1984 Treasury plan and the May 1985

Administration plan, have been advanced for implementation in the second half
of this decade and the U.S. House

December 1985. The passed or

of Representatives passed a reform bill in

proposed tax changes have altered or would

significantly affect both the overall taxation

of capital and taxation in

different uses. As a result, changes in interest rates, homeownership,
and
investment in various types of capital have or would probably be induced.

The

nture and extent of these changes are the subjects of this
paper.
The method of analysis is the

construction and manipulation of a

relatively small simulation model. The principal features of the model are the
dependencies of the demands for various

types of capital on their gross (of

depreciation) user costs of capital and of the user costs on tax parameters and

interest rates. Special emphasis is placed on the housing sector where
households at six different income levels make tenure and quantity_demanded

decisions. Finally, the level of taxable interest rates is determined
by
equality between the total 'demand for

capital and the existing capital stock.

The model is first used to simulate the 1981—82 tax changes.1 The
implied effects of the tax legislation

on interest rates, homeownership, and

capital allocation are then compared with

period. The model implications are at

observed changes in the 1981—84

least roughly consistent with observed

—2—

events. The model is then employed to simulate the impacts of the Treasury and
Administration tax proposals and the House bill. The proposals are analyzed in
a five percent inflation world; the inflation neutrality of current law and
the reform proposals ar.e compared; and efficiency losses due to misallocation
of capital are computed for the various tax regimes.

I. Investment Hurdle Rates or User Costs
General Considerations
As is well known (Hall and Jorgenson, 1967) ,

the decision to invest

depends on whether the present value of the expected revenue from investment
exceeds the supply price of capital, and on marginal investments the two will

be equal. After allowance for taxation, the equilibrium condition for
investment is
(r+d+r ITi) (l—k—tz)

—

,

—

where

(1)

is the business tax rate, p is the gross marginal product of capital,

r is the real after—tax financing rate, d is the economic depreciation rate,
T

is

the concurrent equivalent tax rate on inflationary gains, ir is the

expected inflation rate, and k is the investment tax credit.2 In general, z
the present value of the streaii of tax depreciation allowances,

TAXDEPt.

obtained by discounting the stream of depreciation allowances by the required

nominal after—tax financing rate; taking into account the reduction in
depreciable basis if the investment tax credit is claimed:

N
z =

(l—k/2)

TAXDEP

t

tl[ (l+r) (l+v) ]

(2)

—

where N is the depreciation period of the
asset. The right side of equation
(1) is the "investment hurdle rate or rental user cost for a particular asset.
The lower the user cost, the

greater will be production of the asset, and the

lower will be the productivity of the

marginal investment (p)

In a neutral' tax system, the net user and thus net marginal
productivities (p — d) would be the same for all equally—risky
assets. This
can be achieved in a variety of ways. For example, with k =
either z = 1 —— expensing ——

or

=

0, then p — d =

r.

0,

= 0 and

If the r's were equal

for all assets, the tax system would be neutral across them. Alternatively,
with k =

0,

= 0 and z =

depreciation, then p — d =

d/(r

+ d) ——

r/(l—t).

tax

depreciation equal to economic

If the r's and the r's were the same for

all assets, then the system would also be neutral. Because the I'S are zero
for owner—occupied housing, expensing for depreciable assets (and the
nondeductibility of property taxes on owner—occupied housing) would lead to tax
ndutraiity —— assuming equal r's ——

but setting tax depreciation equal to

economic depreciation would not.3
Assuming that firms use a fixed fraction of debt, b, for financing all
investments, the real after—tax financing rate can be expressed as

r =

[b(l—8t)i

+ (1—b) (l—yT)e —

i]/(l÷)

,

(3)

where 8 and y, respectively, are the portions of interest and equity returns
that are deductible at the business level, and e is the required nominal return

to investors. (Currently 6 = 1 and y =
the marginal costs of debt and

0.)

Firms will choose the b at which

equity, including contracting and bankruptcy

costs, are equal. (Because this marginal cost is
and e are used in the calculation of r.)

unknown, average values of i

—4—

Portfolio equilibrium of investors requires that

(l—T )e = (1—x)i + 6,

(4)

e

where T is the rate at which equity returns are taxed at the personal level,
x is the relevant tax rate for taxable interest (the lower of the personal tax
rate and that implicit in tax—exempt yields) , and 6 is the risk premium

required on equity investments. For all investments except owner—occupied
housing of low and middle income households, x is the tax rate implicit in

tax—exempt yields x. Substituting (4) into (3) ,

the real after—tax financing

rate for capital other than owner—occupied housing is:

r =

[b(l—i)i

If ly were equal to i
would equal I

(l—t)i

e

(l—x )i + 6

e

+ (1—b) (l—yT)

—

1—i e

(which would be true if y =
•

—

uJ/(l+).

T

e

(3')

= 0) and x = 6T, r
e

+ 6(1—b) ]/(l+) for all assets. Further, if all

interest expense were deductible at the same rate and all investments were
equally risky, all r's would be equal.

For corporations, T depends on the taxation of dividends and capital
gains and the division of equity raised between new issues and retained
earnings (Auerbach, 1979) .

T

e

More generally,

flT

dlv

+ (l—fl)t

cg

,

(5)

where n is the proportion of equity funds raised by new issues, and Td. and

Tcg respectively, are the effective tax rates on dividends and equity capital

gains. In general, T

=

div

r.im/2

=

and -t

cg

(l—exclu)t.im/4,

where r.

is the

effective maximum tax rate on personal interest and exclu is the statutory

—5—

capital gains exclusion. The divisions by 2 and 4 allow for tax deferral and
avoidance activities. An n of 0.1 is assumed; as a result,
low (O.l4T. under current law).

is relatively

For noncorporate businesses (including

households investing in owner—occupied housing), T equals 0.
Empirically, the tax rate implicit in

tax—exempt yields varies with the

maturity of the security. For short—term tax exempts, the ratio of prime grade
tax—exempt to risk—free taxable yields has not

corporate tax rate or roughly U.S. For
for the long—term investments

deviated far from unity less the

ten—year bonds, which are more relevant

being analyzed, the ratio has been closer to 0.7.

The implicit tax rate of 0.3, rather than the federal tax rate of 0.46
(the
State and local tax rate is not relevant

if corporations invest in their own

jurisdictions), reflects a number of factors, but the most important is likely

the tax saving from optimally

trading bonds (e.g., taking capital losses and

deferring capital gains).4 This is especially important because high
tiansactions costs virtually eliminate any gains from trading municipal bonds.
The tax rate implicit in long—term

Xe =

where

tax—exempt yields is assumed to be given by:

(O.3)Tfr

(6)

is the federal corporate tax rate and the 0.3 measures the gains from

optimal trading.

All interest expense is not deductible at the same rate, the clearest

example being owner_occupij housing. Because this asset is held by households
with a wide range of income subject to the full array of marginal
personal tax
rates, the tax rates at which interest is

deductible (and at which equity the

owner has in the house would have been taxed had the household rented)
vary

across households.5 More generally, the real
jth household is

after—tax financing rate for the

—6—
r.
J

+ ).

[b.(l—i)i + (1—b,) (l—x)i — u +
J

3

J

(7)

3

:i

The tax rate applicable to own equity investment, x.. is defined as the minimum
of the tax rate paid on the last dollar of taxable interest earned, ST., or
that implicit in tax—exempt yields, Xe•

For all investments other than real estate, b =
investments other than owner—occupied housing, b =

1/3.

2/3.

For real estate

This assumption is

consistent with available data on large—scale (over 50 unit) rental projects,

which probably accounted for over two—thirds of the rental units constructed in

the 1970s.6 The data in Table 1 indicate that ownership of these properties
has shifted sharply from corporations to partnerships over the past two decades
(the vast majority of additions to the stock have certainly been owned by
partnerships) , most of these properties have mortgages (97 percent of those

owned by partnerships in 1980), and the initial loan—to—value ratio on the 81

prcent of properties with a first mortgage at time of purchase is 87 percent.
In 1970, the median loan—to—value ratio was 67 percent. The median was only 53
percent in early 1981, when mortgage rates were at historic highs and terms had

been quite unfavorable for refinancing for three years. The two—thirds ratio
is a reasonable approximation for a present—value, weighted average loan—to—
value ratio in normal times.

For owner—occupied housing, we vary b. depending on the relative

attractiveness of debt and equity financing. More specifically,
(0.667 if x.
b.

(o.85 if x. <

i.

(8)

By our definitions, x. cannot exceed 1.. While these ratios far exceed the
0.33 to 0.4 average economy—wide ratio observed for owner—occupied housing,
the observed ratio is heavily influenced by older owning households who have
repaid their mortgages and are relatively insensitive to housing rental costs

—8—

The 1981 Tax Act also cut the maximum federal tax rates, from 0.48 to

0.46 for corporations and from 0.7 to 0.5 for households. We assume that the
marginal noncorporate investor was in the 54 percent bracket in 1980 (at
roughly the same real income level at which the 49 percent tax rate applied in
1985) .

The income tax rates in Table 3 presume a 0.06 state and local tax rate

deductible at the federal level.
The personal tax rates on real corporate equity returns follow from
equation (5) and the surrounding discussion, given a capital gains exclusion of
0.6 (0.0 under the Treasury plan, 0.5 under the Administration plan and 0.42 in
the House bill) .

The tax rate implicit in tax—exempt yields follows from

equation (6). Finally, the inflation tax, ,

is

0.7t on inventories because

FIFO accounting is used for 70 percent of inventories and is effectively zero
for other assets.

The Treasury plan attempted to neutralize the tax system for inflation by
iYidexing everything. Only real capital gains, including those on inventories,

would be taxed (r = 0)

;

depreciation

would be on a replacement, rather than

historic, cost basis; and only the "real" part of interest expense would be
taxed and could be deducted)0 The Treasury plan also attempted to tax all
assets and business forms (except owner—occupied housing) equally. To this
end, tax depreciation for each depreciable asset would equal the Treasury's

best estimate of true economic depreciation; the investment tax credit would

be dropped; real capital gains would be taxed at the regular income tax rate;
and half of corporate dividends would be deductible at the corporate level.
The indexation of inventory gains, the removal of the tax credit, and the
proposed tax depreciation treatment would result in p—d equaling r/(l—T) for
all properties except owner—occupied housing, and the partial dividend
exclusion would reduce discrepancies between the r's for corporate and
noncorporate investments.

—7--

(see below)] Households under forty use far more debt (the average loan—to—
value ratio for first—time homebuyers in 1984 was 87 percent) and often make

quite long—term housing decisions. It is the decisions of such households that
we are attempting to model, and their present—value, weighted—average, loan—
to—value ratio is probably near two—thirds.

Based upon Ibbotson—Sinquefield calculations, we assume

for corporate

equities is 0.075, and thus the risk premium for corporate assets, which have a
one—third loan—to—value ratio, is (l—b)J

0.05. The risk premium for

depreciable real estate investors in properties with roughly 0.80 initial

loan—to—value ratios is also about 0.075.8 Because these real—estate assets
have a mean loan—to—value ratio of two—thirds (initial ratio of near 80
percent) ,

their

risk premium is only 0.025. For owner—occupied housing, a

premium of 0.01 is assumed. This relatively low premium is consistent with
owners having certainty with regard to their "vacancy" and "breakage" rates
afid thus greater certainty with respect to their net operating incomes than is
the case with rental properties.

Tax Parameters
Tables 2 and 3 list the important business tax parameters under the laws
existing in 1980 and 1981—85, in the proposed Treasury and Administration tax

plans and in H.R. 3838 passed in December 1985. The 1981 Tax Act roughly
halved depreciation tax lives and lowered the percentage of straight line for
equipment and utility and residential structures, raised the percentage for
industrial structures, and 'maintained straight—line for commercial real estate

(straight—line is preferred over accelerated methods due to more onerous

recapture provisions upon sale).9 The 1981 Actpromised more accelerated
methods in 1985, but the 1982 Tax Act reneged on the promise and reduced the

depreciable base for equipment by one—half the investment tax credit. The 1984
Act raised the tax life for structures, other than public utilities, back to 18
years and this was raised further to 19 years in late 1985.

—9—

The Administration plan retreated from these principles in significant

respects: all interest would continue to be deductible; investors in
nondepreciable assets would have the option of paying taxes on- nominal capital

gains at one—half of th regular income tax rate; tax depreciation would
exceed economic depreciation; only one—tenth of dividends would be deductible;
and, in order to make the plan revenue neutral, the indexatjon of inventory

gains is dropped. Tax depreciation would be especially generous for equipment
that continues to be classified as 3 or 5 years and for public utility

structures; allowable depreciation would exceed that under current law even at
zero inflation. However, most 5—year equipment would be reclassified as 6,7
and even 10—year equipment. For industrial structures, tax depreciation would
be more favorable only at inflation rates of roughly 5 percent or greater. The
House bill has double declining balance depreciation

for equipment and public

utility structures, but longer depreciation tax lives than the Administration
p'an and Only partial indexation of the depreciable base (half of the inflation
above 5 percent) results in significantly less favorable overall depreciation.
The partial dividend exclusion is of little import in our model because
Only 10 percent of equity financing is assumed to be from new share issues on

which dividends are paid. (Dividends are saved initially by the retention of
earnings, offsetting the future payment of dividends.) Thus y in the model is
only 0.05 under the Treasury plan and 0.01 under the Administration plan, 10
percent of the 50 and 10 percent exclusions,

respectively.

In our analysis of owner—occupied housing, we consider households at five
different income levels in order to deduce the tax rates that are
representative of households in five income ranges. The ranges for 1980 are

listed in the top panel of Table 4; the 1985 ranges, which exceed those from
1980 by a third to two—fifths to reflect the growth in nominal incomes per
household, are listed in the lower panel.

(The exact income levels for which

the tax rate calculations were performed are listed in parentheses.) The

—10—

state—and—local and federal tax rates relevant to the quantity—demanded
decision in 1980 are listed in the next two columns in the top panel, and the
total tax rate ——

the federal plus the state times one minus the federal ——

shown in the fourth column. For the highest income class, x. = x
j

e

.

is

For the

other classes, the x. equal 8 (equals 1 except in the Treasury plan) times the

t. shown in the table. The interest indexation feature of the Treasury plan (8<
]

1) has a major impact on the opportunity cost of own equity financing of
owner—occupied housing (as well as on tax—exempt yields —— see note a to Table

3)11 The last column is the tax rate relevant to tenure choice (a weighted
average of the average tax rates applied to debt and equity) l2 The lower
panel lists similar calculations for 1985 incomes under current law and the tax
reforms, the Treasury and Administration proposals reflecting the
nondeductibility of state and local taxes.

II. The Capital Allocation Model'3
An Overview
The basic model allocates a fixed private capital stock among various

classes of nonresidential and residential capital. The allocation depends on
the rental or user costs for the capital components, the price elasticities of
demand with respect to the rental costs, and the elasticities of homeownership

with respect to the cost of owning versus renting. The interest rate adjusts
in response to tax changes so as to maintain the aggregate demand for capital

at its initial level. The fixed capital stock assumption implies zero interest
elasticity of saving.
Table 5 lists the distribution of the U.S. capital stock at the end of

1984 by type. A number of simplifying assumptions are made in the construction
of the model. Because well over 90 percent of inventories are held by
corporations and nearly 90 percent of rental housing is held by noncorporate
business, we assume that each of these assets is held totally by corporate and

—11—

noncorporate business, respectively. While equipment is depreciable over 3 or
5 years, about 95 percent of it is classified as S—year. We treat all

equipment as 5—year. Because public utility structures (which are virtually
all corporate) are depreciated over a shorter life that other Structures and
are eligible for the investment tax credit, they are treated separately. With
these assumptions and distinctions, the capital shares in 1980 and 1984 are
those listed in the percent share columns.

The last column indicates that a

reallocation of capital toward equipment and commercial real estate occurred
between 1980 and 1984.
Current law treats owner—occupied housing

differently depending upon the

tax position of the owner, with higher income households paying a lower rental
cost owing to their lower after—tax financing rate. Thus it is necessary to
distribute the housing stock across households at different income levels. The
distribution depends upon the number of owners within each income range as well

a the income range and the rental costs for each of the ranges.
For all assets except rental housing, the demand for the asset is
determined by the investor in the asset, be it a corporation, unincorporated

business or a household. For rental housing, demand is determined by renters,
based upon their incomes and the market rent level. Thus, the total quantity
of rental housing, like the total quantity of owner housing, is built up as the
sum

of

the demands by households in different income brackets.

Table 6 indicates divisions of the demand for housing across the same
five income classes listed,.jn Table 4, with a lower income class of all renters

added. The first three columns contain the income classes selected, the
division of 80 million households across these classes, and the assumed

ownership rates for these classes. Columns 4 and 5 give the distribution of
the income of owners and renters

across these classes. Column 4 is the product

of the first three columns divided

by the sum of the products. In the column 5

calculation, the fraction of households owning is replaced by the fraction

—12—

renting. Columns 6 and 7

give

the distribution of the owned and rented stocks.

These distributions and the ownership rates were calculated from model

equations described below. Based upon 1980 data, the equations imply an
aggregate Ownership rate of 0.59, slightly below that existing then.
Model Equations

The model explains 13 rental costs: seven for the different types of
nonresidential capital, five for owner—occupied housing of households in our

five income ranges, and one for rental housing. As discussed in the previous
section, these costs depend on numerous provisions of the tax law, the
depreciation rate of the asset, the expected inflation rate and the level of

interest rates in the economy. Moreover, rental costs for household tenure
choice decisions (s.)

differ

from those for quantity demanded decisions (p.)

because the tax rates relevant to the after—tax financing rates differ (see
Table 4) .

We

summarize the rental cost equations as

=

p.

= p.(tax.,d.rr,i)

(8)—(12)

= p(tax,d,TT,i)

(13)

J

J

p

=
J

pk(taxk,d.,7T,i)

J3

.(ta,,d,Tr,j).
3
33

(14)—(18)

There are seven demand equations for nonresidential capital (NK)
corporate inventories, corporate and noncorporate 5—year equipment, 10— and

15—year public utility structures, and other corporate

(industrial) and

noncorporate (commercial) structures. Assuming that production functions are
Cobb—Douglass fBerndt(1976)], these demand equations can be

written as

—13—
=

Zk/pk,

(19)—(25)

where the Zk are Constants (depending on given outputs) and the k are the
rental costs.

The housing demand and tenure choice equations come from the
specification of a translog indirect utility function for households (King,
1980) and the empirical application of it to the ownership decision

(Hendershott and Shilling, 1982). The estimated odds of owning equation was

log

=

—3.846log[./(p/.9)] — .383[(1ogj2

—

(log

p1.9)2).

The division by 0.9 reflects the fact that those renting have to pay more than
the user cost to offset the revenues lost from vacancies.

Taking antilogs and

solving, the Ownership rates for the five highest income classes are

0. = e L.j/(l—e L.
j),

(26)—(30)

where the L. equal the right—hand side of the log [o./(l—o.)] expression. The
ownership rate for the lowest income class is assumed to be zero.
There are also five demand equations for owner housing and six for rental
housing based on our six income classes, the lowest of which consists solely of

renters. These demands ar the products of the demands per owning/renting
household and the number of owning/renting households. The specific form of
the equations comes from application of Roys identity to the indirect utility
function and substitution from the estimated odds of owning equation. For
owner housing (OH), the demand equations are

—14—

OHj =

oHHZ(3.846

+ .766 log p.)/p.,

(31)—(35)

where o. is the ownership rate for the jth class, l-IH. is the number of

households in the jth class, and the Z. are constants which are proportional to

the incomes of representative households in the classes. For rental households
(RH), the equations are

RH. =
3

(l—o.)HH.Z.(3.846 + .766 log p/.9)/(p/.9).
J
JJ

(36)—(41)

where p/.9 is the rental price facing all renting households.
Lastly, equality between the sum of the demands and the existing capital

interest

stock determines the level 0

NKk +

ZOH.

+

rates in the economy:

RB.

j

j

K.

(42)

Given a specific tax regime and assumed levels of the interest and

expected inflation rates, the k'

,

and p can be computed. The NKk were

listed in Table 5, and the OH. and RH. are products of the total residential
3

J

structures share reported in Table 5 and the fractions of those shares listed

in Table 6. The o. and iiH. were also listed in Table 6. The Z can be
k
j
j
calculated from equations (l9)—(25); the Z. are proportional to the incomes of
the representative households in the classes and are scaled such that the sum
of the demands for owner and rental housing (as proportions of the total
capital stock) equals the existing housing stock (as a proportion of total
capital)

A number of simplifying assumptions of the model should be noted. These
include, but are not limited to,, constant risk premia and infinite real supply

price elasticities (zero transactions costs) and thus constant real asset

prices. Simulated changes in the allocation of capital are thus meant to

—15—
indicate how the composition of net investment would be altered by tax (and
inflation) changes, not precisely what the new capital allocation will be five
or ten years following a change in tax regime or inflation rate.

III. The Changing Tax and Inflation Environment, 1980—85
In this section we deduce the impact of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of
1981 on interest rates, the homeownership rate, and the allocation of real

capital. Because over four years have now passed since the passage of ERTA, we
can also "test" the underlying simulation model by comparing the simulated

impact of the Act with observed events. This requires analyzing all major
disturbances that have occurred since early 1981, not just the passage of ERTA.
The first part of this section simulates the impacts of ERTA alone and of ERTA

combined with a decline in the inflation rate. The second part compares the
simulated impacts with observed changes in recent years.
E1TA and Disinflation
The disturbance of major interest to us is the passage of the Economic

Recovery Tax Act of 1981. As documented in Section I, this Act substantially
enhanced tax depreciation allowances and lowered personal tax rates. A second
major phenomenon in the early 1980s was a reduction in the inflation rate. In
1980, inflation was proceeding at a 10 percent rate; by 1984 and 1985, the
rate was slightly below 4 percent. We presume that the decline in the long—run
expected inflation rate was a smaller drop from 8 to 5 percent, the 10 percent
reflecting temporarily surging energy prices and declining value of the dollar
and the 4 percent rate reflecting the reverse.

The first column of Table 7 lists the assumed 1980 interest and inflation
rates, the model simulated homeownership rate, and the 1980 distribution of the

capital stock listed in Table 5. The second column contains the model
simulation results for these variables (except for the assumed constant

inflation rate) based upon enactment of ERTA. The third column reflects ERTA

—16—
(and the 1982 reduction in the depreciation base by half of the investment tax

credit) plus a decline in the inflation rate to 5 percent. These simulations
are discussed in turn.

Comparing the second and first columns, the more favorable tax treatment
of depreciable property provided by ERTA raises the demand for such capital at

Pre—ERTA interest rates. While the cut in personal tax rates lowers the demand
for owner—occupied housing ——
of owner equity rise ——

the

the after—tax financing rate and opportunity cost

decline is not nearly sufficient to offset the

increased demand for other capital, so interest rates rise.'4 The computed
increase is just over a percentage point.
In spite of this increase, the hurdle rates for equipment, industrial
structures and public utilities decline by 2½, 1½ and 1 percentage points,

respectively. Those for depreciable real estate are roughly unchanged (the
interest rate increase and more generous depreciation roughly offsetting),
wciiie those for inventories and owner—occupied housing increase by just over a

percentage point. The homeownership rate declines by 4½ percentage points. On
net, the capital stock is shifted sharply from residential to nonresidential

uses, with the aggregate housing stock declining by 9½ percent. Of the
nonresidential components, the increases are roughly 10 percent for equipment
and industrial structures and about 5 percent for public utilities and

commercial real estate. Inventories decline by one percent.
Incorporating a 3 percentage point decline in the inflation rate sharply

alters the results. Becau the interest rate declines by roughly a point and
a half for each point decline in inflation, disinflation is good for owner—

occupied housing; the real after—tax financing rate will decline for
households in tax brackets below 33 percent. Thus we see a 4 percentage point
increase in the homeownership rate relative to the case of no decline in

inflation. The total housing stock is roughly unchanged, however; the
increase in owner—occupied housing is about offset by the decline in rental

—17—

housing. The disinflation also induces a shift in the composition of
structures, with corporate structures rising and highly—levered noncorporate
structures declining (the advantages of debt are reduced at lower interest
rates)

A Comparison with Observed Chan9es
Model simulations should not be expected to track observed economic

changes closely. Simulations provide an estimate of where an economy in full
equilibrium at the initial parameter values will eventually move in response to
a specified disturbance (change in model parameters, Structure or state of
world) .

However, even if the model accurately characterizes the economy, the

observed economic changes may differ from those implied by the model for two

reasons. First, the economy may have been a significant distance from full
equilibrium when the disturbance occurred. If the tendency toward this
equilibrium differs significantly from the tendency created by the specified
disturbance, the observed changes in the economy may not resemble the simulated

changes. Second, disturbances other than those specified may have occurred.
If these have impacts that correlate negatively in some respects from the
specified disturbances, again the simulated changes may differ significantly

from the actual changes. Nonetheless, simulations of the major disturbances to
an economy should trace out the broad contours of subsequent economic events.
The principal phenomena that the model simulations would lead us to
expect are:
(1)

an increase in long—term interest rates until the decline in long—run
expected inflation sets in,

(2)

a shift from owning to renting, until the impact of the decline in long—
run expected inflation is felt, and

(3)

a shift from residential (and inventory) to nonresidential uses,
especially equipment investment early on.

The correspondence of observed events with each of these expectations is
discussed in turn.

—18—
Table 8 contains data on the corporate bond rate and two measures of the

December—to—December changes in the CPI: all items less food, energy and home
purchase and finance and the new CPI X—I, which became the official CPI after

1982. The major difference between the inflation series is the exclusion of
food and energy from the former; these components rose particularly rapidly in
the late 1970s and 1980 and slowly in the 1982—84 period. The bond rate
certainly jumped in 1981 and 1982. The rate exceeded 14 percent for the entire
July 1981—July 1982 period (was over 15 percent in September—October 1981 and

January—February 1982) before plummeting by year end 1982. The one—year
inflation rate also plummeted in 1982 and has continued to drift downward since
then.

A lagged response of long—run expected inflation to short—run observed

inflation would suggest a gradual decline in the
period. In

former throughout the 1983—85

general, we would anticipate that the

1981—84 data changes would

largely reflect the ERTA simulation, with post—1984 data gradually reflecting
the ERTA plus disinflation simulation.
The correspondence between simulations of the homeownership rate and
observed changes is especially tenuous because the changes are quite Sensitive

to shifts in the age composition of the population. To illustrate, the
aggregate rate rose by only 3½ percentage points between 1960 and 1979, even
though ownership rates of every age cohort rose by close to 10 percentage

points. The reason for this discrepancy was a surge in young households (under
25)

who tend to rent and a relative decline in older households (over 34) who

predominantly

own. The dat,a

in Table 8

illustrate the dependency of ownership

on age. Old households tend to be less mobile, have higher incomes, and be
wealthier, characteristics that lower the effective cost of owning.
The data in Table 9 refer to married couples only in order to abstract
from other demographic effects, but the results would be roughly comparable for

all households. As can be seen, a shift to homeownership occurred for all age
groups between 1974 and 1980 and even continued after 1980 for households over

—19—

age 54. For younger more mobile households who are more likely to be making
tenure decisions based upon current economic conditions, 1980 was a watershed

for ownership. In just three years, the ownership rate for those under 40
declined by 4 to 6½ percentage points, just as would be anticipated under the

ERTA scenario. Whether the offsetting disinflation impact will be observed in
later data is uncertain.

The ERTA simulation suggests a large decline in residential structures

and an increase in equipment. These shifts are reflected in the 1984 data (see
Table 4) with the equipment share already up by half the predicted 11 percent
increase and residential structures down by one—quarter of the estimated 9½

percent decline. Much of the observed decline is certainly due to the changed
behavior of younger households. If this change were allowed to work its way
through to older households in a long—run adjustment, the decline in
residential structures would approach the large simulated decline.
The observed reallocation of nonresidential structures does not
correspond nearly as well with the hypothesized partial movement to the

simulated new equilibrium. Commercial structures have already increased in
share by more than the simulated amount, while public utility structures have
declined significantly as a share of the total capital stock (not increased as

the simulation predicts) and industrial Structures have risen little. Even
here, plausible explanations are available. The expansion of the
rehabilitation tax credit in ERTA, which is not reflected in the simulations,
must have significantly inoreased the value of commercial structures;
moreover, high vacancy rates suggest that commercial structures have been over
built ——

the new equilibrium could entail a less than four percent increase in

this share. As for the relative decline in public utility structures, energy
conservation in response to the sharp run up in real energy prices in the
1979—81 period and the well—publicized problems of the nuclear power industry

are likely causes. Dwelling on such explanations is probably not worthwhile;

—20—
the important fact is that observed data, on the whole, are not inconsistent

with the ERTA model simulationJ5 Thus, the simulation model appears to be a
reasonable vehicle for analyzing the impact of proposed tax reforms.

IV.

Capital Allocation Under Current Law and Proposed Tax Reforms

The likely impacts of the Treasury and Administration tax reform proposals
and the House bill on the level of interest rates, rental user costs, capital

shares, and the homeownership rate are calculated in this section. We begin
with a comparison of the risk—adjusted net user costs and interest rates under

current law and the reforms and then turn to the capital stock effects. The
analysis presumes 5 percent inflation. The sensitivity to inflation of various
tax regimes is then examined, and efficiency losses from the misallocation of
capital under the regimes are calculated.

Five Percent Inflation: Net Rental Costs
The risk—adjusted net (of depreciation) rental costs for alternative
investments are reported in Table 10 for current law and three reforms.

(The

risk adjustment is 0.04 for nonreal estate assets and 0.015 for depreciable real

estate.) The interest rate (risk—free) under current law is presumed to be 10
percent (slightly above the 9½ percent model simulation of a 5 percent inflation

world with ERTA tax law). The first numbers (those not in parentheses) given
for the reforms are based upon the listed model—computed interest rates; the
numbers in parentheses presume an unchanged 10 percent interest rate.
Under a neutral tax system, the risk—adjusted net hurdle rates would be

the same for all assets. As can be seen, this is far from true under current
law. The tax—favored assets are housing of high—income owners and noncorporate
equipment. The tax—penalized assets are corporate structures, especially
industrial structures that receive no tax credit, and inventories, whose
inflationary gains are not indexed (with r

=

inflation tax raises the user cost by 0.035) .

O.7t,

t

= 0.5

and 11

= 0.05,

More generally, corporate

the

—21—

investments are penalized relative to noncorporate; less—leveraged investments
are penalized relative to more—leveraged investments; and risky assets are
penalized relative to less risky assets (Bulow and Summers, 1984) .

The over

three and a half percentage point difference in net hurdle rates for industrial

and rental structures reflects all three penalties. The largest penalty is the
difference in asset risk, 0.05 for nonreal estate versus 0.025 for real estate,

which accounts for 2 of the 3½ points. The corporate (double taxation) penalty
is the smallest, accounting for only

of the 3½ points because the taxation of

corporate equity at the personal level is relatively light under the new view of
corporate financing.

The Treasury plan greatly reduces the difference in risk—adjusted net
hurdle rates among corporate assets by eliminating the inventory tax and the

investment tax credit. All hurdle rates move toward that for industrial
structures. The gross hurdle rate (net plus depreciation rate plus 0.04) for
equipment rises by 14 percent and that for public utility structures rises by 8
percent, while that for inventories (with their 100 percent depreciation) falls

by 3 percent. However, the plan increases the advantages of real estate. While
the hurdle rates for depreciable properties are roughly unchanged (at 3 points
below those for corporate assets), those for owner—occupied housing decline

significantly; the 2.6 percentage point fall in the level of interest rates
swamps the loss of the property tax deduction and the reduction in rates at
which interest is deductible.

The increased advantage of owner—occupied housing stems from two factors:
removal of tax advantages for business capital (especially the investment tax
credit) and the introduction of an additional advantage for owner—occupied
housing (the nonindexation of mortgage interest expense) .

The data in the third

column of Table 10 are calculations assuming the Treasury plan were amended to

include indexation of home mortgage interest expense. As can be seen, full
indexation lowers the interest rate by another 30 basis points and the hurdle

—22—

rates for business investments by 40 basis points. In contrast, the declines in
the hurdle rates for middle—income owner—occupied housing are reduced by 25
basis points, and high—income owner—occupied housing faces a 50 basis point rise
in hurdle rate.

The Administration plan drops interest indexation (and thus the new
advantage for owner—occupied housing) ,

deletes

inventory indexation (in the

revisions needed to achieve revenue neutrality) , and "gives back" part of the

investment tax credit by accelerating depreciation deductions for equipment and

public utilities relative to economic depreciation; the present value of a
dollar of depreciation on 5—year equipment increases from 76 to 85 cents, while
that for 15—year public utilities rises from 50 to 76 cents or by over 50

percent. The latter change is so generous that the investment hurdle rate
actually declines in spite of the loss of the ITC. With these changes, the
level of interest rates falls by only 60 basis points, and the net result is a
tax system that is less tilted toward high—income owner—occupied housing than
current law.

The House bill postpones depreciation deductions, except on equipment,
even more than the Treasury plan and does not index depreciation deductions

unless inflation exceeds 5 percent. As a result of these changes and the
removal of the investment tax credit, the aggregate demand for capital falls
sharply and a 125 basis point decline in the level of interest rates occurs, a
decline which significantly lowers the cost of owner—occupied housing at all

except the very highest income levels. Like the Treasury plan, the House bill
would tend to equalize net user costs across corporate investments.
As discussed, the model computes the level of interest rates that would
maintain the aggregate demand for capital (net investment in a growth context)

at its prereform level. However, a decline in U.S. interest rates would
represent a decline in after—tax returns to foreigners unless foreign countries
cut their marginal tax rates on interest income or move their interest rates

—23—

pan pu with those in the U.S. As a result capital would flow out of the
U.S. and domestic interest rates would not need to fall as much to bring the

demand and supply of capital in the U.S. into balance. In the extreme case of
no adjustment in foreign taxes or interest rates and prefectly elastic
international capital flows, U.S. interest rates would not fall at all but the
U.S. capital stock would, the fall being greater the larger is the decline in

interest rates computed from the fixed—capital stock model.'6 A more balanced
view would incorporate less than perfectly elastic capital flows and significant

changes in foreign interest rates in response to movements in U.S. rates. Thus
a fall in foreign demand for U.S. capital would tend to dampen the decline in
U.S. rates, but not eliminate it.
To indicate the sensitivity of the relationships among the adjusted net
rental costs to the Computed interest rate declines, rental costs based upon no

rate decline have been computed and are listed in parentheses in Table 10. With
higher (than the model—computed) interest rates, the rental costs are higher.
For the Administration and House reforms, the relationships among the costs are

little affected. For the Treasury plan, the already strong bias toward owner—
occupied housing is magnified because all home mortgage interest is deductible
whereas only the real component of interest financing other investments is.

Five Percent Inflation: Capital Stock Impacts
The data in Table 11 suggest how the capital stock would be reallocated

under the various reforms. These reallocations follow fairly directly from the
realignment of investment hurdle rates just discussed. Removal of the inflation
tax raises inventories, while the loss of the investment tax credit tends to
shrink equipment and utilities, although utilities would actually rise in
response to the far more generous depreciation allowances of the Administration

plan. The Treasury and Administration reforms have sharply different impacts on
the three types of structures. Under the Treasury plan, residential structures
rise by 8 percent, while industrial and commercial structures are unaffected.

—24—

Under the Administration plan, the reverse is true; residential structures are
roughly unchanged while industrial and commercial structures rise by 8 percent.
Moreover, the homeownership rate rises by 6 percentage points under the Treasury

plan, but falls by 4 points under the Administration plan. The reallocations
under the House bill are close to those of the Treasury plan, although the
increase in the homeownership rate is only 2½ percentage points.
In general, an across the board cut in tax rates would be expected to have
a negative impact on owner—occupied housing, the income from which is not taxed.
This impact would be reinforced by a loss of the deductibility of property taxes

on primary residences. Thus, the homeownership rate would decline, as would the
share of structures in residential use. The simulated effect of the

Administration plan corresponds to these expectations. The inverted effect of
the Treasury plan follows from its interest indexation provision and the sharp

decline in interest rates (largely in response to the indexation). A decline in
interest rates is more beneficial to investors in low tax brackets than to those
in high brackets because the investor receives more of the rate decline (and the
Treasury receives less) .

Thus a sharp decline in interest rates is particularly

beneficial to housing demanded by low and middle income owners. This factor is
exaggerated in the Treasury plan by the exemption of home mortgage interest

expense from the interest indexation feature. Thus housing of owners at all
income levels (but especially at lower incomes) increases, and the homeownership

rate jumps. The demand for owner—occupied housing would also rise under the
House bill. This reflects the absence of a cut in the tax rates relevant to the
quantity—demanded decision of owners with incomes under $100,000 (see Table 4),
the continued deductibility of property taxes, and the sharp 125 basis point
decline in interest rates.

—25—
Inflation Neutrality
Next we consider the impact of inflation under the various tax regimes by

simulating an increase in inflation from zero to 10 percent. Inflation is quite
negative for owner—occupied housing under current law because the average tax
rate at which expenses are deductible is significantly less for owner housing
(except for owners with very high incomes) than for other capital. Thus, the
real after—tax interest rate paid by owners tends to rise, while that for other

capital falls (see Titman, 1982 and Follain, l986).17 On the other hand,
inflation is very positive for depreciable real estate because the advantages of

debt are magnified at higher interest rate levels. Thus the increase in
inflation lowers the homeownership rate by 11 percentage points (the first
column of Table 12), and raises the demand for both rental and commercial

structures, the latter by 19 percent. The total housing stock increases because
the stimulus to renter housing outweighs the negative impact on owner housing.

With real estate expanding, the other capital components must decline. As can
be seen, di/dir =

1.46,

midway between the nontax (unity) and tax [di/dil =

1/(l—

T)"-21 Fisherian values.

The Treasury plan makes a serious attempt at achieving inflation
neutrality by setting tax depreciation equal to economic depreciation and

indexing capital gains, depreciation allowances and interest. Unfortunately,
the plan fails badly. To understand the failure, it is best to consider first
the impact of an increase in inflation in a fully—indexed variant of the
Treasury plan, i.e., one in-which home mortgage interest expense is also

indexed. The data in the second column of Table 12 show this impact. Increases
in inflation are generally favorable for the sector with the highest tax rate
(noncorporate business has a tax rate of 0.41 versus 0.37 for the corporate

sector) because the after—tax interest rate rises least. The aggregate
homeownership rate declines because the negative impact on lower income (tax)

households outweighs the positive impact on high income households. The

—26—
interest rate rises by more than the increase in inflation because of imperfect

indexation; under our assumptions, only a third of interest is real at 5
percent inflation [ (7.42—5)/7.421, but the Treasury indexation formula would
treat six—elevenths as real (see note 10) .

With

some inflationary interest

being taxed, the interest rate responds more than one—for—one to inflation.
Nonetheless, the fully—indexed variant of the Treasury plan is significantly

less sensitive to inflation than current law; more specifically the sharp tilt
toward depreciable real estate is greatly dampened.

Exclusion of home mortgage interest from the indexation provision changes

the impact of inflation enormously. Homeownership and the demand for owner—
occupied housing are greatly stimulated by inflation because the real—after tax

financing rate for even our lowest income owning households declines. The surge
in housing is matched by declines in all other capital types. The actual
Treasury plan proposed is even less inflation neutral than current law.
The next to the last column in Table 12 shows the impact of inflation on

capital allocation under the Administration tax plan. Just as under current
law, the homeownership rate would be significantly lowered by inflation.
However, the stimulation for depreciable real estate and constriction of

nonresidential capital would be far less. The Administration plan is thus
significantly more inflation neutral than current law. The last column suggests
that the House bill would be marginally more neutral than current law.
Efficiency Losses
The differences in the risk—adjusted net rental costs in Table 10 provide
a general indication of the misallocation of capital under the various tax laws.
A single efficiency loss number for each tax regime is computed from the
Harberger equation:

—27—
LOSS =
J

where the ADJ0.'s

are

— ADJp.) (CAP. — EFFCAP.),
J
J

J

the risk—adjusted net user costs listed in Table 10,

EFFADJp is the single risk—adjusted net user cost (0.0406) that when used to
obtain gross user costs equates the sum of the demands for capital to the
aggregate stock, the CAPj are the likely percentage capital stocks under a given
tax law (listed in Table 13), and the EFFCAP. are the percentage allocations

when the gross user costs are based on EFFADJp. The efficient allocation of
capital is listed in the first column of Table 13.

The efficiency loss under current law, listed at the bottom of Table 13,
is roughly 0.12 percent of the capital stock or about 0.25 percent of GNP.18
The major source of the loss is 10 percent too much residential capital (largely
offset by 24 percent too few industrial structures and 12 percent too few

utility structures).19 The widely—cited overinvestment is equipment is only 3
percent; while substantial overinvestment in equipment exists relative to
corporate structures, overinvestment relative to capital generally is minor. Of
the three reforms, only the Administration plan reduces the efficiency loss, and

the reduction is a sharp 50 percent. This is achieved by both a better
allocation between residential and nonresidential capital (the overinvestment in
residential capital is reduced from 10 to 8 percent) and better allocations

within the residential and nonresidential sectors. The difference between the
net user costs for the highest and lowest income owning households is reduced
from 0.029 to 0.018, and the large underinvestment in corporate structures is
reduced significantly.
The Treasury plan and the House bill would increase the efficiency loss by
53 and 36 percent, respectively, the principal reason being the further
overinvestment in residential capital (18 and 17 percent versus the current 10
percent) .

Not only do these bills remove the investment tax credit for

equipment and utilities, but they reduce the value of depreciation deductions.

—28—

The greater efficienty loss under the Treasury plan relative to the House bill
is attributable to a substantial increase in the existing bias in favor of

owning over renting. This, in turn, is due to the great advantage of debt
financing of owner—occupied housing given by the partial taxation of interest

income but full deduction of home mortgage interest expense. The fully—indexed
Treasury variant (only real mortgage interest expense is deductible) leads to a
smaller increase in residential capital, a better allocation within residential,
and thus a negligible 6 percent increase in the efficiency loss.
Efficiency losses have also been calculated at different inflation rates.
The losses under all tax regimes are lower at a zero inflation rate and greater

at 10 percent inflation. For current law, the loss is 12 percent less at zero
inflation and 37 percent greater at 10 percent inflation. The efficiency loss
under the Administration plan is roughly half that of current law over the

entire inflation range examined. At zero inflation, the losses under the
Tteasury plan and House bill are virtually identical to those under current law.
At higher inflation rates the losses, especially under the Treasury plan,

increase relative to current law; at 10 percent inflation the loss under the
Treasury plan is nearly double that under current law. Such is not the case
with the fully—indexed Treasury variant; its loss at 10 percent inflation is
slightly less than that of current law.

V. Summary
The paper begins with- presentation of a methodology for computing annual

rental costs of capital or investment hurdle rates under any tax regime. Tax
law over the 1980—84 period is specified and the provisions of the Treasury and

Administration tax reform proposals and HR 3838 are described. A model is then
constructed to allow calculation of the impact of changes in tax regimes and/or

expected inflation on interest rates and the allocation of real capital. The
model allocates a fixed private capital stock among various classes of

—29—
nonresidential and residential capital, depending upon the rental costs for the
capital components, the price elasticities of demand with respect to the rental
costs, and the elasticities of homeownership with respect to the cost of owning

versus renting. The interest rate adjusts in response to tax/inflation changes
so as to maintain the aggregate demand for capital at this initial level.

Simulation of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 suggests an increase
in interest rates, a decrease in homeownership, and a shift in capital from

residential to nonresidential uses, especially equipment. Data since 1980 are
consistent with these "forecasts" when one abstracts from the impact of the

decline in inflation on interest rates after the middle of 1982. The decline in
ownership is restricted to younger (under 40) households who are likely to be

making tenure decisions based upon current economic conditions. The general
correspondence between these simulations and recent economic events suggests
that the simulation model is appropriate for analyzing the impact of proposed
tax reforms.

Under a neutral tax system, the risk—adjusted net (of depreciation)

investment hurdle rates would be the same for all assets. This is far from true

under current law. The tax—favored assets are housing of high—income owners and
noncorporate equipment. The most tax—penalized asset is inventories, whose
inflationary gains are not indexed. Corporate structures are also penalized,
especially industrial structures that receive no tax credit. More generally,

corporate investments are penalized relative to noncorporate; less—leveraged
investments are penalized relative to more—leveraged investments; and risky
assets are penalized relative to less risky assets.
The Treasury plan greatly reduces the difference in risk—adjusted net
hurdle rates among corporate assets by eliminating the inventory tax and the

investment tax credit. However, the plan increases the advantages of real
estate. While the hurdle rates for equipment and uti1ities rise to that for
industrial structures, those for owner—occupied housing decline significantly in

—30—
response to a 2.6 percentage point decline in interest rates (and the
nonindexation of home mortgage interest expense) .

The Administration plan drops

interest indexation and accelerates depreciation deductions for equipment and,

especially, public utilities relative to economic depreciation. With these
changes, the level of interest rates falls by only 0.6 percentage points, and
the demand for owner—occupied housing by middle and high income households

declines. In contrast, the House bill has even less general depreciation
allowances than current law, Consequently, hurdle rates for equipment and
utilities rise sharply, while the 125 basis point decline in interest rates

lowers hurdle rates for owner—Occupied housing. The basic results are the same
in the absence of interest—rate declines; hurdle rates decline relatively for
owner—occupied housing under the Treasury plan and House bill, but not under the

Administration plan. That is, whether rates decline or not the former two
roposals would tilt the playing field toward owner—occupied housing, the most

tx formed asset under current law.
Reallocation of the capital stock follows fairly directly from the

realignment of investment hurdle rates. Removal of the inflation tax raises
inventories, while the loss of the investment tax credit tends to shrink
equipment and utilities, although utilities would actually rise in response to

the far more generous depreciation allowances of the Administration plan. While
the specific provisions of the Treasury plan and the House bill differ widely,
these two reforms should be expected to have remarkably similar impacts on

capital allocation. In contrast, the Administration plan would have a sharply
different impact on the three types of structures. Under the Treasury and House
plans, residential structures rise by 8 percent, while industrial and commercial

structures are largely unaffected. Under the Administration plan, the reverse
is true. Moreover, the homeownership rate rises significantly under the
Treasury and House plans, but falls by 4 points under the Administration plan.

—31—
Inflation is quite negative for

owner—occupied housing under current law

because the average tax rate at which expenses are deductible
is significantly
less for owner housing than for
other capital. Thus, the real after—tax
interest rate paid by owners tends to rise with an increase

in inflation, while

that for other capital falls.

On the other hand, inflation is very positive for
depreciable real estate because the
advantages of debt are magnified at higher

interest rate levels. While

an increase in inflation lowers the

rate, commercial structures increase

because the stimulus to

homeownership

sharply. Moreover, total housing increases

renter housing outweighs the negative impact on owner

housing. With real estate expanding, the other capital
components decline.
The Treasury plan makes a Serious attempt at achieving
inflation
neutrality by setting tax depreciation

equal to economic depreciation and

indexing capital gains, depreciation allowances and interest.

the plan fails badly. While

Unfortunately,

a fully—indexed variant of the Treasury plan would

b less Sensitive to inflation than current law,
exclusion of home mortgage
interest expense from the indexation

this result. Honleownership

provision of the Treasury plan reverses

and the demand for

strongly stimulated because the

owner_occupied housing are

real—aftet tax financing rate for even low

income owning households declines.

The surge in housing is matched by declines

in all Other capital types.

Just as under current law, the
lowered by inflation if the

homeownership rate would be significantly

Administration plan or House bill were in place.

However, the Stimulation of—depreciable

real estate and the constriction of

nonresidential capital would be far less under the Admini5tration
plan. The
Administration plan is thus
significantly more inflation neutral than current

law; the House bill would be
Of the three plans,

mildly more neutral.

only that proposed by the Administration would lead to
a more efficient allocation of
capital, i.e., one that is less biased toward
high—income housing and away from corporate structures. The
current efficiency

—32—

loss would be roughly halved. The Treasury plan, while equating hurdle rates
across corporate assets, would greatly increase the current efficiency loss at
positive inflation rates by stimulating additional overinvestment in housing.
The increases in the loss would be roughly 50 percent at 5 percent inflation and

nearly 100 percent at 10 percent inflation. The House bill, too, would increase
the efficiency loss, and for the same reason, but the increase would be a
smaller 25 to 40 percent at inflation rates between 3 and 10 percent.

—33-

FOOTNOTES

1.

Earlier simulation analyses of ERTA include Gravelle (1982) and Hendershott

and Shilling (1982)

2. We do not consider the impact of

imperfect loss offsets. For an analysis of

these and other details of corporate taxation, see Auerbach (1983)

3. Because property taxes on

owner—occupied housing are deductible, the tax

saving from these taxes on a dollar of housing
0.012) is subtracted from the right side of

(assuming a property tax rate of

(1)

4. Optimal bond trading is discussed in Constantjnjdes and Ingersoll (1984).
Other sources of the low implicit

yield in longer—term tax exempts are the

greater risk of losses due to default and call
Treasuries and the 80 percent limitation of

on municipals relative to

the portion of interest on

indebtedness used to carry tax exempts that commercial banks can deduct.

5. While the explicit and implicit tax rates relevant to the quantity_demanded
decision are marginal rates, those relevant to the decision of whether to own
or rent depend on the average rates at which interest for the entire house
purchase is deducted and on which the entire

owner—equity investment would have

been taxed (Hendershott and Slemrod, 1983).

6. One million of the 1—4 unit properties in 1980 were no more than a decade
old, as were 77,500 of the 5—49 unit properties and 22,700 of the over—50 unit

properties. With 1.3, 11 and 160,
in each of these three classes of

respectively, as the average nunther of units

properties, 63 percent of the total units no

more than a decade old were in properties with 50

or more units. Because a

-*
significant

number of the 1—4 unit properties were originally built for

ownership, two—thirds to three—quarters of the newly—constructed rental units
were probably in properties with 50 or more units.

7. Sixty percent of owning households with incomes under $15,000 in 1983 had
house—to—income ratios exceeding 4, suggesting that the households were retired

and did not have a mortgage. In contrast, eighty percent of owning households
with incomes over $25,000 had mortgages and only five percent with incomes
above $25,000 had house—to—income ratios above 4.

8. The National Association of Homebuilders (1985, p.51) assumes a 14 percent
value for e when t

is

six percent. This inflation rate translates into a tax—

exempt rate just above 8 percent in our model and thus a risk premium of about

6 percent. Price—Waterhouse has used an e of 16 percent in their calculations.

9. The 1981 act also expanded the investment tax credit slightly. Both this
expansion and the more generous depreciation deductions were effective January
1, 1981.

10. The Treasury would assume a real interest rate of 6 percent and allow the
deduction of (or would tax) Only 6/(6+n) of interest paid (or earned), where it

is

the actual inflation rate in a tax year. Thus if inflation were 5 percent,

only 55 percent of interest would be taxed and deducted. With zero inflation,

all interest would be taxed and deducted; with 10% inflation only 38 percent
would.

(However, mortgage interest outlays on one's principal residence would

be fully deductible.)

-.35—

11. Because only 55%/38% of nominal interest income would be taxed in
a
five/ten percent inflation world, the tax rate relevant to own equity financing
would be 55%/38% of the marginal rates shown in Table 2 or the tax—exempt
rate,
whichever is less.

12. The methodology for

computing these tax rates is discussed in Hendershott

and Ling (1986).

13. The model is both an extension

and simplification of that used by

Hendershott and Shilling (1982) to analyze the Economic Recovery Tax Act of

1981. The extension is a more detailed treatment of nonresidential capital;
the simplification is an exogenous specification of risk premia. Gravelle
(1985) uses a somewhat similar model to

analyze the Treasury plan. Fullerton

(1985) analyzes the impact of the Treasury plan on effective tax rates.

14. Higher interest rates pulled in
of this inflow on rising interest

foreign capital, but the dampening effect

rates is assumed to have been offset by

increased Federal deficits.

15. Boswortj- (1985) makes the

Somewhat contrary argument that business

investment in recent years is not consistent with the passage of ERTA.

16. In simulations where the

aggregate

as that consistent with the imposed 10

capital stock was determined endogenously
percent interest rate, the total capital

stock falls by 15 percent in the Treasury simulation, 8 percent in the House—
Bill simulation, and 3 percent for the Administration plan.

—36—

17. This statement would seem to be at variance with the sharp shift to

homeownership in the 1970s. The latter occurred because interest rates did not
fully reflect expected general inflation and expected house price inflation
likely exceeded expected general inflation by 2 to 3 percentage points.

18. This is an understatement of the loss because it does not take into account
inefficiencies created by industry specific tax provisions or by tax—exempt

financing of private purpose activities. Moreover, the gains from removing
such inefficiences by, say, the Treasury plan are understated.

19. The loss is independent of the presumed risk premium associated with

owner—occupied housing (p—d— is independent of ) and is largely independent
of its presumed loan—to—value ratio (under current law an advantage of debt
financing exists only for high—income owners)

—37—

REFERENCES

Auerbach, A.J., 1983, "Corporate Taxation in the United States," Brookings
on Economic Activity, 2, 451—505.

,1979, "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital," Qrterly Journal of
Economics, 93, August, 433—446.

Berndt, E.R., 1976, "Reconciling Alternative Estimates of the Elasticity of
Substitution" Review of Economics and Statistics, February, 59—68.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1984, Balance Sheets for the
U.S. Economy, April.

Bosworth, B.P., 1985, "Taxes and the Investment

Recovery," Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity, 1, 1—38.

Bulow, J.I. and L.H. Summers, 1984, "The Taxation of Risky Assets," Journal of
Political Economy, 92, 20—39.

Constantinides, G.M. and J.E. Ingersoll, Jr., 1984, "Optimal Bond Trading with
Personal Taxes," Journal of Financial Economics, 13, September, 299—335.

Follain, J.R., 1986, "Another Look at Tenure Choice, Inflation and Taxes,"

Office of Real Estate Research Working Paper 24, University of Illinois,
January -

Fullerton,

D., 1985, "The Indexation of Interest, Depreciation, and Capital

Gains: A Model of Investment InCentives,"

NBER Working Paper 1655, June.

—38—
Gravelle, J.G., 1982, "Effects of the 1981 Depreciation Revisions on the
Taxation of Income from Business Capital," National Tax Journal, 35, March, 1—
20.

_______

1985, "Assessing Structural Tax Revision with Economic Models: The

Treasury Tax Proposals and the Allocation of Investment," Congressional Research
Service, The Library of Congress, April 8.

Hall, R.E. and D.W. Jorgenson, 1967, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior,"
American Economic Review, 56, June, 391—414.

Hendershott, P.H. and D.C. Ling, 1986, "Likely Impacts of the Administration
Proposal and the House Bill," in J. Follain (ed.), Tax Reform and Real Estate,
The Urban Institute.

Hendershott, P.H. and J.D. Shilling, 1982, "The Impacts on Capital Allocation
of Some Aspects of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981," Public Finance
Quarterly, April, 242—273.

Hendershott, P.H. and J. Slemrod, 1983, "Taxes and the User Cost of Capital for
Owner—Occupied Housing," Journal of the American Real Estate and Urban
Economics Association, Winter, 375—393.

King, M.A., 1980, "An Econometric Model of Tenure Choice and the Demand for

Housing as a Joint Decision," Journal of Public Economics, 14, 137—159.

Musgrave, J.C., 1984, "Fixed Reproducible Tangible Wealth in the United States,
1980—83," Survey of Current Business, August, 54—59.

—39—
National Association of Home Builders, 1985, "Impacts of the President's Tax
Proposal on Housing,' July.

Titman, S.D., 1982, "The Effect of Anticipated Inflation on Housing Market
Equilibriuni," Journal of Finance, 37, 827—842.

—40—
Table 1
Data on Ownership and Debt for Stock of Over—SO Unit Rental Properties

1960

1970

1980

Individuals

21

22

18

Partnerships

14

36

56

Rental Corporations

49

29

12

6

3

4

% of Total Properties

90

93

92

Median Loan—to—Value Ratio

54

67

53

% Ownership

Other

Mortgaged Properties

Properties with First Mortgage
(new or assumed) at Time of Purchase
% of Mortgaged Properties

57

71

81

Median Loan—to—Value Ratio

83

87

87

Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Residential
Finance Sections of 1960, 1970 and 1980 Census of Housing.

—41—
Table 2

Depreciation and Tax Credit Parameters

Equipment

Public Util. Industrial

1980

%SL

Tax Life
Tax Credit

Commercial

Residential

2.0

2.0

1.5

11
.096

1.0

2.0

21/30

37
0

37
0

32
0

1.5

1.5
10/15

15

LOb
15

15

.10

0

0

0

.15(aver.) .08/.05
5 to 24
24/38
0
0

.03

.03

63

63

.03
63

0

0

0

.10

1981—85

%SL

Tax Life
Tax Credit

5

10a

1"75b

Treasury

Depr. Rate
Tax Life

Taxcredjt
Administration

%SL
Tax Life

Taxcredjt

1.62
6(aver.)
0

1.54/1.7
7/10

1.12

1.12

1.12

28

28

28

0

0

0

0

1.0
30

1.0
30

1.0

0

0

0

House Bill
%SL

Tax Life

Taxcredjt

2.0
8(aver..)

0

2.0
20/30
0

30

aThe 1982 Tax Act reduced the depreciable base by one—half the tax credit.
bThe 1984 Tax Act raised the life from 15 to 18 years, and the 1985 Act raised
it to 19.

—42—

Table 3

Tax Rates and Deductibility Provisions

1980

1981—85

.48
.512

.46

.33
.37

.33
.37

.36

.4924

.568
.0795
.336

.53

.41

.41

.112
.081

.0662
.231

.4172
.0753

Treasury Adininistra— House
tion

Corporate
Tax Rate
Federal (t )
Total (t)

.3984

Personal
Tax Rates

Interest Income (t. )a
Equity Income (t )lm

Tax Exempts (X)e
Tax on Inven—
tory Gains

.0742
.322

70% of Reg— 70% of reg—
ular rate
ular rate

.252

70% of re— 70% of reg—
ular rate
ular rate

0

Interest
Indexation

No

No

Yes

No

No

Dividend

0

0

0.5

0.1

No

Full

Full

No

No

Full

d

E5cclusion

Deductibility of
Property Taxes

aTh

are the rates at which interest income is taxed (real interest under the

Treasury plan). The rate at which business (noncorporate) interest expense would be
deducted is lower under the Treasury and Administration plans, 0.389 owing to the
state and local offset at the Federal level.

bThis rate varies with the -expected inflation rate because

=

.06/(.06+it).

The value shown is for -ii =

0.05.

For It =

Xe

0.0,

=

(B_O.3)Tf

Xe

= 0.231;

and
for it

0.1, x = 0.025.
e

cTaX was removed in original version but added later to achieve revenue neutrality.

dHOme mortgage interest expense is not indexed.

—43.-

Table 4
Tax Rates Relevant to Housing Decisions

1980 Income
(thousands)

State and
Local

9—18½

Federal

Quantity—Demanded
Total

Tenure Choice
Total

.03

.16

.185

.132

.035

.18

.209

.201

.04

.24

.270

.306

.05

.37

.402

.435

.06

.49

.521

.565

(12½)

18½—22½
(20)

22½—37½
(30)

37½—75
(50)

over 75
(97½)

1985 Income
(thousands)

Federal

Current Trea

Quantity—Demanded

House Current

&Adm
12½—25

&Adm

.14

.15

.15

.166

.180

.176

.147 .119 .092 .071

.16

.15

.15

.189

.185

.180

.210 .146 .130 .097

.18/.22

.15

.15/.25 .232

.190

.232

.279 .178 .198 .208

.33

.25

.35

.364

.300

.383

.402 .300 .300 .383

.42

.35

.35

.455

.410

.389

.476 .410 .410 .404

(17½)

25—30
(27½)

30—50
(35 & 40)

50—100
(70)

over 100
(130)

Tenure Choice

Trea House Current Trea Adm House

—44.-

Table S
Private Capital Stock in the U.S.

End 1983 Dollar Value
(billions)

Inventories

Corporate

12.79

12.43

—2.8

1183

18.95

20.10

6.0

269

4.26

4.40

3.0

(2.29

(2.18

814
769
45

Noncorporate

1451

Equipment
Corporate
Noncorporate

Nonresidential Structures
10—Year Public
Utilities

Percent Share of Real Stock
1980
1984

1634
138

15—Year Public
Utilities

322

Industrial

—4.7

6.54

6.86..4

1,4.57

L4.36

546

7.85

7.92

0.9

628

8.31

8.64

4.0

2893

40.96

39.97

—2.4

6793

100.00

100.00

(corporate)

Commercial
(noncorporate)

Residential Structures
70

Corporate Rental

Noncorporate Rental
Owner—Occupied

553

2270

Sources: Data for all assets except inventories and public utilities are from

Musgrave (1984). The inventory data are from the Federal Reserve (1984); the
aggregate public utility data are from unpublished data supplied by John

Musgrave; and the 1/3, 2/3 division between 10 and 15 years are based on the
fraction given in Gravelle (1982).

—45—
Table 6

Assumed Distribution of Owner and Rental Housing
Across Six Income Classes
Income
Range

Households
(millions)

Fraction
that Own

% of Income
of Owners
of Renters

(thousands)

% of Housing Stock
Owner-.

Occupied Rental

1980
less than 9

9.6

0

0

11

2.7

9—18½

24

.577

12

22

7.6

4.9

18½—22½

12

.625

11

15

7.1

3.6

22½—37½

22.4

.707

34

34

24.3

7.9

37½—75

9.6

.813

28

15

23.9

3.6

over 75

2.4

.889

15

4

13.5

0.9

100

100

76.4

23.6

0

11

—

2.6

80
1985

less than 12½

9.6

0

l2½—25

24

.631

14

17

9.4

4.6

25—30

12

.664

12

14

8.0

3.3

22.4

.703

33

33

23.9

8.0

9.6

.781

28

18

22.2

4.4

2.4

.819

13

7

12.1

1.7

100

100

75.5

24.5

30—50

50—100
ove.r 100

80

46—

Table 7

ERTA and Disinflation
1980

ERTA

ERTA plus
Inflation Decline

Inflation Rate

.08

.08

.05

Interest Rate

.13

.1406

.0944

Inventories

12.79

12.68

—0.9

12.77

—0.2

Equipment

23.21

25.83

11.2

25.61

10.4

Industrial

7.85

8.61

9.7

8.83

12.5

Public Util.

6.86

7.21

5.1

7.31

6.5

Commercial

8.31

8.56

3.0

8.19

—1.5

40.96

37.11

—9.5

37.28

—9.2

_______

_______

Real Capital

Nonresidential
Structures

Residentia1
Structures

100.00
Homeownership
Rate

.589

100.00

100.00

.544

.585

