                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EUROPEAN CRISIS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE HISTORY OF PREVIOUS
                             FINANCIAL CRISES

                                           Michael D. Bordo
                                            Harold James

                                         Working Paper 19112
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19112


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




Paper prepared for Bank of Greece Conference, May 23-25, 2013 The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research.
Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w19112.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Michael D. Bordo and Harold James. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The European Crisis in the Context of the History of Previous Financial Crises
Michael D. Bordo and Harold James
NBER Working Paper No. 19112
June 2013
JEL No. E00,N1

                                             ABSTRACT

There are some striking similarities between the pre 1914 gold standard and EMU today. Both arrangements
are based on fixed exchange rates, monetary and fiscal orthodoxy. Each regime gave easy access by
financially underdeveloped peripheral countries to capital from the core countries. But the gold standard
was a contingent rule—in the case of an emergency like a major war or a serious financial crisis --a
country could temporarily devalue its currency. The EMU has no such safety valve. Capital flows
in both regimes fueled asset price booms via the banking system ending in major crises in the peripheral
countries. But not having the escape clause has meant that present day Greece and other peripheral
European countries have suffered much greater economic harm than did Argentina in the Baring
Crisis of 1890.


Michael D. Bordo
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
New Jersey Hall
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
and NBER
bordo@econ.rutgers.edu

Harold James
History Department and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544
hjames@princeton.edu
The European Crisis in the Context of the History of Previous Financial Crises


Michael Bordo, Rutgers University


Harold James, Princeton University


Paper prepared for Bank of Greece Conference, May 23-25, 2013




       This paper places the analysis of the European financial crisis in the context of

previous international financial crises. It brings together three strands of literature that

are normally treated separately: on the macroeconomic context of the gold standard; on

microeconomic financial sector linkages; and on the domestic and international political

economy of exchange rate regimes.


       The parallel between the classical gold standard and EMU has frequently been

made. Sometimes in a positive way. Many of the key political figures who drove

forward European monetary integration admired the discipline and certainty of the

gold standard. French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing drew on the Gaullist

tradition of seeing gold as the embodiment of sound money principles: “During the

second half of the nineteenth century, up to the 1914 war, France enjoyed continuously

successful economic growth, and a steady build-up of its engineering industry, with a

currency that was totally stable. With their roots in a rural economy and their cultural

leaning towards the fundamental values of savings and thrift, the French as a nation


                                             1
cannot cope with an inflationary economy and a weak currency. They thrive on stable

money”. German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt put the point in this way: “We had a

currency union up to 1914 in Western Europe – the Gold Standard. From a historical

point of view, I would draw a direct parallel.” (Marsh 2009)


       More recently, the comparison is more usually a negative or hostile one. The

intent is to demonstrate the unrealizability or absurdity of the constraints that rigid

monetary systems impose (Krugman 2013), or the problems of an asymmetric

adjustment process (Eichengreen and Temin 2010). These parallels emphasize the

interwar experience with a managed gold exchange standard, rather than the classical

gold standard.




I Systemic Requirements and Benefits


       Adherence to the gold standard, and to EMU, involved an acceptance of:


- monetary orthodoxy: in the gold standard, the constraint is the convertibility of claims

into a metallic equivalent; in the modern monetary union, it is imposed by a central

bank with a price stability target (in reality since May 2003 defined as “inflation rates

below but close to 2 percent over the medium term”).


- fiscal orthodoxy: both regimes depend on the avoidance of fiscal deficits that would

place the monetary objective in danger. In the gold standard era, most states had little

                                             2
room (little technical capacity or political consent) to raise large amounts in taxation,

and orthodoxy meant in practice a constraint on spending. Nevertheless, spending

continued to increase, and more advanced states began to experience a pressure to

undertake some sorts of social spending (before that, the major areas of expenditure

were debt service and war). Adolf Wagner formulated a law of increasing state

spending. Though government spending rose, economic growth meant that for most

countries, the share of government debt of GDP was falling, despite the arms race in the

years immediately before the First World War that contributed to a rise in government

spending in the major European powers (Figures 1 and 2). The modern EMU occurred

in the context of much higher spending levels and higher levels of government debt in

all industrial countries, as well as of continual social and political pressure to expand

government spending.


       The benefits of the gold standard, which became widely adopted in the last third

of the nineteenth century, were seen as lying in:


- ease of a common monetary standard


- access to capital markets (overcoming “original sin” that made financially immature

economies unable to borrow abroad except in foreign-denominated currency)


- reduction of borrowing costs.




                                             3
       The initial discussion about the gold standard in the 1860s and 1870s was cast

primarily in terms of the ease of a common monetary standard. As the system

established itself, membership in the club became an increasingly attractive prize, and

countries often went through a period of substantial rigor or austerity as they adopted

the rules of monetary and fiscal orthodoxy and hoped for the reward of lower

borrowing costs. Ivan Vyshnegradsky, Russian Finance Minister from 1887 to 1892,

explained the budgetary and monetary deflation that was needed to bring Russia onto

gold as “we must export though we die.” (von Laue 1969, 27) In modern Europe,

Romano Prodi as Italian Prime Minister and his Treasury Minister Carlo Ciampi,

justified a Maastricht tax in 1996-7 in a similar way as an unpleasant medicine that

needed to be swallowed, and the international financial markets enthused that – as the

Financial Times put it – “at last Italy is close to a virtuous economic path.”


       The gold standard was based on a contingent rule (Bordo and Kydland 1995). In

some unusual circumstances, above all the event of a major war, the commitment to

gold convertibility would be temporarily suspended, but with an expectation of an

eventual return to convertibility without a change in the exchange rate on the

restoration of “normalcy”. The model for this behavior was given by the British

example, in which convertibility was suspended in the French Revolutionary War in

1797, and restored in 1817 (at the old parity). Britain followed this model in 1914, with a

return to the old parity in 1925. The rule is contingent in the sense that the public

understands that the suspension will only last for the duration of the wartime


                                              4
emergency plus some period of adjustment. It assumes that afterwards the government

will follow the deflationary policies necessary to resume payments at the original

parity. In the gold standard, the major fiscal event that would push up debt

temporarily was war, which had a clearly definable beginning and end. By contrast, in

the modern EMU, the political pressure that increased government spending was not in

any way analytically distinguishable from “normalcy” and there was thus a blurry

sense of what might constitute exceptional circumstances.


       The contingent rule gave a safety valve for fiscal policy in dealing with

exceptional circumstances. Following such a rule allows the government to smooth its

revenue from different sources of finance: taxation, borrowing, and seigniorage (Lucas

and Stokey 1983; Mankiw, 1987).


       The operation of the gold standard was seen in a convergence of bond yields.

The convergence was never complete, and in particular there is a clear core/periphery

divergence. (Bordo and Flandreau 2003) (Figure 3) Peripheral countries always faced

the risk of exit, though many countries from the European periphery after they

abandoned the formal commitment to a gold parity in fact maintained exchange rate

practices which shadowed the gold standard parities (this was the practice in Italy,

Portugal, and Spain).


       There were also divergences of interest rates within a single monetary area and a

single country. The U.S. had large regional interest rate divergences until the post civil


                                            5
war era. The internal spreads between the north and the south in the early nineteenth

century were probably larger than between the core countries (Davis 1965). Even in the

early years of the Federal Reserve System, member banks set different discount rates.

The small differences that existed in central bank discount rates of the European core of

the gold standard, the UK, France and Germany should not be interpreted as evidence

of a market assessment of the likelihood of departure from gold, but rather as evidence

of an incomplete integration of capital markets, even on a national level.


       The experience of countries with “original sin” (Eichengreen and Hausmann

1999) – in other words countries that did not have sufficiently deep capital markets to

borrow in their own currency – can be divided into two groups. In the pre-1914 period,

one group includes countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Italy and Portugal each of

which suffered a financial catastrophe between 1880 and 1913. The other group,

including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, and the US had relatively little

trouble with financial crises in terms of frequency or virulence (Bordo and Meissner

2007). This differential cannot be explained in terms of differing debt levels. Indeed

after a certain point more hard currency debt relative to the total seemed to be

associated with fewer debt crises and banking crises. Three or four categories seem to

be apparent. The financial centers with low original sin and strong financial

fundamentals obviously avoid crises. Other highly developed countries that are small

in terms of global output, and carry high original sin also avoid severe financial crises.

In terms of less developed countries, there are many which are relatively closed to


                                             6
external capital flows or have yet to kick start the development process. These countries

also have original sin like the rest of the world but are not prone to volatile capital

movements. The most dangerous combination seems to be high original sin in an

emerging market. Such countries were characterized by what Reinhart and Rogoff

(2009) term debt intolerance. But that effect could be counteracted by some measures:

in particular political integration in the international state system. Reinhart and Rogoff

note how “recovery [from financial crises] may take decades or even centuries” in the

absence of an “outside political anchor” (they give as cases of such successful anchoring

the effect of the European Union on countries like Greece and Portugal: p. 30). The

monetary regime is inevitably part of a general concept of international order.




II The Risks of the Classic Gold Standard


       Large-scale emerging market borrowers ran a substantial risk of entering into an

unstable dynamic with a destabilizing fiscal policy that might threaten the maintenance

of the rules of the game. The gold standard experience is filled with sudden stops of

capital inflows in which advanced country creditors either hit by domestic shocks or

fearful of events in the borrowing countries turn off the lending spigot (Bordo 2006).

1890 was a turning point, after which creditors became more concerned with fiscal

sustainability than with development potential (Flandreau and Zumer 2004)




                                              7
      The turning point in 1890 was the result primarily of a crisis in Argentina. In the

late 1880s Argentina had experienced a major boom, with substantial borrowing to

develop the potential of the pampas. A modern calculation suggests that Argentina

imported capital amounting to 18.7% of its GDP between 1870 and 1889 (the other big

importers of capital were Australia, 9.7%, and Canada 7.2%, over this period)

(Flandreau and Zumer 2004). By the 1880s, Argentina accounted for almost half of

British foreign lending (Ford 1963; Mitchener and Weidenmier 2006). By the end of the

1880s, Argentine public finances were increasingly strained, with the cost of financing

the federal deficit amounting to 68 percent of government expenditure by 1889.

Subsidiary government institutions continued to borrow even when the federal

government promised not to borrow more without the consent of the bankers. All

Argentine short term borrowing became much more expensive, and long term bond

issues impossible. Bank credit creation, which had been regulated under an 1887 Law

of National Guaranteed Banks in which banks issued notes backed by gold

denominated government debt, represented another weak point of the Argentine

structure. The crunch came when the largest and most prestigious London merchant

bank, Barings, which had been handling Argentine debt issue since 1824, failed to sell

the bonds of the Buenos Aires Water Supply and Drainage Corporation, and faced a

substantial loss on its underwriting that threatened the solvency of the bank. The

government was unable to make gold payments, and paid instead in depreciated paper.

Thus the gold standard rule was violated, and the access to further borrowing was

radically shut down. Without access to more finance, the economy collapsed, and

                                            8
political unrest brought down Juarez Celman, the President of the Republic, in 1890.

The contraction was very sharp, indeed in terms of real GDP sharper and more sudden

than anything in the recent financial crisis, but growth resumed quite quickly, and by

1893 pre-crisis real GDP levels were attained. It was only in 1893 that the Argentine

debt was restructured (in the arreglo Romero), with a deferral of most payments for ten

years and a reduction of interest payments for five years; and only in the new century

that capital flows to Argentina really resumed.


      After 1890, as Flandreau and Zumer (2004) document, as a response to the

Argentine crisis and its aftermath, investors focused less on judgments about the

inherent possibilities of development in a borrowing country than on the extent of the

institutional commitment to a low deficit budget regime. What determined the

sustainability of inflows, and was it just a matter of following good policy?


      1. The flows almost always produced an expansion of the banking system in the

importing country. That expansion could turn into a source of instability if banks

became unable to repay credits, either because of a liquidity or a solvency problem.

When countries credibly adopted the gold standard, they often experienced surges of

capital inflows. These were almost always mediated through the financial system.

Sudden stops, were sometimes caused by banking sector weakness, and sometimes lead

to bank collapses. They did not inevitably end the exchange rate commitment. There

was thus a close association between capital flows and banking crises (Figure 4).




                                            9
      For instance, when Italy returned to convertibility after a period of suspensions

following the Austrian war of 1866, the move sparked off a substantial surge in growth,

financed in large part by inflows of foreign credits, and a real estate boom. There was a

substantial current account deficit, reflecting the inflows of external money. Between

1882 and 1887, the lending of commercial banks increased by 15 per cent a year (Toniolo

1990, p. 77). When the boom slowed down in 1887-88, the Italian banks ran into great

difficulties. The inflows now stopped, in 1892 there was a sharp drop in GDP, while the

current account moved into surplus in 1891 and 1892. The sudden stop was

fundamentally unsustainable in the political and economic circumstances of Italy, and a

wave of scandals and crises erupted that required a complete reorganization of Italian

banking, with a new central bank (the Banca d’Italia) taking the place of the previous

banks of issue, and new commercial banks. 1893 was a major financial crisis in which

the two largest commercial banks, the Credito Mobiliare and the Banca Generale, failed,

in addition to one of the note-issuing banks, the Banca Romana. For most of the period

following the re-establishment of the gold standard, the lira-sterling and lira-pound

exchange rate was very close to parity, but after June 1893 the exchange rate fell

sharply. The depreciation of the lira reached as much as 13 percent. The subsequent

bank reform led on the one hand to the creation of a new major note-issuing bank, the

Banca d’Italia, which absorbed the Banca Romana; and to the institution of new mixed

or universal banks, explicitly copied from the German model, and financed by

international consortia in which the German financial establishment was preponderant.

The new banks, the Banca Commerciale Italiano (1894) and the Credito Italiano (1895),

                                            10
were intended to contribute to the financing of industrial development. In practice

they set off a new wave of capital inflows, that lasted until the next financial crisis.


       Another example of the perils of banking expansion was provided by Australia,

which experienced a massive capital inflow from Britain to fuel a wool and mutton

driven boom in pastoral land. The land mortgages were financed by pastoral finance

companies and mortgage banks. The Australian commercial banks (some of which were

based in London) in turn funded these institutions. They obtained their funding from

deposits of British (largely Scottish) savers who believed that the Australian banks were

similar to those in Britain, in the sense that they followed the real bills doctrine and did

not make mortgage loans. When the global terms of trade turned down in the late 1880s

and wool prices fell this decimated the balance sheets of the pastoral finance companies

and then quickly spread to the banking system evident in the failure of the Mercantile

Bank of Australia in 1892 and a banking panic in 1893. Large losses to the British

depositors led to a major sudden stop to Australia which lasted for a decade (Bordo and

Meissner 2012).


       The consequences of capital inflows and an explosion of bank lending is visible

in the case of the largest and most persistent debtor country of the nineteenth century,

the United States. The U.S. banking system based on small unit banks was notoriously

unstable and volatile and there were frequent banking panics. Indeed the panic of 1873

followed a sudden stop of British capital which had financed the development of the

railroads across the west after the Civil War. The boom was associated with a corporate

                                             11
governance scandals since many railroads engaged in “tunneling” between their

finance holding companies and the railroads (Bordo and Benmelech 2008) as well as

political corruption (such as in the case of the 1832 American Crédit Mobilier scandal)

(Glaeser and Goldin 2007). Many banks were involved with the affected railroads.

News of the scandal led to a sudden stop of British capital, a stock market bust, and the

panic. But, perhaps with the exception of the mid 1890s at the height of the political

agitation for Free Silver (Hallwood MacDonald and Marsh 2012), there was no doubt

about the maintenance of the parity consistent with gold standard rules.


       2. A strong and effective state could underpin a banking system, and thus allow

greater volumes of borrowing to continue for longer and with greater sustainability. In

Russia, the State Bank was widely regarded as a reinsurance mechanism that would bail

out problematical private debtors: it was often referred to as “the Red Cross of the

bourse” (Crisp 1976). Thus Russia had large inflows, and a sudden stop, but no

suspension of convertibility.


       How is state effectiveness measured? There is both an internal and an external

component. The internal prerequisites relate to capacity to tax or raise other revenue.

The external component depended on relations with a major power which could

provide an anchor of financial stability.


       3. International diplomatic commitment enhanced the market perception of state

effectiveness. Alliance links offered to investors the security that creditor governments


                                            12
would put pressure on banks to continue lending, and hence reduced the likelihood of

sudden stops.


      The story of how diplomatic commitments enhance credibility is especially

evident in the well-known case of Russia. The beginning of the diplomatic

rapprochement of Russia with France in 1891 was accompanied by a French bond issue,

which the supporters of the new diplomacy celebrated as a “financial plebiscite” on the

Franco-Russian alliance. Russia survived a sharp contraction in 1900-01, as well as a

political crisis with war and revolution in 1905, with no default. It raised new money

immediately after the revolution of 1905. By 1914, almost half of the 1733 m. ruble

Russian government debt was held abroad, and four fifths of that was in French hands,

with the UK holding 14 percent. The diplomatic, military and financial calculations

were intricately tied together, and were skillfully used by Russia as a way of locking in

the creditors politically and economically.


      In imperial systems, the imperial security umbrella, coupled with the extension

of legal principles from the metropol, functioned in a similar way and reaasured

investors that the country was capable of sustaining greater debt levels. The effect has

been attributed to imperial order, but it is hard to determine whether it is more due to

the effects of good policy, imposed as a result of reform minded administrators, or of

the power of the empire to compel repayment. (Ferguson and Schularick 2006). In the

aftermath of some crises, the imperial system simply expanded to swallow up bankrupt

debtor entities: well known example are Egypt in 1875, or Newfoundland in 1933. In an

                                              13
extreme example in early 1915, the Russian government suggested a fiscal and political

union with France and UK to allow it continued access to credit markets (Siegel

forthcoming).




       4. Popular political discontent eventually limited the possibility of adjustment

policy. The Tsarist empire was an effective and capacious borrower, it never seemed to

violate the gold standard rule in peacetime, but it was brought down by massive social

discontent that was in large part driven by the widespread perception that its policy

had been sold out to foreigners. A major part of Lenin’s analysis, for instance, was

devoted to the demonstration that Russia had become a quasi-colony as a result of the

large scale capital imports, and that the foreign creditors in effect controlled Russia’s

foreign policy.


       The linkages of these issues can be summarized as a series of impossible trinities

or trilemmas (on political trilemmas see Rodrik 2007).




       The trilemmas:

       1. The macroeconomic classic: fixed exchange rates, capital flows,
       autonomous monetary policy

       2. The financial sector: fixed exchange rates, capital flows, financial
       stability

       3. The international relations setting: fixed exchange rates, capital flows,
       national policy independence
                                             14
       4. The political economy: fixed exchange rates, capital flows,
       democratization
III. What happened in the interwar years?


All four of these trilemmas became more obviously impossible after the First World

War.


1. The best known macro-economic interpretation of the interwar problem emphasizes

the much more pronounced asymmetry of the adjustment problem in the managed gold

exchange standard of the 1920s (Eichengreen 1992). The active monetary management

by central banks in France and the U.S. meant the sterilization of gold inflows, while

deficit countries, including the UK and most central European and Latin American

countries faced a pressure to deflate when capital markets were no longer available.


2. Financial intermediation chains were weaker because of the inherently weak

positions of banks in many borrower countries. Inflation and hyper-inflation destroyed

the capital basis of many financial institutions. Austrian, German and Hungarian banks

                                            15
were thus much more weakly capitalized than they had been before the First World

War, and were consequently more vulnerable than they had been in the era of the

classic gold standard.


       The intermediation chains also became more complex. A consequence of the

First World War had been the development of small neutral countries, in particular the

Netherlands and Switzerland, as the locus of financial intermediaries. These

intermediaries had regulatory and fiscal attractions, as well as offering greater currency

stability. It was thus a regular practice for German corporations and banks to create

affiliates and subsidiaries in Amsterdam and Zurich, deposit funds with them, and then

borrow from those affiliates or subsidiaries. They had similar credit relations with

some institutions that they did not own or control. Moments of crisis – as in 1931 -

produced large inflows to these neutral intermediaries, without any onward lending.

In these circumstances, the Swiss and Dutch banks lived with the possibility that there

would be an outflow of deposits (James 1986).


3. Policy credibility could be enhanced by signing into the international system – as in

the pre-1914 days. Taking on commitments was a way of enhancing credibility for

lenders. Thus, for instance, Germany appeared to have a much greater worthiness

when its parliament (the Reichstag) accepted the Dawes Plan in 1924 and the provisions

of the London conference by the special majority (two thirds) required for a

constitutional alteration. Or, in another example, Italy under the fascist leader Benito




                                            16
Mussolini gained market access when it not only stabilized the currency against gold,

but also (temporarily) abandoned its expansionist and revisionist rhetoric.


4. Enhancing credibility through international commitment might bring a heavy price

in domestic political terms. The domestic price was higher because of the other policy

trilemmas: deflation made adjustment more painful. The result of the social and

political pain was that discontent was focused on the international order, and that

radical parties demanded a nationalist and populist alternative.




IV. The EMU Story


       The move to monetary union for weaker countries was a credibility enhancing

mechanism that would lower borrowing costs. For countries that had strong creditor

positions, the attractions of monetary union lay in the depoliticizing of the adjustment

process.


       At the beginning, in the Bretton Woods era of fixed exchange rates and

controlled capital markets, even relatively small deficits could not be financed, and

produced immediate pressure on the exchange markets. The deficit countries then had

to apply fiscal brakes in a stop-go cycle. Germany’s partners, notably France, were

faced by the prospect of austerity and deflation in order to correct deficits. This

alternative was unattractive to the French political elite, because it constrained growth



                                            17
and guaranteed electoral unpopularity. Their preferred policy alternative was thus

German expansion, but this course was unpopular with a German public worried about

the legacy of inflation and was opposed by the powerful and independent central bank,

the Deutsche Bundesbank. Solving the question of the German current accounts in the

European setting at first appeared to require some sophisticated and ingenious political

mechanism, that would force French politicians to do more austerity than they would

have liked, and Germans less price orthodoxy than they thought they needed. A

political mechanism however requires continual negotiation and public deliberation,

and that would have been painful given the policy preferences in the two countries (and

in those countries that lined up with each one of the Big Two). The increased attraction

of monetary union was that it required no such political process, and that the operation

of an entirely automatic device would constrain political debate, initiative and policy

choice. The monetary union occurred in the aftermath of an era of capital market

liberalization, in which current account imbalances were sustainable for much longer

periods. The effects of movements in capital in allowing current account imbalances to

build up to a much greater extent, and ensuring that corrections, when they occurred,

would be much more dramatic, was already noticeable in the late 1980s and early 1990s,

before the move to monetary union. Indeed, those large build-ups in the imbalances

were what convinced Europe’s policy-makers that a monetary union was the only way

of avoiding the risk of periodic crises with currency realignments whose trade policy

consequences threatened the survival of an integrated internal European market.



                                           18
       Monetary discipline was built into the new European order, which was founded

on a strong assertion of the primacy of price stability as the objective of the central bank.

Fiscal stability was the subject of intense debate at both a theoretical and a policy-

making level. Prior to the monetary union, an extensive discussion had taken place as

to whether fiscal discipline could be imposed by market pressures alone. In the context

of the Delors Committee, a memorandum prepared by the BIS General Manager

Alexandre Lamfalussy stated:


       “With widely divergent ‘propensities to run deficits’ prevailing in the various European

       countries, I doubt whether we could count in the foreseeable future on a convergence

       within a European EMU similar to that observed in most contemporary federal systems.

       Nor do I believe that it would be wise to rely principally on the free functioning of

       financial markets to iron out the differences in fiscal behavior between member

       countries: (a) the interest premium to be paid by a high-deficit member country would

       be unlikely to be very large, since market participants would tend to act on the

       assumption that the EMU solidarity would prevent the "bankruptcy" of the deficit

       country; and (b) to the extent that there was a premium, I doubt whether it would be

       large enough to reduce significantly the deficit country's propensity to borrow. There is,

       therefore, a serious risk that, in the absence of constraining policy co-ordination, major

       differences in fiscal behaviour would persist within a European EMU. This would be

       one contrast between most contemporary federal systems and a European EMU. […]

       Such a situation would appear even less tolerable once the EMU was regarded as part

       and parcel of the world economy, with a clear obligation to co-operate with the United

       States and Japan in an attempt to preserve (or restore) an acceptable pattern of external

                                               19
      balances and to achieve exchange rate stabilisation. To have the smallest chance of

      reaching these objectives, all co-operating partners need flexibility in the

      fiscal/monetary policy mix - as we have so often told the United States. In short, it

      would seem to me very strange if we did not insist on the need to make appropriate

      arrangements that would allow the gradual emergence, and the full operation once the

      EMU is completed, of a Community-wide macro-economic fiscal policy which would be

      the natural complement to the common monetary policy of the Community.”


In the course of these discussions, the Governor of the Banque de France, Jacques de

Larosière suggested as a phrase for the final report: “economic and monetary union

without a sufficient degree of convergence of budgetary policies would be unlikely to

be durable.” But at a later stage, when the final draft was being discussed, he pointed

out that there was a problem with the concept of “binding constraints on the size and

financing of budget deficits”: “who,” he asked, “is going to be judge of the

enforceability… there is no police.” (James 2012) The common fiscal policy never

emerged in the Eurozone.


      The involvement of monetary authorities in government finance was ruled out

by the stipulations of the Maastricht Treaty forbidding the ECB to purchase government

bonds, and the absence of support was a vital part of the “no-bailout” philosophy

woven into the treaty (Article 104/1 of the Maastricht Treaty, Article 21 of the ECB

statute, and Article 104/1 of the Lisbon Treaty).




                                               20
       After entry into the EMU, bond spreads fell to almost zero (until the outbreak of

the global financial crisis), as the ECB was bound to treat all member country bonds

equally. (Figure 5)


       EMU worked quite well as a disciplining mechanism before it entered into effect,

but much less well afterwards. (Figure 6)


       A major blow came when France and Germany ignored the Stability and Growth

Pact and had it suspended in November 2003 as a counter to a – as it proved spurious –

threat of recession. EU Commission President Romano Prodi memorably called the

Pact “stupid.” The European Council agreed not to apply the deficit procedure against

France and Germany, though later the European Court of Justice ruled that this step

contravened EU law. In 2005, the disciplinary mechanism was softened, many

processes became merely discretionary, and new procedural provisions made it harder

to take action against non-compliant states (Council Regulations of June 27, 2005,

1055/2005 and 1056/2005). Smaller EU countries were outraged by France and

Germany’s initiative. But the behavior of the Big Two had a corrosive effect on other

countries. While there had been a great deal of fiscal convergence in the 1990s on the

Maastricht criteria, in the 2000s (even before the financial crisis) fiscal discipline in

Europe deteriorated. Was this just a European phenomenon? The same trajectory

occurred in the US, from fiscal responsibility in the 1990s (under President Clinton) to

persistent and high deficits in the 2000s under George W. Bush and under Barack

Obama in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2007-8. So other explanations posit that

                                              21
the US also provided a bad example, or (more plausibly) that the markets were

apparently willing to finance almost limitless amounts of government debt, as they

perceived the debt of industrial countries to be an entirely risk-free asset.


       In the wake of the transition to monetary union, debt holding became

internationalized. Up to the late 1990s and the advent of monetary union most EU

government debt was domestically held: in 1998 the overall ratio of foreign held debt

was only a fifth. That ratio then climbed rapidly in the aftermath of the introduction of

the Euro. In 2008, on the eve of the financial crisis, three quarters of Portuguese debt,

and half of Spanish and Greek debt, as well as over two fifths of Italian debt was held

by foreigners. A significant proportion, especially in the case of Greece, Portugal and

Italy, was held by banks.


       The steps in the gold standard and interwar logic are repeated, with an

intensification of the trilemmas:


1. Banking expanded after the establishment of EMU (Shin 2012). No adequate

provision on a European basis existed for banking supervision and regulation, which

like fiscal policy, was left to rather diverse national authorities. An explosion of

banking activity occurred simultaneously with the transition to monetary union and

may well have been stimulated by the new single money. A “banking glut” led to a

new challenge to monetary policy-making. It produced high rates of growth in Greece,

Spain and Ireland, with commentators celebrating Greece as “a giant in the making”


                                             22
(Kalaitzidis 2010), the Spanish Miracle, and the Irish “Celtic Tiger”. Though there were

concerns about asset price inflation, there was no European mechanism for controlling

the explosive growth of bank credit. (Figure 7)


2. The bank expansion could go on longer because of implicit government backstop. It

was reversed when government debt management no longer looked credible: in the

Greek case after the elections of October 2009. In that aftermath of the reversal of

expectations, fears about the Greek financial system produced an intermediation

through foreign banks, notably in London and in Cyprus, with both assets and

liabilities of Greek banks with these financial centers rising (Figures 8, 9, 10).


3. The implicit national government backstop was really only credible because of the

international commitment to the European integration project. It was that commitment

that led markets to believe that – in spite of the no bailout provisions of the Maastricht

Treaty – there were almost no limits to the amount to which debt levels could

accumulate both in the private and the public sector. The private sector thus behaved

as if there were a bailout provision. As Dellas and Tavlas (2012) put it: “The only way

the low risk premia can be justified (ex-post) is by assuming that investors expected the

core of the euro zone would have no choice but to bailout Greece in the event of a

financial-fiscal crisis.” European officials continued to foster this kind of thinking as the

crisis grew deeper. Even when confidence in the Greek government’s handling of the

crisis was beginning to erode, the President of the Eurogroup Jean-Claude Juncker

stated boldly: “We’re telling financial markets: Look out, we’re not abandoning

                                             23
Greece.” (Lynn 2012, 135) When governments turned round, in particular after the

Deauville meeting of Chancellor Merkel and President Sarkozy in October 2010 and

demanded a haircut for Greek creditors (or Private Sector Involvement, PSI), the yields

immediately diverged further, with dramatic jumps for Italy and Spain whose debt

levels had previously been thought of as sustainable (Figure 11). Deauville undid the

framework of solidarity that the EU treaties seemed to have created.


4. Cross-border capital flows through the financial system, especially when they take

place through small countries where the banking system is substantially larger than the

size of the national economy, are potentially dangerous. In the absence of a Europe-

wide resolution system, banks may be too large for national governments to rescue.


5. When the democratic/popular backlash occurs, it takes the form of rejection of

international/cross-border political commitment mechanism. Voters are surprisingly

discerning. Opinion poll data shows a major increase in hostility to the EU in

peripheral countries, but with no corresponding unpopularity of the common currency.

Hostility to the EU is also evident in parliamentary elections results in Greece and Italy.


       The trilemmas are worse in the recent context because of the absence of an escape

clause as under the gold standard. A standard IMF package for instance was usually

thought to contain a mixture of exchange rate adjustment to restore competiveness with

some measure of debt reduction in order to restore sustainability. There is something

classic about this. That combination was characteristic of Argentina’s approach to its


                                            24
extreme debt crisis in the 1890s. In the absence of an exchange rate option, there is

consequently a need for greater debt reduction, but that raises a politically awkward

question of the distribution of losses between the private and the public sector.


       The result is reminiscent of the interwar political debate about whether (mostly

American) private creditors or (mostly European) official reparations creditors should

have priority in the payment of German debts. What made the interwar slump so

intractable was that it was not just a financial issue, but also a crisis of democracy, of

social stability, and of the international political system. It is now clear that

contemporary Europe is reenacting the political economy logic of that interwar

upheaval.


       In the interwar period, increased social tension as a consequence of increased

unemployment and of widespread bankruptcy made normal democratic politics

impossible. In Germany, the epicenter of the breakdown of democracy, nationalist

radicals on both the right and the left raged against the postwar peace settlement and

the Versailles Treaty. In the last years of the increasingly unstable Weimar Republic, as

democracy was fraying, the German government started to use the radicalism of their

opponents as a way of trying to extract security concessions from the western powers.

Domestic political pressure became a source of heightened international tension.


       That is true in today’s Europe. Democracy has become a central target of

complaints by the European elite. Luxembourg Prime Minister and former Euro group


                                             25
chair Jean-Claude Juncker stated that it wasn’t that European leaders didn’t know what

the right policies were; but that they didn’t know how to be reelected after they had

implemented them (Economist, 2007). Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti after a

humiliating election defeat in 2013 wistfully explained how the Italian electorate was

too impatient to bear reforms whose benefits would only become evident over a longer

time frame than that of the election cycle (Financial Times 2013). The 2013 Cyprus crisis

and its resolution exposed two new dimensions to the clashes over Europe’s debt and

bank crisis. The discussion of a levy on bank deposits, and whether small customers

should be exempted, puts class conflict at center stage. The question of foreign, and

especially Russian, depositors – along with the proximity to Syria - makes the incident

into an international relations problem.




Conclusion


       The ability to overcome “original sin” and to absorb debt in a sustainable fashion

does not lead itself to any easy metric or rule. Institutional arrangements play an

important part in shaping the nature of the commitment mechanism. Countries with

immature financial markets and evident growth or catch-up potential can increase their

ability to borrow by entering into political agreements with powerful creditor countries.

The diplomatic ties of Russia before the First World War, or of Germany in the

stabilization years after 1924, are precedents for the processes created in the course of


                                            26
European integration at the end of the twentieth century. In the course of European

integration an apparently even more solid framework for cooperative action was

created. Those diplomatic or now supranational commitments however do not change

the problems posed by the adjustment requirement, and the asymmetric character of

crisis adjustment is more apparent in the modern era (and in the interwar experience)

than it was under the classic gold standard. A design that intentionally excluded a

contingent clause made the system at first apparently more robust, but aggravated the

eventual adjustment issue. That is why the initial crisis may not have been so acute as

some of the gold standard sudden stops, such as Argentina’s 1890 collapse, but the

modern European recovery or bounceback is painfully slow and protracted (Figure 12).

The modern system has more deeply embedded institutions that should foster

cooperation and looks stronger; and this makes it possible for strains to build up for

much longer before the system cracks. When the cracks appear, the damage is deeper.

The instability is increased by the heightened complexity and length of credit chains,

and by the fact of the mediation of credits through small country banking centers.




                                           27
References:




Bordo, Michael D. (2006) “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Original Sin in

Emerging Countries: Déjà vu?” NBER working paper 12393


Bordo, Michael D. and Efraim Benmelech ( 2008)“ The Financial Crisis of 1873 and 19th

Century Corporate Governance” NBER DAE Summer Institute


Bordo, Michael D. and Finn E. Kydland (1995), “The Gold Standard as a Rule,”

Explorations in Economic History, vol. 32, pp. 423-464


Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher M. Meissner (2007), ”Foreign Capital and Economic

Growth in the First Era of Globalization,” NBER Working Paper No. 13577


Bordo, Michael D. and Christopher Meissner ( 2012) ‘ Financial Globalization,Financial

Development, Financial Crises and Economic Growth in the Golden Age, 1870-1914”

Slides given at SSHW Stanford University May 2012


Bordo, Michael D. and Hugh Rockoff (1996), “The Gold Standard as a ‘Good

Housekeeping’ Seal of Approval, Journal of Economic History 56, 389-428.


Bordo, Michael D. and Marc Flandreau (2003), “Core, Periphery, Exchange Rate

Regimes, and Globalization,” in (eds.) Michael D. Bordo, Alan M. Taylor and Jeffrey G.




                                            28
Williamson, Globalization in Historical Perspective, Chicago: University of Chicago Press


Crisp, Olga (1976), Studies in the Russian economy before 1914, New York : Barnes &

Noble Books


 Davis, Lance (1965), "The Investment Market, 1870-1914: The Evolution of a National

Market." Journal of Economic History 25, pp. 355-399


Della Paolera, Gerard and Alan M. Taylor eds. (2003), A new economic history of

Argentina, Cambridge ; New York : Cambridge University Press


Dellas, Harris and George S. Tavlas (2012), “The road to Ithaca: the Gold Standard, the

Euro, and the origins of the Greek sovereign debt crisis,” Paper at Cato Institute 30th

Annual Monetary Conference, Washington D.C., November 15.


Economist, The (2007), “The quest for prosperity,” March 15


Eichengreen, Barry (1992), Golden fetters: the gold standard and the Great Depression, 1919-

1939, New York ; Oxford : Oxford University Press


Eichengreen, Barry and Peter Temin (2010), "Fetters of gold and paper," Oxford Review

of Economic Policy, vol. 26(3), pp. 370-384


Eichengreen, Barry and Ricado Hausmann (1999), “Exchange Rates and Financial

Fragility”, in: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (Ed.), New Challenges for Monetary




                                              29
Policy, pp. 329-368Ferguson, Niall and Moritz Schularick (2006), “The Empire Effect:

The Determinants of Country Risk in the First Age of Globalization, 1880–1913,”

Journal of Economic History, 66/2, 283-312


Financial Times (1997), Perseverance on Monetary Union is Close to Reward,” July 21


Financial Times (2013), “Voters in southern Europe grow weary of austerity,” March 3


Flandreau, Marc and Frédéric Zumer (2004), The Making of Global Capital 1880-1913,

Paris: OECD Development Centre Studies


Ford, A.G. (1962), The Gold Standard 1880-1914: Britain and Argentina, Oxford: Oxford

University Press


Glaeser, Edward and Claudia Goldin ( 2006), Introduction to Corruption and Reform.

Chicago; University of Chicago Press


Hallwood, C. Paul, Ronald MacDonald and Ian W. Marsh (2012), Credibility and

fundamentals: were the classical and inter-war gold standards well-behaved target

zones?” in Michael D. Bordo and Ronald MacDonald (eds.), Credibility and the

international monetary regime : a historical perspective, New York : Cambridge University

Press, pp. 71-88


James, Harold (1986), The German Slump: Politics and Economics 1924-1936, Oxford:




                                             30
Oxford University Press


James, Harold (2012), Making the European Monetary Union, Cambridge Mass.: Harvard

University Press


Kalaitzidis, Akis (2010), Europe’s Greece : a giant in the making, New York : Palgrave

Macmillan


Krugman, Paul (2013), “Lust for Gold,” New York Times, April 11, 2013


Lucas, Robert E., Jr. and Nancy Stokey (1983), "Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in

an Economy without Capital," Journal of Monetary Economics, 12(1), pp. 55- 93


Lynn, Matthew (2011), Bust : Greece, the Euro, and the sovereign debt crisis, Hoboken, N.J.:

Bloomberg Press


Mankiw, Greg (1987), “The Optimal Collection of Seigniorage: Theory and Evidence,”

Journal of Monetary Economics 20, pp.327-341


Marsh, David (2009), The euro : the politics of the new global currency, New Haven;

London : Yale University Press


Monovoukas, Michael (2012), "Sovereign Debt: Levers Long Enough to Move the

Earth," Woodrow Wilson School Princeton Senior Thesis


Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor (2004), Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis


                                            31
and Growth, New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004


Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of

Financial Folly, Princeton: Princeton University Press


Rodrik, Dani (2007),”The Inescapable Trilemma of the World Economy,” in:

http://rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_weblog/2007/06/the-inescapable.html


Shin, Hyun Song (2012), “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium,” Mundell-

Fleming Lecture, presented at the IMF Annual Research Conference, November 10-11,

2011, IMF Economic Review, 60, pp. 155-192


Siegel, Jennifer (forthcoming), For Peace and Money: International Finance and the

Making and Unmaking of the Triple Entente


Toniolo, Gianni (transl. Maria Rees) (1990), An economic history of liberal Italy, 1850-1918

London New York: Routledge


von Laue, Theodore (1963), Sergei Witte and the industrialization of Russia, New York,

Columbia University Press




                                             32
Charts




1. Public Debt as a Share of GDP




S. Ali Abbas, Nazim Belhocine, Asmaa ElGanainy, and Mark Horton, A Historical Public

Debt Database, IMF WP 10/245




                                          33
 120.0

 100.0

  80.0
                                                                                                                  Argentina
  60.0                                                                                                            Germany
                                                                                                                  Russia
  40.0
                                                                                                                  UK
  20.0

   0.0
         1885
                1887
                       1889
                              1891
                                     1893
                                            1895
                                                   1897
                                                          1899
                                                                 1901
                                                                        1903
                                                                               1905
                                                                                      1907
                                                                                             1909
                                                                                                    1911
                                                                                                           1913

2. Public Debt as a Share of GDP in Gold Standard (IMF Historical Debt Database)




                                                                                         34
3. Bond Yields in Gold Standard




 29
        Source: Obstfeld and Taylor (2004) Globalization and Capital Markets




                                                            35
4. Capital Mobility and the Incidence of Banking Crises




From: Reinhart Rogoff 2009.




                                        36
5. Bond Yields in Eurozone




                             37
6. Fiscal Positions in Eurozone




         General Government Net Borrowing/Lending 1990s (% of GDP)




                                 Source: IMF




         General Government Net Borrowing/Lending 2000s (% of GDP)




                                Source: IMF




                                               38
7.




     39
8.



                                   Greek Bank claims (assets/loans) on foreign/domestic MFIs
                         140,000
                                                                                                                                                                          other countries
                         120,000
                                                                                                                                                                          UK
                         100,000
                                                                                                                                                                          Bulgaria, Romania, Poland
     Millions of Euros




                          80,000
                                                                                                                                                                          Cyprus

                          60,000                                                                                                                                          Luxembourg

                          40,000                                                                                                                                          Core: Germany, Austria,
                                                                                                                                                                          Belgium, Netherlands
                          20,000                                                                                                                                          France

                              0                                                                                                                                           PIIS
                                   Mar‐02
                                            Nov‐02
                                                     Jul‐03
                                                              Mar‐04
                                                                       Nov‐04
                                                                                Jul‐05
                                                                                         Mar‐06
                                                                                                  Nov‐06
                                                                                                           Jul‐07
                                                                                                                    Mar‐08
                                                                                                                             Nov‐08
                                                                                                                                      Jul‐09
                                                                                                                                               Mar‐10
                                                                                                                                                        Nov‐10
                                                                                                                                                                 Jul‐11
                                                                                                                                                                          Domestic




Source: Monovoukas 2012 and Bank of Greece statistics




                                                                                                                              40
9


                                     Net Change in Greek Bank Liabilities to Other Banks
                                                 March 2008 ‐ March 2010
                        20000.00                                                                        Cyprus

                                                                                                        Luxembourg
                                         15852.13
                                                                                                        Bulgaria, Romania, Poland
                        15000.00
                                                                                                        France

                                                                                                        Core: Germany, Austria, Belgium,
                                                                                                        Netherlands
                        10000.00                                                                        Other
    Millions of Euros




                                                                                                        PIIS

                                                                                4943.77                 Domestic
                          5000.00                                     4328.35

                                                                                                        Britain

                                                    978.59                                1117.55                 1183.00
                                                             356.33
                             0.00


                                                                                                    (2171.72)

                         (5000.00)


                                                                                                                            (7588.03)

                        (10000.00)
                                                                      Source: Bank of Greece




Source: Monovoukas 2012 and Bank of Greece statistics




                                                                       41
                                    Net Change in Greek Bank Assets of Other Banks:
                                               March 2008 ‐ March 2010
                         40000.00
                                         36396.91

                         35000.00                                      Cyprus

                                                                       Luxembourg

                         30000.00                                      Bulgaria, Romania, Poland

                                                                       France
                         25000.00                                      Core: Germany, Austria, Belgium,
                                                                       Netherlands
     Millions of Euros




                                                                       other countries
                         20000.00                                      PIIS

                                                                       Domestic                                                 13402.40
                         15000.00
                                                                       Britain


                         10000.00

                                                    4869.72
                          5000.00
                                                              740.01
                             0.00
                                                                         (395.09)   (465.12)   (426.78)   (482.05)   (597.00)

                         (5000.00)
                                                                        March 2008 ‐ March 2010



10


Source: Monovoukas 2012 and Bank of Greece statistics




                                                                              42
11. Public Debt as Share of GDP in some EMU countries (IMF Historical Database)




 180.0
 160.0
 140.0
                                                                                                                  France
 120.0
                                                                                                                  Germany
 100.0
                                                                                                                  Greece
  80.0
                                                                                                                  Ireland
  60.0
                                                                                                                  Italy
  40.0
                                                                                                                  Spain
  20.0
   0.0
         1983
                1985
                       1987
                              1989
                                     1991
                                            1993
                                                   1995
                                                          1997
                                                                 1999
                                                                        2001
                                                                               2003
                                                                                      2005
                                                                                             2007
                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                           2011




                                                                                        43
12. Real GDP after Financial Crisis




 140

 120
                                                      France
 100
                                                      Germany
  80                                                  Greece
                                                      Ireland
  60
                                                      Italy
  40                                                  Spain

  20                                                  Argentina 1889

   0
        0     1     2     3     4     5     6




Source: Della Paolera and Taylor 2003 for Argentina after 1889; IMF for Europe after

2007.




                                          44
