                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE EFFECT OF MERGERS IN SEARCH MARKET:
               EVIDENCE FROM THE CANADIAN MORTGAGE INDUSTRY

                                          Jason Allen
                                          Robert Clark
                                      Jean-François Houde

                                       Working Paper 19126
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19126


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2013




Jean-Francois Houde thanks NSF for funding (SES- 1024840). We thank the Canada Mortgage and
Housing Corporation and Genworth Financial for providing us with the data.The views of this paper
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of Canada or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Jason Allen, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Mergers in Search Market: Evidence from the Canadian Mortgage Industry
Jason Allen, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde
NBER Working Paper No. 19126
June 2013
JEL No. L11,L41,L85

                                           ABSTRACT

We examine the relationship between concentration and price dispersion using variation induced by
a merger in the Canadian mortgage market. Since interest rates are determined through a search and
negotiation process, consolidation eliminates a potential negotiation part- ner, weakening consumers
bargaining positions. We combine reduced-form techniques to es- timate the mergers distributional
impact, with a structural model to measure market power across consumers with different search costs.
Our results show that competition benefits only consumers at the bottom and middle of the transaction
price distribution. Estimates from a search and negotiation model attribute these differences to the
presence of large search frictions.


Jason Allen                                       Jean-François Houde
Bank of Canada                                    Wharton School
234 Wellington Street                             University of Pennsylvania
Ottawa, ON K1A 0G9                                3620 Locust Walk
jallen@bankofcanada.ca                            3008 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
                                                  Philadelphia, PA 19104
Robert Clark                                      and NBER
Institute of Applied Economics                    houde@wharton.upenn.edu
HEC Montreal
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine
Montreal (Quebec) H3T 2A7
Canada
Robert.Clark@hec.ca
Introduction
Like many consumer-finance products, mortgage contracts are negotiable: lenders post a com-
mon sticker price, and contract terms are determined through a search and negotiation process
between local branch managers and individual borrowers. This allows informed consumers to
gather multiple quotes and obtain an interest rate that reflects the expected lending cost, even
with a small number of competing lenders. In practice, however, consumers differ in their ability
to understand the subtleties of financial contracts and their willingness to negotiate and search
for multiple quotes. Indeed, recent surveys in North America show that while some buyers get
multiple quotes when shopping for their mortgage contract, nearly half only get one.1
       These features lead to price dispersion. In Allen et al. (2013) we document that the Canadian
mortgage market exhibits substantial dispersion, even for contracts with homogeneous terms and
for which lenders are fully protected against the risk of default by a government-backed insur-
ance program. The inter-quartile range of the net transaction interest spread approaches 100 basis
points and the coefficient of variation is about 59%. Importantly, more than 60% of the dispersion
in margins is unexplained by standard borrower and contract characteristics.
       Similar phenomena have been documented by a growing literature analyzing price dispersion
in retail markets: new cars (e.g. Goldberg (1996), Scott Morton et al. (2003), Busse et al. (2006),
and Langer (2012)), mortgage broker fees (Hall and Woodward (2012)), real-estate (Hendel et al.
(2009)), and health care services (e.g. Sorensen (2001), Grennan (2013)). Building on Stigler (1961),
many of these papers have provided evidence that a significant fraction of the observed disper-
sion in prices is caused by the inability of (some) consumers to gather information and negotiate
discounts, suggesting that search and information frictions are important factors in these markets.
       In contrast, we know relatively little about the impact of market structure and competition
on the distribution of negotiated prices.2 It remains an empirical question whether the benefit
of competition is spread equally across consumers, and whether competition raises or lowers the
dispersion of transaction prices. Indeed, search-theoretic models of price dispersion provide am-
biguous predictions with respect to the impact of concentration on price dispersion, as discussed
in Janssen and Moraga-González (2004) and Baye et al. (2006).3
       Our objective is to measure the role of competition in determining the distribution of prices
in markets with price negotiation. Unlike in markets without search frictions, in our context the
   1
      In Canada, the Canadian Association of Accredited Mortgage Professionals conducts an annual survey on the state
of the mortgage market and on average have reported that about 45% of new home buyers visit one lender. For similar
U.S. evidence see Lee and Hogarth (2000).
    2
      An exception is the recent literature on negotiation between buyer and seller networks (e.g. Town and Vistnes
(2001), Crawford and Yurukoglu (2012), Lewis and Pflum (2013), Gowrisankaran et al. (2013)). While it analyzes the
impact of market structure on the relative bargaining leverage of parties, it does not provide a convincing interpretation
of residual price dispersion, and abstracts from the role of information and search frictions.
    3
      The same is true for discrimination-based theories: the “textbook” price discrimination model suggests a negative
relationship between dispersion and competition, while Borenstein (1985) and Holmes (1989) show that an increase in
competition in markets with third-degree price discrimination lead to more dispersion.


                                                            1
effect of competition on prices depends not only on the relative market power of firms, but also on
the willingness and ability of consumers to haggle with sellers. If there is heterogeneity in these
abilities across consumers and markets, then variation in transaction prices induced by changes
in competition may not reveal the importance of market power. Because of this ambiguity, we
combine reduced-form econometrics techniques to estimate the impact of losing a competitor on
negotiated prices, with a structural econometric model to measure the extent of market power
across consumers with different search and negotiation costs.
       To perform our analysis, we use administrative data on insured mortgage contracts, and take
advantage of the quasi-experimental variation created by a horizontal merger between two im-
portant mortgage lenders in Canada. Our empirical strategy relies on the idea that the merger
of two banks’ networks creates discrete changes in the choice-set of consumers located near the
branches of both merging parties, while the number of options offered to consumers living close
to only one or neither remains unchanged.
       This variation naturally leads to a difference-in-difference estimator with which we infer the
average price changes among consumers directly affected by the merger by looking at the evo-
lution of prices in comparable local markets in which the number of lenders remained constant.4
Our first set of results shows that the loss of a competitor led to an increase in the average interest
rate in treated markets of approximately 6 basis points (bps), which corresponds to about 15% of
residual price dispersion in our sample.
       We then estimate the distributional effect of the merger, an aspect of merger evaluation that has
been ignored up to now by the literature. To do so, we use the change-in-change estimator proposed
by Athey and Imbens (2006) to recover the counter-factual distribution of negotiated rates that
would have been observed if the merger had not been approved by antitrust authorities. This
allows us to document substantial heterogeneity in the impact of the merger along the distribution
of negotiated rates. In particular, our second set of results show that the loss of a competitor
increased interest rates between 7 and 9 bps for consumers in the lower and middle percentiles of
the distribution, and had no effect on consumers in the top 30%. This result implies that borrowers
who are the most adversely affected by a negotiation-based pricing policy do not benefit from an
increase in the degree of competition between lenders.
       Having estimated the pre- and post-merger price distribution, we measure the impact of the
merger on residual price dispersion. Our third set of results shows that the merger led to a 16%
decrease in the inter-quartile range, while the coefficient of variation decreased by 15%. This
establishes a positive relationship between the number of firms and residual price dispersion in
markets with negotiated prices.
       We then develop and estimate a model of search and price negotiation that is consistent with
   4
   This strategy has recently been used to study the impact of mergers in gasoline markets (e.g. Hastings (2004), and
Houde (2012)), cement industry (e.g. Hortacsu and Syverson (2007)), health-care industry (e.g. Dafny et al. (2011)), and
durable goods (e.g. Weinberg et al. (2013)).


                                                           2
our three reduced-form results. The parameters of the structural model are estimated by inverting
the observed post-merger price distribution and matching the predicted merger effect obtained
from the change-in-change estimator. This approach allows us to estimate a non-parametric search-
cost distribution, as done in recent papers estimating search models in markets with price disper-
sion (e.g. Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004), Hong and Shum (2006), and Wildenbeest (2011)).
   Finally, we use the estimated model to identify the contribution of consumers’ search-costs in
generating market power among mortgage lenders. In our setting, because consumers endoge-
nously respond to changes in market structure by reducing their search effort, the price effect of
losing a competitor is the sum of a reduction in search costs and an increase in the price that con-
sumers expect to pay if negotiation fails. For instance, at the estimated parameters, the merger
reduced the bargaining leverage of the median consumer by about 6 bps, which corresponds to a
9 bps increase in the price of the next best alternative, and a 3 bps search-cost reduction.
   Moreover, we show that the net effect of mergers is very different in markets with lower search
costs. In particular, reducing consumer search costs by half would lead to a 30% increase in the av-
erage effect of the merger, and 46% more homogeneous effects across consumers. These results
imply that the reduced-form impact of mergers in markets with large search-costs is not an accu-
rate representation of firms’ market power.
   Our paper is related to an extensive literature on bank mergers (see Berger et al. (1999) for a
discussion). A lack of consumer-level data has made it difficult to analyze the effect on transaction
prices, and therefore most studies have focused on the impact of mergers on average transaction
prices or posted deposit services (fees and rates). For instance Prager and Hannan (1998) find
that bank mergers in the U.S. led to a decrease in deposit rates. Using Italian data, Focarelli and
Panetta (2003) find a decrease in the short-run, but an increase in the long run due to efficiency
gains resulting from the merger. Finally, our results are related to those of Sapienza (2002) who,
in the context of business lending, finds that borrowers with few outside banking relationships
are significantly less affected by mergers, while those with an intermediate number of banking
relationships are affected the most. Although the methods for identification are different, her
interpretation of the economic channel through which the results are derived is similar to ours.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 describes the Canadian mortgage
markets, focusing on market structure and pricing. Section 2 presents our sample and defines
the variables used in the analysis. In Section 3 we provide we describe our empirical approach
and explain our identification strategy. Section 4 presents results of the reduced-form analysis. In
section 5 we develop and estimate a model of search and price negotiation. Section 6 concludes
and presents implications of our results for mortgage-market policies.




                                                  3
1       The Canadian mortgage market
1.1       Market structure and mergers

The Canadian mortgage market is currently dominated by six national banks (Bank of Montreal,
Bank of Nova Scotia, Banque Nationale, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Royal Bank Finan-
cial Group, and TD Bank Financial Group), a regional cooperative network (Desjardins in Québec),
and a provincially owned deposit-taking institution (Alberta’s ATB Financial). Collectively, they
control 90 per cent of assets in the banking industry and we conveniently call them the “Big 8.”
        The market was not always this concentrated. Until the early 1990s the Canadian residential-
mortgage market also featured a large number of trust companies. Trusts are like Savings & Loans
in the U.S. At the time the main difference between trusts and banks was that trusts were more
lightly regulated with regards to reserve requirements. In particular, trusts did not have to hold
reserves against mortgages, while chartered banks did. This provided trusts with a competitive
advantage in the mortgage market due to a lower cost of funding. Cross-ownership between the
two types of institutions was not permitted until the 1992 revisions to the Bank Act. Following
these revisions banks and trusts were granted almost identical powers, making them undifferen-
tiated products from the point of view of consumers.5
        As a result of the Bank Act revisions and a series of bad residential and commercial loans
that created solvency and liquidity issues for the trusts in the 1980s, Canadian chartered banks
acquired the majority of trust companies over the course of the following decade. The merger
wave led to the six largest banks controlling approximately 80 per cent of the mortgage market
– almost double their 1980s market share. These mergers all resulted in significant expansion of
the merged entity’s branch network since in each case the Canadian Competition Bureau required
little or no forced divestiture of branches.
        Figure 1 presents the evolution of the mortgage-market share of the main lending groups – The
Big 8, Trusts, Credit Unions and other banks as well as the major mergers, including the number
of branches acquired. The figure also lists the major trust acquisitions along with the number of
branches acquired in each case. The major acquisitions were: Canada Trust & Toronto-Dominion
(2000), National Trust & Scotia Bank (1997), Montreal Trust & Scotia Bank (1994), Royal Trust
& Royal Bank (1993), and Central Guaranty Trust & Toronto-Dominion (1993). A more detailed
discussion of the major Canadian bank mergers is presented in the Appendix.
        Our empirical analysis focuses on the short-run impact of one of the major mergers between
a bank and a trust. As a result we study contracts signed within a year of the merger. This is
    5
    There were still differences in ownership structure (trust companies could be closely held - and commercial own-
ership of trusts became common, while banks had to be widely held to prevent ownership concentration) as well as
in supervisory authority (banks are federally regulated whereas trust companies can be federally or provincially regu-
lated), but these differences are unlikely to affect consumer demand. In 1992 trusts were given full consumer lending
powers, and banks were permitted to offer in-house wealth management advice (fiduciary services).



                                                          4
                                             !!!
                                              "

                                           +,#'
                                                                                                                                                                                      ? 5:.0!@/A89!B0!C0.D65E2A6BA9
                                            +,#

                                           +,*'
                12324/567.!3/08.5!9:/0.9
                                            +,*
                                                                                                             ; 0295!<:/0.

                                           +,)'


                                            +,)

                                           +,('
                                                                                                                                                                                             = 6>!*!<:/0.

                                            +,(

                                           +,''
                                                                                          <CB56/EI; !G"$'H




                                                                                                                             <CB56/EF; !G"**H
                                                                      J BK/4EJ ; !G"'+H




                                                                                                                                                                     ; LE1; !G&&+NH
                                                       ; LE1M!G"'(H




                                            +,'

                                           +,&'

                                             !!!
                                              "##"
                                                 !!!       "##$             "##%               "##&          "##'     "##(        "##)              "##*    "###   $+++               $++"    $++$     $++%      $++&   !!!
                                                                                                                                                    - ./0



Figure 1: Evolution of financial institution market shares for newly insured mortgages (smoothed)


appropriate, since we know that the merged entity did not start closing duplicate branches until
approximately a year after the official merger date. For confidentiality reasons cannot reveal the
parties involved in the merger. We therefore label the two institutions A and B, and hide the exact
timing of the merger.


1.2      Pricing and negotiation

The large Canadian banks operate nationally and post prices that are common across the country
on a weekly basis in both national and local newspapers, as well as online. There is little dispersion
in posted prices, especially among the largest banks. In contrast there is a significant amount of
dispersion in transaction rates. This comes about because borrowers can search for and negotiate
individual discounts. One option for borrowers is to visit local branches and negotiate directly
with branch managers who have the authority to offer borrowers discounts below the posted
price under general guidelines from headquarters.
       Negotiating larger discounts is costly for the local bank manager, reducing the commissions
earned by branch employees (see KPMG (2008)), but worthwhile if a consumer is likely to switch
to another financial institution without a discount. Local branch managers compete against rival
banks, but not against other branches of the same bank.6 Survey evidence from the Canadian
   6
    Borrowers must present credible quotes to competing branches, and branch managers are explicitly told not to
compete against each other. We know from private conversations with loan officers that only in extremely rare occa-
sions will a branch manager deviate from this directive. There is also important record keeping that prevents branch
managers from the same institution from making competing offers. First, a pre-approved mortgage is typically good for



                                                                                                                                                5
Association of Accredited Mortgage Professionals reports that about 52% of new home buyers
visit more than one lenders when shopping for a mortgage (Dunning (2010)).
    Alternatively borrowers can hire brokers to search for the best rates on their behalf. Unlike
in the United States (except California), brokers in Canada have fiduciary duties. Brokers are
“hired” by borrowers to gather the best quotes from multiple lenders, but are compensated by
lenders an amount equal to 1-1.3 per cent the value of the mortgage. According to detailed survey
evidence collected by Taddingstone in 2005 brokers on average contact 5.9 lenders for their clients,
suggesting they do, in fact, assist in gathering multiple quotes. See Allen et al. (2013) for a more
detailed description of the pricing strategies used in the market.


2    Sample selection and variable definition
Our analysis focuses on insured mortgages, and we use administrative data obtained directly from
the two insurers operating in Canada: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC), and
Genworth Financial. CMHC is a crown corporation with an explicit backstop from the federal
government. Genworth also receives an explicit government of Canada guarantee, but for 90 per
cent of the amount owing. During our sample period, both insurers used the same strict federal
approval guidelines: (i) borrowers with less than 25% equity must purchase insurance, and (ii)
borrowers with monthly gross debt payments that are more than 32% of gross income or a total
debt service ratio greater than 40% are rejected.7 The government also sets an insurance premium
that is solely a function of the loan-to-value ratio, and ranges from 1.75 to 3.75 per cent of the
loan. The qualifying rules and premiums are common across lenders and based on the posted
rate. Borrowers qualifying at one bank, therefore, should assume that they can qualify at other
institutions, given that the lender is protected in case of default.
    We construct a 10% random sample of all contracts issued between 1992 and 2004. We have
access to 20 household/mortgage characteristics, including all of the financial characteristics of
the contract (i.e. rate, loan size, house price, debt-ratio, risk-type), the lender identity (for the 12
largest lenders), some demographic characteristics (e.g. income, prior relationship with the bank,
residential status, dwelling type), as well as the house location up to the forward-sortation area
(FSA).8 Table 9 in the Appendix lists all of the variables included in our data-set.
90 days, therefore a bank is committed to a consumer for those 90 days and this information is locked into a banks (and
therefore all branches) database. Second, when mortgage insurance is provided the insurers’ automated underwriting
program flags whether an individual has qualified for insurance. Third, when individuals apply for a mortgage there
is a credit check and all lenders can see that this has been done.
    7
      Gross debt service is defined as principal and interest payments on the home, property taxes, heating costs, annual
site lease in case of leasehold, and 50 per cent of condominium fees. Total debt service is defined as all payments for
housing and other debt.
    8
      This unit of aggregation is defined as the first three letters of the postal-code. It corresponds to about 4 to 6 census-
tracts in urban areas (or between 10,000 and 40,000 households), or one small town in more rural areas. The median
population size per FSA is about 16,000. There are over 1,300 FSA’s in Canada, and over 850,000 postal codes.



                                                              6
       We follow a quasi-experimental approach to study the impact of the merger on the distribution
of negotiated interest rates. Over the next three subsections we describe the construction of our
sample: (i) definition of the treatment and control group, (ii) sample selection criteria, and (iii)
variable definitions and summary statistics.


2.1      Treatment and control groups

Our empirical strategy relies on the idea that when two bank networks merge, the pre-merger
location of branches creates discrete changes in the structure of local markets. In particular, when
two neighboring branches merge local competition is immediately reduced, since loan managers
stop competing for the same borrowers. Importantly, since retail mergers are negotiated nation-
ally, these changes can be viewed as exogenous relative to local market conditions, at least in the
short run.
       A retail merger can generate two types of changes. First, it can reduce the number of available
options for consumers who had both brands in their neighborhood. Second, if the two merging
firms were ex-ante different in terms of their product characteristics, the merger can change the
characteristics of the available options for consumers who had only one of the two merging firms
in their neighborhood. There is no effect for consumers who had neither brand in their neighbor-
hood pre-merger.
       Bank A is a national bank, and therefore present in nearly all local markets pre-merger. Trust
B, on the other hand, is smaller, and isolated from A in only 2% of its markets. Given the extent
of branch co-location we focus only on the first effect of the merger, namely the reduction in the
number of available options. The treatment group is therefore defined as the set of consumers who
had both lenders in their choice-set prior the merger, while the control group is the set of consumers
who had only one or none of of the merging firm.9
       To operationalize this definition, we need to formally define the choice-set of consumers. To
do so, we exploit the fact that the pricing decision is decentralized, and therefore that consumers
negotiate directly local branch managers. This allows us to define a consumer’s choice-set as the
set of lenders present in a neighborhood around the house’s FSA, denoted by Ni . In the empirical
analysis we use a fixed radius of 5KM to define neighbrohood boundaries, and measure distances
as the Euclidian distance from FSA centroids to the closest branch of each bank. We make use of a
yearly panel obtained from the Financial Services Canada directory (Micromedia ProQuest). This
data-set contains the location of active branches for all financial institutions.
       Figure 2 motivates this definition, by illustrating the distribution of the minimum distance
to chosen and competing lenders. The average distance to chosen lenders is much smaller than
   9
   Ideally we would use as control group local markets in which none of the merging banks’ branches were present.
However, the fact that Bank A is present in nearly all neighborhoods limits the amount of variation to identify the
model. In Section 4, we study the robustness of our results to this alternative definition of the control group.



                                                        7
            .3




                                                                                 .4
                                                                                 .3
            .2
 Fraction




                                                                          Fraction
                                                                            .2
            .1




                                                                                 .1
            0




                                                                                 0
                   0         2            4            6        8    10                        0       2          4             6         8        10
                                   Distance from chosen bank                                                    Average distance


                       (a) Distance to chosen bank (km)                                        (b) Distance to competing banks (km)

                            Figure 2: Distribution shortest distances between homes and banks


                                                                                   .25
            .4




                                                                                   .2
            .3




                                                                                     .15
 Fraction




                                                                              Fraction
   .2




                                                                                   .1
            .1




                                                                                   .05
            0




                                                                                   0




                             4           6            8         10   12                    0       2         4           6          8         10
                                 Number of lenders pre−merger                                              Number of lenders pre−merger


                           (a) Markets with A & B                                              (b) Markets with A or B alone (or none)

                   Figure 3: Distribution of the number lenders per local markets before the merger


the average distance to other financial institutions, and nearly 80% of transactions occur with a
bank located within 2KM of consumers. This provides strong evidence that consumers most often
deal with a bank that has a large presence in their region. Indeed, the 5KM threshold includes
more than 90% of transactions. Notice that we measure distance as the Euclidian distance, which
under-estimates the actual driving distance from the center of each FSA to a branch. A 5KM
radius is therefore larger than the radii of most FSAs, and broadly corresponds to each consumer’s
municipality.10
      10
             In Section 4.1 we evaluate the robustness of our results to alternative neighborhood sizes.




                                                                          8
2.2     Sample selection

We construct our sample based on three criteria: (i) timing of the merger, (ii) homogeneity of
contractual characteristics, and (iii) comparability of market structure.

Time period We first select contracts signed within a year of the merger date. We further elimi-
nate contracts for which the closing date is less than 90 days after the merger, to avoid including in
the post-merger period rates that were negotiated pre-merger. We use 90 days because in Canada
lenders tend to guarantee price quotes for 90 days. This leads to a slightly uneven split of obser-
vations before and after the merger: 42% of the transactions take place post-merger.

Contract characteristics We select our sample by limiting heterogeneity in contractual charac-
teristics (other than prices), and across consumer attributes. To do so, we select newly issued
mortgages, excluding home-owners that are either refinancing or renewing their mortgage con-
tract, and contracts with a 25 years amortization period and 5 year fixed-rate term. During our
sample period, nearly all mortgage contracts were fixed rate, and over 85 per cent had a 5 year
term. A 5 year fixed-rate mortgage contract must be renegotiated every five years, and banks im-
pose substantial penalties to refinance before the end of the term.11 This has been the standard
contract offered by Canadian banks since the late 1960’s. Similarly, almost all contracts have 25
year amortization periods.

Market structure Our choice-set definition creates a split between contracts signed in areas where
both A and B were present pre-merger (i.e. treatment group), and areas in which only A or B, or
neither were present (i.e. control group). Not all of these neighborhoods are directly comparable,
and local markets with both A and B tend to be larger and have more lenders.
      Figures 3a and 3b illustrate that the treatment and control groups significantly overlap only
in medium-sized markets with five to eight lenders. Less than 1% of control markets have more
than eight lenders, while less than 1% of treatment markets have fewer than five. Ideally, we
would estimate the treatment effect separately for consumers facing similar choice-sets, but the
distribution of lenders only allows us to do so for local markets with an intermediate level of
concentration.12
   11
      Unlike in the United States, refinancing is uncommon in Canada. This is largely because of the relatively short
term of the mortgage contract (5 years versus 30), which makes the benefits from refinancing, that might come from
lower interest rates relative to the large penalties imposed, less attractive compared to simply waiting to renewal. In
addition refinancing in the U.S. happens when borrowers move. In Canada borrowers can port their mortgage, i.e.
their mortgage can be transferred to the new home.
   12
      This difference in the structure of local markets between treatment and control groups can bias our results, since
merger effects are unlikely to be constant across markets of different sizes. Similarly, markets with a larger number
of lenders tend to be more urban, and therefore possibly subjected to correlated aggregate trends. The fact that the
compositions of two groups differ implies that these unobserved factors can be confounded with the causal effect of
the merger.




                                                           9
               Table 1: Summary statistics on consumer choice-sets prior to the merger

                                                     Full sample               5N 8
                                                  A or B A & B              A or B A & B
                                                  or none                   or none
                      Number of Lenders            5.855     9.627           6.465  7.421
                                                    (2.43)        (1.96)     (1.07)   (0.74)
                      Number of Branches           18.037         64.452    14.272    22.173
                                                   (20.98)        (71.68)    (8.56)   (12.37)
                      Branch HHI                   1.567          1.728      1.620    1.627
                                                    (0.34)        (0.35)     (0.26)   (0.23)
                      Share of bank A              0.059          0.139      0.063    0.156
                                                    (0.09)        (0.06)     (0.07)   (0.06)
                      Share of trust B             0.008          0.095      0.012    0.121
                                                    (0.06)        (0.06)     (0.05)   (0.05)
                         Branch HHI                               0.179               0.230
                                                                  (0.22)              (0.25)

 Each entry corresponds the sample average and standard-deviations (in parenthesis), calculated using the observation
weights from the mortgage contract data-set. Local markets are defined as 5KM euclidian distance around each FSA
centroid. Markets “A or B, or none” do not have A and B together, and markets “A & B” have both merging parties.


      Given this additional constraint, we restrict our sample to borrowers facing choice-sets with
five to eight lenders. In the estimation sample, therefore, households with only one or with neither
of the two firms are under-represented (i.e. 37% versus 67%), but less so than in the full sample (i.e.
10% versus 90%). The final sample includes slightly more than eighteen thousand observations
over approximately 400 different locations.
      Table 1 describes the structure of choice-sets. The first two columns illustrate the distribution
of the number of lenders and branches in the full sample, while the second two consider only
overlapping markets. Excluding non-overlapping markets leads to comparable neighborhoods:
the average number of branches and Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) are similar across the
two groups, as is the number of lenders. The last three rows show that, absent other concurrent
changes, concentration would increase significantly in markets with both A and B. Both institu-
tions had a large presence in A & B markets, with a cumulative average market share of 28%. The
merger alone therefore corresponds to an average increase of 0.23 points in the branch HHI.


2.3     Variable definitions and descriptive statistics

Our analysis focuses mostly on two outcome variables: discounts and margins. These two vari-
ables provide direct measures of the cross-sectional dispersion of rates, by controlling for inter-
temporal variation in aggregate interest rates. Transaction margins are measured as the interest
rate paid by consumers less the swap-adjusted 5 year government of Canada bond rate measured


                                                             10
          Table 2: Summary statistics on mortgage contracts and household characteristics

                                         Control/Before                              Control/After
                                 Mean     S.D. P (25) P (75)               Mean       S.D. P (25)         P (75)
     Margin                       1.07     0.46  0.73    1.42               1.43      0.56   1.02          1.82
     Residual margin              1.07     0.43  0.78    1.35               1.67      0.46   1.36          2.02
     Zero discount - %            36.38   48.12                            26.92     44.36
     Income (/1000)               61.95   25.00 43.70    74.77             62.84     24.49 45.37          75.29
     House price (/1000)         121.11   55.49 82.18 145.30               118.25    52.16 81.18          143.74
     Loan (/1000)                 113.4    49.7   78.7   137.2             110.0      46.9    76.9        133.5
     LTV - %                      91.58    4.26  90.00   95.00             91.25      4.34   90.00        95.00
     FICO 600 - %                 67.23   46.95                            64.27     47.93
     Status: Renter - %           68.30   46.55                            70.05     45.82
     Status: Parents - %          5.73    23.24                             6.64     24.90
     Switch - %                   30.21   45.93                            36.84     48.25
     Broker - %                   21.91   41.37                            30.05     45.86
                                        Treatment/Before                            Treatment/After
                                 Mean S.D. P (25) P (75)                   Mean       S.D. P (25)         P (75)
     Margin                       0.93     0.49  0.65    1.27               1.44      0.56   1.12          1.82
     Residual margin              1.06     0.43  0.78    1.35               1.72      0.47   1.44          2.00
     Zero discount - %            23.67 42.51                              22.23     41.58
     Income (/1000)               69.33 26.48 50.71      82.23             70.99     26.49 52.46          84.11
     House price (/1000)         162.93 63.38 116.77 201.83                161.07    64.58 114.84         200.72
     Loan (/1000)                 152.3    57.6  110.5   188.2             149.9      57.6   108.2        187.0
     LTV - %                      91.35    4.25  90.00   95.00             90.99      4.48   89.60        95.00
     FICO 600 - %                 62.40 48.44                              62.56     48.40
     Status: Renter - %           68.28 46.54                              71.15     45.31
     Status: Parents - %          8.31    27.61                             9.32     29.08
     Switch -%                    26.68 44.23                              38.43     48.65
     Broker - %                   15.66 36.34                              27.73     44.77

     The sample size is 18,121 divided between the control and treatment group, pre- and post-merger with 62.8% of
contracts in the treatment and 42.2% of the contracts observed post-merger. It includes a random sample of homoge-
nous term and amortization contracts insured by CMHC or Genworth within one year of the merger. Margins and
residual margins are defined in the text. F ICO 600 is an indicator variable equal to one if a consumers credit score
is greater than 600. Renters and parents correspond to new home buyers exiting from renting and living with parents,
respectively. Switcher is an indicator variable equal to one if consumers have no prior experience with the chosen fi-
nancial institution. The sample is restricted to households with 5 to 8 lenders located within 5KM of their FSA centroid.


at the week of negotiation, and discounts are measured relative to the bank-specific posted rate
at the week of negotiation. We use the discount variable to calculate the fraction of households
receiving zero discounts, defined as an indicator variable equal to one if the observed discount is
less than 10 basis points.
    Note that we only observe the closing date on the house sale. For each contract, we identify
the negotiation week by calculating the absolute difference between the transaction rate and the


                                                           11
posted rate for the weeks within 90 days of the closing date, and take the smallest value, and/or
the closest in time in case of a tie. From this, we estimate that 44% of contracts are negotiated
within 1 week of the closing week, and the remaining are approximately uniformly distributed
between 1 week and 90 days. This definition also increases the fraction of consumers paying a
rate equal or close to the posted-rate. Less than 10% of consumers pay a rate equal to the posted-
rate valid at the closing date, while we estimate that roughly 25% pay the posted rate valid at
the “negotiation” week. Many of the consumers that we categorize as receiving zero discounts
actually benefit from a discount relative to the posted rate valid at the closing date, while others
end up paying more than this posted rate.
       We use the negotiated margins as our main outcome variable. To measure residual price dis-
persion, we proceed by decomposing the observed margins into a deterministic function of bor-
rowers’ characteristics, and an idiosyncratic component mi :

                                     Margini =       0
                                                         Xi + µweek
                                                               i    + ✓Gi ,Ti + ei ,                                  (1)
                                                                      | {z }
                                                                           =mi


where Margini = Ratei Bondi is the transaction margin, and ✓Gi ,Ti is a group/period fixed-effect,
Gi and Ti index the group (treatment or control) and time period (before or after the merger) for
borrower i, µweek
             i    is a closing-week fixed-effect, and Xi is a vector of control variables.13 In the
empirical analysis we mostly focus on the impact of the merger on the level and dispersion of
residual margins, mi .
       Notice that we index each observation by i, with the understanding that i captures: (i) the
individual borrower (or household), (ii) the time period of the contract, and (iii) the location of the
purchased house. Although we observe each household only once, we observe most FSAs pre-
and post-merger. This allows us in some specifications to control for location fixed-effects in (1).
       Table 2 describes the sample, split across treatment/control groups and pre/post-merger. Over-
all the average margin is 117 basis points, and it has increased over time. In contrast, the fraction
of consumers paying the posted rate (i.e. zero-discounts) remained fairly stable at around 26%.
Since the remaining 74% of consumers negotiate discounts, most of the dispersion in margins is
unexplained by variation in the level of interest rates. This is illustrated by the residual margin dis-
persion on the second line of each panel of Table 2. Slightly more than half of the margin variance
in our data comes from cross-sectional residual dispersion alone. The magnitude of dispersion
is large compared to other financial markets, considering the homogeneity of the contract terms
and the presence of insurance. For instance, Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) show that the cross-
  13
    The exact set of control variables is: income, loan size, loan to income ratio, other debts, debts to income ratio,
loan-to-value categorical variables, credit score categories (4), residential status category (4), switcher, and FSA-level
census characteristics (i.e. house value, income, education, average age, and migration). To control for the non-random
nature of missing household characteristics we interact a missing value dummy with: province indicators, treatment
group, after merger, and bank indicator variables.



                                                             12
sectional standard-deviation among mutual fund transaction fees was equal to 60 bps in 2001.
Mutual funds exhibit substantially more heterogeneity in observable characteristics and returns
than the 5-year fixed rates mortgage contracts studied here.
    Comparing the treatment and control groups pre-merger, we can see that approximately 23%
of consumers in the treatment group and 36% of those in the control group received zero discounts.
Margins were also higher in the control groups. These differences mostly reflect the fact that
markets in the treatment group are more urban and feature more competition.
    These differences can be seen by comparing income and loan size in the two groups. The av-
erage home-owner in the treatment group earns $69,330 and contracts a loan of $152,300, while
in the control group the mean income and loan size are $61,950 and $113,400 respectively. How-
ever, loan-to-value ratios are similar across the two groups. The other characteristics are all quite
similar across the two groups prior to the merger.
    The effect of the merger on rates can already be seen in Table 2. Rates rise in both the treatment
and control markets, but the increase is about 7 bps greater in the treatment. Similarly, the fraction
of consumers paying the posted rate falls everywhere, but by less in the treatment.


3   Estimation and identification strategy
Our objective is to study the effect of the merger on the distribution of negotiated rates. Equation
1 characterizes a reduced-form pricing function. Using the language of the treatment effects lit-
erature, we think of the merger as an intervention (Ii ) that changes residual margins negotiated
between borrowers and lenders:

                               mi = Ii mI (ui , Ti ) + (1   Ii )mN (ui , Ti ),                           (2)

where Ti is a before/after period indicator, Ii = Ti ⇥ Gi is a merger indicator variable, and
mIi (ui , Ti ) and mN
                    i (ui , Ti ) correspond to the post- and pre-merger residual margin functions, re-
spectively. Equation 2 allows for the possibility that mergers have heterogeneous effects by ex-
pressing transaction prices as a non-separable function of the consumers’ unobserved heterogene-
ity component ui . This variable determines the size of negotiated discounts, and represents, for
example, unobserved search effort or negotiation skills.
    Since the post-merger prices are observed from the data, the goal of our empirical analysis is to
identify the counter-factual pre-merger prices given by the function mN (ui , Ti = 1) for “treated”
consumers (Gi = 1). This allow us to measure the effect of the merger along the distribution
of residual margins: mI (ui , Ti )   mN (ui , Ti ). In contrast, the merger evaluation literature has
focused on estimating changes in average prices: E mI (ui , Ti )          mN (ui , Ti ) . More formally, our
empirical analysis focuses on estimating the effect of the merger along three dimensions:
                            ⇥                                        ⇤
  1. Average prices: ↵¯ = E mI (ui , Ti = 1) mN (ui , Ti = 1)|Gi = 1 ,

                                                    13
   2. Price distribution: ↵q = mI (ui , Ti = 1)                mN (ui , Ti = 1), such that Pr(u < ui |Gi = 1) = q,
                                                 ⇥                       ⇤                 ⇥                       ⇤
   3. Price dispersion:            Disp(m) = Disp mI (ui , Ti = 1)|Gi = 1              Disp mN (ui , Ti = 1)|Gi = 1 ,

where Disp(x) is one of three measures of price dispersion: standard-deviation, coefficient of
variation, or inter-quartile range.
       To perform the estimation, we impose three assumptions on the residual margin function and
the distribution of ui . First, in order to compare treated and control markets, we assume that
the function mN (u, T ) is common across treated and control consumers (hence the importance of
using comparable markets with intermediate levels of competition). Second, residual margins are
monotonically increasing functions of ui . Ceteris paribus, a high ui consumer pays a high rate,
and receives a small discount. Finally, the distribution of unobserved heterogeneity is assumed to
be constant over time, but can differ across control and treated markets. This assumption implies
that the effect of the merger could differ across the two groups, even though the residual margin
function is common. We let H1 (u) and H0 (u) denote the distributions of u within treated and
control areas, respectively.
       All three assumptions are fairly standard in the difference-in-difference literature (e.g. Abadie
(2005)), and are adapted to our context, following Athey and Imbens (2006), to reflect the fact
that the errors are non-separable. Below we describe the three estimators used to characterize the
average and distributional impact of the merger.

Linear difference-in-difference estimator We first use a linear difference-in-difference (DiD) ap-
proach to measure the average treatment effect (ATE) of the merger. In our context, the DiD
model linearly approximates the residual margin function above, and estimates equations (1) and
(2) jointly. Moreover, the linearity assumption allows us to control for location (FSA) fixed-effects.
This leads to the following estimating equation:

                                       Margini = ↵
                                                 ¯ Ii +        0
                                                                   Xi + µweek
                                                                         i    + µfsa
                                                                                 i + ei ,                            (3)

where Xi is a vector of control variables, and µweek
                                                i    and µfsa
                                                          i are week and FSA fixed-effects.
       An important concern is that the merger predominantly affected a small number of provinces,
and therefore might be correlated with location-specific housing or financial variables affecting
negotiated interest rates. For instance, house prices and the timing of purchases follow regional
cycles and trends that could be confounded with the merger. Furthermore, local housing market
trends may impact mortgage rates differently in treated and control markets. We consider two
sets of control variables to address this question.
       Our baseline specification includes controls that describe the financial and demographic char-
acteristics of the contract, and the identity of lenders.14 We use the vector Xbase
                                                                               i    to denote these
  14
       The exact set of control variables is listed in footnote (13).


                                                                   14
controls. In an effort to further control for confounding factors we also estimate ↵
                                                                                   ¯ using a richer
set of variables, labelled Xtrend
                            i     , that control for heterogenous observable trends across our control
and treatment groups. We do so by interacting every consumer and contract characteristics in Xi
with Ti , our “post-merger” dummy variable. We also include in Xtrend
                                                                i     province-level linear and
quadratic trends. We present the empirical results using both Xbase
                                                               i    and Xtrend
                                                                         i     specifications.
       In addition to estimating the ATE for margins, we study the impact on the probability of paying
the posted rate. Using the same two specifications, we replace pi by an indicator variable equal to
one if the consumer pays a rate greater than or equal to the posted-rate plus 10 bps.

Matching estimator An alternative approach to control for differences between control and treat-
ment groups is to estimate ↵
                           ¯ using a matching DiD estimator. Since we want to compare local
markets along multiple dimensions, we implement a matching DiD estimator based on a propen-
sity score function, and measure the degree of similarity between local markets using a Kernel
smoothing function. In addition to the three assumptions imposed on ui already mentioned, this
estimator also imposes the restriction that treated and control neighborhoods have a significant
overlap in terms of the probability of being affected by the merger. We therefore exclude neigh-
borhoods in the top and bottom 2% of the propensity score distribution.
       In order to control for borrower-specific observed covariates, we calculate the matching esti-
mator using residual margins. This leads to a sequential estimator: (i) estimate mi by OLS from
equation 1, (ii) estimate the propensity score function via a Logit model (i.e. probability of having
both A and B in a neighborhood), and (iii) estimate the ATE of the merger using the estimator of
Heckman et al. (1997). The propensity score controls for time-invariant demographic characteris-
tics and branch concentration of each neighborhood.15
       This estimator relaxes the assumption that the residual margin function mN (ui , Ti ) is common
across control and treated local markets. Instead, we are implicitly assuming that neighborhoods
with similar propensity scores have homogenous pricing functions.

Change-in-change estimator We apply the change-in-change (CiC) estimator proposed by Athey
and Imbens (2006) to study the distributional impact of the merger on negotiated margins. In
addition to the three assumptions above, we also assume that the support of ui in the treatment
group overlaps with the support of ui in the control group. We impose this restriction by dropping
the non-overlaping residual margins across the two groups for each time period.
       In practice, we also assume that the observed characteristics of the contracts Xi are indepen-
dent of ui . Like with the matching estimator, this allows us to perform the estimation using the
  15
    The list of controls are demographic characteristics measured using 2001 census tables at the FSA level and branch
location data and include: average house value and income to house value ratio, fraction of households that rent,
average age, inter-province migration ratio, fraction of people with a university degree, number of dwellings, pre-
merger branch-HHI, and number of lenders pre-merger.




                                                         15
residual margins distribution defined in equation 1, and to control for observable characteristics
of the contracts in the parametric form suggested by equation 1.16
         Under these assumptions, the change in the q th percentile of the margin distribution in the
control group identifies the change in the markup function that is strictly due to time. Using this
logic, and the fact that the distributions are invertible (under the monotonicity assumption), we
can recover the counter-factual distribution of prices in the treatment group for any point mi in
the common support:                                     ⇣                  ⌘
                                        c
                                       F1,1 (mi ) = F1,0 F0,01 (F0,1 (mi )) ,                                       (4)

where the superscript c identifies the counter-factual distribution, and FG,T (m) is the CDF of mar-
gins in the sub-population (G, T ). Intuitively, we obtain the counter-factual distribution by trans-
forming the observed residual margin distribution in the treatment group at time 0 (i.e. F1,0 (m))
to mimic the change in the distribution observed in the control group. We then use the empirical
counterparts of F1,1
                 c (m) and F
                             1,1 to calculate the impact of the merger on various moments of the
margin distribution, such as the average, the standard-deviation and the inter-quartile range. We
also recover an estimate of the effect of the merger for different percentiles q:
                                                              ⇣     ⇣          ⌘⌘
                                   ˆ (q) = F̂1,11 (q)
                                   ↵                    F̂0,11 F̂0,0 F̂1,01 (q) ,                                   (5)

where F̂ (·) refers to the empirical distribution function (EDF), and F̂             1 (·) is the inverse of the EDF.

Since we can normalize the scale of ui to be between zero and one, ↵(q) measures the estimated
effect of the merger on a consumer of type ui = q.


4        Results
4.1        Average impact of the merger

In Table 3 we present the average effect of the merger on margins and discounting, estimated by
OLS, matching, and using the CiC estimator. We present results for both the “baseline” (including
all the covariates in Xbase
                       i    ) and “trends” (including all the covariates in Xtrend
                                                                             i     ) specifications.17
         Columns (1) and (2) present the average treatment effect of the merger on margins in the base-
line and trends cases, respectively. Adding the trend variables increases the point estimate from
about 6 bps to 7 bps in the OLS specification. This increase is not uniform across the three methods
of estimation. The matching estimator yields slightly higher estimates of the ATE, but the baseline
    16
     This is the approach suggested by Athey and Imbens (2006) (pages 465-466). See Linton et al. (2005) for a related
two-step procedure.
  17
     In the appendix we report OLS estimates of the merger effect, along with the marginal effect of other covariates to
provide the interested reader with some information on how these are priced. For a more detailed discussion of the
pricing of these contracts see Allen et al. (2013).




                                                          16
                      Table 3: Average effect of the merger on margins and discounts

                                                    Margin                    Zero discount
                                             Baseline With trend           Baseline With trend
                  Linear DiD (OLS)
                  Merger ATE                 0.0607a        0.0719a        0.0646a         0.0477a
                                             (0.0183)       (0.0242)       (0.0154)        (0.0188)
                  N                           18,121         18,121         18,121          18,121
                  R2                           0.408          0.420          0.181           0.189
                  Matching DiD
                  Merger ATE                 0.0739a        0.0692b        0.0670a         0.0538b
                                             (0.0249)       (0.0273)       (0.0206)        (0.0218)
                  N                           17,220         17,220         17,220          17,220
                  Change-in-change
                  Merger ATE                  0.057a         0.0661a
                                              (0.015)        (0.021)
                  N                           18,103         18,103

    Standard-errors clustered at the FSA level are in parenthesis. Significance levels: a p<0.01, b p< 0.05, c p< 0.1. The
dependent variable in columns (1) and (2) is the transaction rate minus bond rate, in columns (3) and (4) is an indicator
variable for the transaction rate within 10 basis points of the posted rate, which we take to imply zero discount. All
specifications include borrower characteristics and bank characteristics as well as FSA and week fixed effects. The trend
specifications include province trends as well as the borrower covariates interacted with the “after-merger” dummy.
The matching estimator is calculated using the propensity score with four (4) nearest neighbors. Standard errors and
hypothesis tests are calculated by bootstrapping the original sample 1000 times. See Huynh et al. (2011) for analysis of
the bootstrap performance in the context of the CIC estimator.


estimate is higher than the one with trends (i.e. 7.39 versus 6.92 bps). The average effect estimated
with the CiC estimator is the lowest, between 5.7 and 6.6 bps.
    In columns (3) and (4) we estimate the impact of the merger on the probability of not receiv-
ing a discount. On average, consumers are 5-6 percentage points less likely to receive a discount
post-merger. This effect corresponds roughly to a 20% increase in the probability of not receiving
a discount. Once again, the matching results mostly confirm the OLS estimates of the merger,
suggesting that our choice of sample and control variables accurately correct for systematic differ-
ences between the treated and control neighborhoods. Notice that we do not report an estimate for
the change-in-change estimator since it does not provide a point estimate for the discrete outcome
case (only bounds).
    Overall, all three methods produce remarkably similar estimates, ranging from 5.7 to 7.39 for
margins, and from 4.77 to 6.7 percentage points for the probability of not receiving a discount. The
estimates are also precisely estimated in most specifications; only the matching ATEs with trends
have a p-value lower than 1%. We can therefore reject the null hypothesis that the merger did not
change market power, at least for the subsample of neighborhoods with five to eight lenders pre-
merger. This implies that residual dispersion is not solely driven by risk- or cost-based pricing.



                                                           17
Recall that this is the standard model assumed in the finance literature to explain the observed
dispersion of lending rates (e.g. Edelberg (2006), and Einav et al. (2012)).
   In terms of magnitude, the point estimates for the ATE on margins correspond to between
10%-15% of the observed standard-deviation in our sample. For an average loan size of $152,000,
we estimate that the merger led to a $5.73 increase in monthly payments (evaluated at the baseline
OLS estimate).
   This relatively small price increase suggests on the one hand that the merger did not cause
substantial harm to the average borrower. This is consistent with the notion that, featuring five to
eight lenders, the markets were fairly competitive to begin with. In addition, several institutional
features support this interpretation: contracts are homogeneous, rates are negotiable, and, due to
loan securitization, for a given consumer costs are mostly common across lenders. Moreover, in
the market that we study, lenders are fully protected against the risk of default by a government
insurance program, which standardizes the lending conditions across financial institutions. These
features allow informed consumers to gather multiple quotes, and obtain an interest rate that
reflects the expected lending cost, even with a small number of competing lenders.
   On the other hand, our regression methodology likely provides a lower bound evaluation of ↵
                                                                                             ¯.
This is because the treatment effect approach to merger analysis assumes fixed market boundaries,
and in our context that consumers living in the same neighborhood have a known and common
choice set. The presence of heterogeneity in the sets of lenders considered by consumers translates
into measurement error in the treatment variable, which would in general attenuate our estimate
of the merger effect. Assuming that this measurement error is independent of the timing of the
merger itself, our estimates represent a lower bound of the effect of the merger on consumers who
did have both lenders in their choice-set.

Robustness analysis We analyse next the robustness of the average merger effect to alterna-
tive estimation methods, and sample selection. We present robustness results with respect to the
choice of controls, the size of local neighborhoods, and different event windows. Due to space
constraints, we focus on the average effect on transaction margins, but the robustness analysis for
discounting yields similar results, and is available upon request.
   In Table 4 we present the average effect of the merger estimated with alternative sets of control
variables. Our baseline specification is reproduced in column (2) and the trend results are repro-
duced in column (3). Column (1) shows that failure to control for characteristics of the transaction
does not lead to a substantial change in the ATE. In column (4) we introduce provincial fixed ef-
fects interacted with the post-merger dummy variable. Since a large fraction of observations are
clustered in a few provinces this specification adds substantial strain to the data. However, we still
estimate an ATE of 5 bps that is statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% confidence
level. The point estimates remain fairly constant across all four specifications, which suggests that
our conclusions are not sensitive to the choice of controls.


                                                 18
                    Table 4: Alternative linear difference-in-difference specifications

                                           (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
      Merger                            0.0623a     0.0607a           0.0719a     0.0500b      0.0564a       0.0602
                                        (0.0188)    (0.0183)          (0.0242)    (0.0251)     (0.0193)     (0.0374)

      Observations                       18,121      18,121            18,121      18,121       15,770       13,216
      R-squared                          0.344       0.408              0.416       0.417        0.415        0.420
      Location (FSA) FE                    X           X                  X           X            X            X
      Week FE                              X           X                  X           X            X            X
      Control group                       Full        Full               Full        Full          A         None
      X Controls                                       X                  X           X            X            X
      D ⇥ X & Province trends                                             X           X
      D ⇥ Province FE                                                                 X
      % Treated                          0.628        0.628            0.628        0.628        0.722       0.862

     The dependent variable is margins. Significance levels:   a
                                                                   p<0.01, b p< 0.05, c p< 0.1. Standard errors are clustered
at the location level (FSA).


    In columns (5) and (6) we modify the definition of the control group. First we restrict the
control group to markets in which only bank A is present, and then to markets where neither A
nor B are present. The “only A” specification raises the fraction of treated observations to 72%,
but leaves the point estimate largely unchanged (i.e. 5.64 versus 6.04 bps). In contrast, in the
“no A or B” specification the point estimate is equal to 6.02 bps, but the standard-error nearly
doubles. This decrease in precision is due to the fact that the fraction of observations belonging to
the control group goes down from 43% to less than 14%. Despite this, the results from these two
specifications suggest that the magnitude of the estimated average merger effect is not driven by
changes occurring in the control markets, such as the re-branding of bank A post-merger.
    Our second set of robustness tests considers the impact of different neighborhood sizes. Our
main specification assumes that consumers shop within a 5KM radius around the centroid of their
FSA’s. Increasing this threshold tends to raise the number of FSA’s directly affected by the merger,
at the cost of including lenders that are not considered by the average consumer (falsely treated
neighborhoods). Using a smaller threshold reduces the number of treated neighborhoods, and
includes in the control group areas that are affected by the merger. Therefore, over-estimating or
under-estimating the size of consumers’ choice-sets exacerbates the measurement error problem
in our treatment variable, and biases our results towards zero. The estimation results, reproduced
in Table 5a, confirm this intuition. The effect of the merger is statistically different from zero for
most neighborhoods, but is smaller and less precisely estimated for smaller and larger radii. This
is particular true when we control for province-level trends in the larger neighborhood specifi-
cations, since the number of provinces present in both treated and control groups shrinks (i.e. it
becomes harder to distinguish between the merger effect and other province-level trends).


                                                          19
                    Table 5: Robustness analysis results on the average merger effect
                                           (a) Alternative neighborhood sizes
                                           (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)         (5)
                                          3KM          4KM          5KM           6KM         7KM
                    Baseline            0.0405b      0.0529a      0.0607a       0.0478b      0.0304
                                        (0.0184)     (0.0198)     (0.0183)      (0.0198)    (0.0204)
                    With trends          0.0242      0.0496c      0.0719a        0.0414      0.0173
                                        (0.0213)     (0.0262)     (0.0242)      (0.0258)    (0.0266)
                    Observations         18,121       18,121       18,121        18,121      18,121
                    % Treated             0.479        0.589        0.628         0.706       0.728

                                  (b) Alternative event windows and falsification tests
                                     (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)             (5)
                                 6-Months        1-Year      18-Months        + 6 Months       - 6 Months
             Baseline             0.0969a       0.0607a        0.0172            -0.0135          0.0166
                                  (0.0279)      (0.0183)      (0.0152)          (0.0254)         (0.0177)
             With trends          0.0677c       0.0719a        0.0444b           -0.0250          0.0100
                                  (0.0391)      (0.0242)      (0.0200)          (0.0343)         (0.0217)
             Observations          8,040         18,121        27,978            17,296           17,148

    Dependent variable is margins. Significance levels: a p<0.01, b p< 0.05, c p< 0.1. All specifications include week
and location (FSA) fixed effects, these are included in Xibase . Trend specifications also include the variables in Xitrend
Standard errors are clustered at the location level (FSA).


      Finally, we consider different event windows and present the results of a falsification exercise
in Table 5b. Recall that throughout the paper we use contracts signed at most one year before or
after the official merger date. In columns (1) and (3) we compare our main specification with a
shorter window of six months and a longer window of eighteen months. The results suggest that
the effect of the merger was strongest within six months of the announcement, but diminished
over time, possibly due to the closing of branches.
      In columns (4) and (5) we consider two alternative merger dates: six months before and six
months after the actual date. In both cases, we fail to find any evidence of rate increase, suggesting
that our estimates are not confounded with the presence of unobserved factors affecting the treated
neighborhoods within a year of the merger.


4.2     Distributional impact of the merger

In this section, we estimate the impact of the merger on the distribution of transaction rates. We
use the change-in-change estimator to evaluate the counter-factual distribution of residual mar-
gins absent the merger in the treated neighborhoods, denoted by F̂1,1
                                                                  c (m).

      Figure 4 plots the counter-factual (red) and observed (blue) empirical distribution functions


                                                            20
                                   1
                    Empirical distribution function
                     .2       .4   0    .6       .8




                                                      0   .5        1              1.5        2        2.5
                                                                    Margin: Rate - Bond

                                                               With Merger            Without Merger



            Figure 4: Empirical distribution of residual margins with and without the merger


(EDFs) for consumers with Gi = 1 and Ti = 1. The dashed lines represent bootstrapped 95% con-
fidence intervals. For about three-quarters of the range, the counter-factual distribution is shifted
to the left, confirming that most consumers pay higher interest rates as a result of the merger.
The figure also reveals that the two distributions are nearly identical for consumers located in the
top percentiles, suggesting that consumers paying higher rates were unaffected by the merger.
Therefore, the increase in average rates is entirely due to the fact that consumers who, without
the merger, were paying relatively low rates, experienced a significant decline in their ability to
negotiate discounts. The same pattern is observed if we use a specification with trend, or if we
vary the dimension of the choice-sets.18
       Table 6 summarizes the effect of the merger on various moments of the margin distributions.
At the bottom of the table, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) statistic is a measure of the difference
between two EDFs, and tests the null hypothesis of equality of the rate distributions with and
without the merger. As suggested by Figure 4, the test statistic easily rejects this null hypothe-
sis. The counter-factual rate distribution without the merger therefore first-order stochastically
dominates the post-merger rate distribution observed in the data.
       The first seven rows of Table 6 calculate the difference between the two EDFs, and list the
quantile treatment effect (QTE) of the merger. Consistent with the figure, we find that the effect
of the merger ranges from around 9.1 bps for borrowers at the 10th quantile to zero at the 90th
  18
       These results are available upon request.


                                                                         21
quantile. We cannot reject the null hypothesis that the merger had no effect on negotiated rates for
consumers beyond the 30th percentile. The QTE is similar once we control for trends (column 4).
    This nonlinearity has two consequences. First the median borrower experienced a 2.7 bps
larger rate increase than the average (i.e. 8.42 versus 5.7 bps). Second, the merger led to a com-
pression of the overall distribution of rates, since they increased for borrowers in the lower part of
the distribution, but were unchanged for those at the top.
    Therefore, an important consequence of the merger is to reduce the amount of residual price
dispersion. We estimate that the standard-deviation declined by 2.8 bps, while the interquartile
range fell by 8.7 bps. Moreover, since average margins were higher post-merger, the change in the
coefficient of variation shows a more pronounced decline in price dispersion: the merger led to a
4.6 percentage point decrease in the standard-deviation relative to the average margin. Similarly,
the inter-quartile and inter-decile changes correspond roughly to 15% of the observed dispersion
measured in the post-merger data.
    This finding is in line with the predictions of Borenstein (1985) and Holmes (1989) regarding
the relationship between competition and price dispersion. According to their setup, an increase
in competition lowers the prices paid by the price-sensitive segment of the market, while leaving
more or less unchanged the prices paid by consumers at the top of the distribution that tend to be
loyal to one company. In contrast, it is at odds with the “textbook” price discrimination model,
which suggests a negative relationship between dispersion and competition (see for example Stole
(2007)). Note also search theoritical models of price dispersion have ambiguous predictions with
respect to the impact of concentration on price dispersion, as discussed in Janssen and Moraga-
González (2004) and Baye et al. (2006).
    Our approach differs substantially from most of the existing empirical literature testing the
relationship between market structure and price dispersion. The typical approach has been to
compare, either with or without the use of instrumental variables, measures of residual dispersion
across markets with different numbers of competitors or degrees of concentration. This has led
to a wide array of empirical results, some of which have supported the traditional interpretation
that market power enhances the ability of firms to price discriminate between consumers (see
for example Gerardi and Shapiro (2009), Busse and Rysman (2005), Marvel (1976) and Barron
et al. (2005)) and others of which found a negative or zero correlation between dispersion and
concentration (see for instance Borenstein and Rose (1994) and Stavins (2001)). Still others find
support for both interpretations, depending on market definition (Lewis (2008)).
    In contrast, we measure the impact of losing one competitor on residual price dispersion in
a comparable group of local markets. By exploiting the variation induced by the merger, our
approach does not require the use of an instrumental variable, nor does it compare firms operating
under different market structures.19 We therefore think that our method is more credible and
   19
      See Gerardi and Shapiro (2009) for a discussion of the potential pitfalls of relying on market-structure comparisons
to estimate the relationship between concentration and price dispersion.


                                                           22
                     Table 6: Distributional effect of the merger on residual margins

                                                 Baseline                               With trend
                                   Estimates      95% Conf. interval        Estimates    95% Conf. interval
    Quantile merger effects
         q5                           0.0766       0.0123          0.157      0.0782        0.0080        0.18
         q10                          0.0914       0.0505           0.13      0.0844        0.0379       0.138
         q25                          0.0762       0.0454         0.0994      0.0767        0.0397       0.119
         q50                          0.0842       0.0433          0.114      0.0874        0.0446       0.128
         q75                         -0.0008      -0.0621         0.0686      0.0185       -0.0473      0.0885
         q90                         -0.0042      -0.0485         0.0383      0.0069       -0.0393      0.0591
         q95                          0.056        0.0053         0.0949      0.0513       -0.0125      0.0973
    Price dispersion
            Std.Dev.                 -0.0287      -0.0587         -0.0066     -0.0256       -0.056      -0.0034
            Coef. variation          -0.0462      -0.0766         -0.0211     -0.0455      -0.0792      -0.0184
            q75 q25                   -0.077       -0.131         -0.0099     -0.0582       -0.114      -0.0044
            q90 q10                  -0.0957       -0.153         -0.0457     -0.0776       -0.134      -0.0261
           c (x) = F (x)
    H0 : F1,1        1,1
         KS statistics                 4.7a                                    4.84a

   Significance levels: a p<0.01, b p< 0.05, c p< 0.1. The dependent variable is residual margins. Confidence intervals
were calculated by bootstrapping the sample 1,000 times. The KS statistic is a test of the equality of the observed and
counter-factual empirical distribution functions.


could be used in other contexts as well to study the link between competition and dispersion.


5    Mergers when prices are negotiated
In this section, we interpret the empirical results from the previous section through the lense of
a search and price negotiation model. We assume that the transaction rate is determined by de-
terministic functions of the bond-rate and borrower characteristics, and by a bilateral negotiation
process generating residual margins:

                                     Ratei = Bondi +        0
                                                                Xi + µweek
                                                                      i    + mi ,                                  (6)

where mi is, as above, the residual margin. Our interest is in modelling the determination of mi .
    Our objective is to provide a theoretical framework that can replicate both qualitatively and
quantitively the effects of the merger. In order to do so, we develop a model of search and price
negotiation that is fully consistent with the identification assumptions of the CiC estimator de-
scribed in Section 3. In particular, we use a model that yields a reduced-form pricing equation
that is a monotonic function of a single-dimension unobserved heterogeneity term, ui , measuring
the marginal search cost of consumers. This allows us to invert the observed pre- and post-merger


                                                          23
margin distribution in order to recover a semi-parametric estimate of the search-cost distribution
in the population of consumers directly affected by the merger. Finally, we use our estimates to
perform counterfactual experiments in which we decompose the merger effect into a search-cost
effect and an expected price effect, and in which we simulate the effect of lowering the search-cost
of consumers.


5.1      Model

We consider a model with n + 1 lenders, in which negotiation takes place over three stages. In the
first stage, consumers receive a take-it-or-leave-it offer mi from one lender. In the second stage,
if the initial offer is rejected, consumers put forth a search effort ei at cost i to gather additional
quotes. The number of quotes that consumers obtain is stochastically determined by their search
effort: with probability s(ei ) they are randomly matched with n banks, and with probability 1
s(ei ) they receive 2 quotes.20 In the final stage, competition takes place, and consumers choose
the lowest price offer. We characterize each stage sequentially, starting with the final competition
game.

Competition stage As in Hall and Woodward (2012) and Allen et al. (2012), we model the com-
petition stage as an English auction between at most n lenders. Alternatively, one can think of this
stage as a Bertrand game between a random number of lenders, where the randomness is created
by consumers’ search effort. This modeling strategy differs from the standard search model often
used in I.O. (e.g. Varian (1980)), which is based on a price-posting assumption. However, it is a
common way of introducing negotiation in on-the-job-search environments (e.g. Postel-Vinay and
Robin (2002)).
       Lenders are ex-ante identical with a common marginal cost c, but face a mean-zero additive
idiosyncratic cost shock ✏j that is privately observed after consumers are matched with lenders.
The common component, c, should be interpreted as a lending cost on top of the bond rate and
observable characteristics (for example processing fees). Note that, without loss of generality, we
can also interpret ✏j as the idiosyncratic willingness to pay for each lender, or a combination of cost
and value differences. The data do not allow us to differentiate between the two interpretations.
       The game has a unique Bayesian-Nash equilibrium: banks are willing to offer up to their pri-
vately observed cost c + ✏j , and the most efficient bank wins the contract by offering a rate equal
to the second lowest cost, c(2) = c + ✏(2) , where ✏(2) is the second order statistic of {✏1 , .., ✏k }.
Let E(m⇤ |ñ) = c + E ✏(2) |ñ denote the expected second-stage transaction price, where ñ is
  20
    We assume that the initial lender does not participate in the competition stage. We also assume that consumers get
a minimum of two quotes in order to generate a finite price even for consumers with high search-costs. Alternatively
we could have explained the reduced-form results by adding heterogeneous reservation values, for instance due to the
posted rate or the value of renting a house. We chose not to include these features since they would require more than
one source of unobserved heterogeneity, and therefore do not satisfy the identification assumptions of the reduced form
model (i.e. the CiC estimator only accommodates a scaler unobserved heterogeneity).


                                                          24
the number of quotes generated (either two or n). Given our matching assumption, the gain
from searching is summarized by the expected cost difference between obtaining two or n quotes:
  (n) = E ✏(2) |2     E ✏(2) |n > 0. This function in increasing in n.

Search effort At this stage, consumers incur a search cost i to gather additional quotes. We use
a simple search/matching technology to describe this process. Consumers invest in costly effort e
to increase the probability s(e) of receiving the maximum number of quotes n. Consumers putting
forth zero effort are automatically matched with just two lenders, and we use a Pareto distribution
to characterize the matching probability function: s(e) = 1        (1 + e)    1   .
    Consumers choose an optimal level of search effort to minimize the sum of the expected trans-
action price and the search cost. We assume that the search cost is an increasing function of effort
e, and heterogeneous across consumers: i (e) = ui · (1 + e), where ui is the marginal search cost
of consumer i. That is, even consumers who choose not to exert any search effort must incur a
cost for getting two quotes. This cost measures both the cost of acquiring information, and the
haggling or time-cost of setting up the auction.
    A consumer of type ui facing n possible options chooses an optimal effort level that minimizes
the net borrowing cost:

                        r(ui , n) = min ui · (1 + e) + c + E ✏(2) |2    s(e) (n).                       (7)
                                    e 0


    In Appendix C we show that, in the interior, the solution to this problem gives rise to effort and
matching probability functions that are decreasing in ui and increasing in n, and that the optimal
effort level exhibits a threshold property: consumers with marginal costs larger than a threshold
ū(n) invest zero effort.

Initial offer In the first stage, information is symmetric and the initial lender offers a rate, mi ,
such that the consumer is indifferent between accepting this rate and searching for an extra quote:
mi = r(ui , n). In equilibrium, consumers do not search, but pay a price that reflects the value of
their reserve price including the search cost, given by equation (7). This leads to the following
reduced-form pricing equation:
                               8
                               <c + (u , n) + E ✏ |2         s(ui , n) (n)       if ui < ū(n),
                                       i          (2)
          mi = c + ⇡(ui , n) =                                                                          (8)
                               :c + u + E ✏ |2                                    if ui   ū(n).
                                          i     (2)


where (ui , n) and s(ui , n) are the equilibrium search cost and matching probability functions,
respectively, and ⇡(ui , n) is the equilibrium first-stage margin.
    In Appendix C, we show that the pricing function has the following properties: (i) it is mono-
tonically increasing in ui , (ii) it is weakly decreasing in n, and (iii) the marginal effects are increas-
ing, @ 2 mi /@ui @n   0. As we discuss below, these properties have implications for the predicted

                                                      25
impact of mergers.
   The first property implies that the pricing function satisfies the monotonicity assumption used
to estimate the counter-factual price distribution (see Section 3). Therefore, as in Hortaçsu and
Syverson (2004) and Hong and Shum (2006), the distribution of search costs can be recovered
from the observed post-merger residual margin distribution:

                                                                          1
                        F1,1 (m) = Pr(c + ⇡(ui , n) < m) = H1 ⇡               (m   c, n) .                 (9)

See Appendix C for derivation of the inverse function.
   The second and third properties of the pricing function lead to the following proposition with
respect to the impact of mergers in negotiated price markets.

Proposition 1. The effect of a merger is heterogeneous in the consumer’s type, u:

   1. Positive price differential only among searchers:
                                                               8
                                                               <> 0   if ui < ū(n),
                               ⇡(ui , n    1)   ⇡(ui , n) =                                               (10)
                                                               := 0 if u       ū(n).
                                                                         i


   2. Price differential is decreasing in u:

                         ⇡(u, n    1)     ⇡(u, n)   ⇡(u0 , n     1)   ⇡(u0 , n), for all u0   u.          (11)


   The first element of the proposition follows directly from the fact that prices are weakly de-
creasing in n, and implies an increase in the average transaction prices. Moreover, if the median
consumer exerts effort, it also provides a rationale for the result that the average merger effect is
smaller than the effect for the median consumer. This is because the average is calculated over
both searchers and non-searchers – two groups that are differentially affected by the merger.
   The second element follows from the fact that the pricing function exhibits an increasing
marginal effect of ui with respect to n: @ 2 mi /@ui @n         0. Intuitively, relative to high ui consumers,
low search cost consumers are more likely to receive n quotes, and are therefore more affected by a
reduction in    (n). This prediction is consistent with the observed non-linear effect of the merger:
consumers at the top of the distribution were not impacted by the merger, while borrowers below
the 70th percentile experienced rate increases between 7 and 9 bps.
   The increasing difference property can also be used to show that mergers decrease residual
price dispersion. In particular, we can re-write the second element of the proposition to establish




                                                      26
the following prediction with respect to the change in the inter-quartile range of residual margins:

                              ⇡(u25 , n          1)     ⇡(u25 , n)        ⇡(u75 , n    1)    ⇡(u75 , n)
                                                                 0        IQR(n       1)    IQR(n),

where uq denotes the q th percentile of the marginal search-cost distribution, and IQR denotes the
inter-quartile range. In other words, dispersion of prices in equilibrium is an increasing function
of n. This prediction is therefore consistent with our empirical results, that the merger led to a
contraction of the empirical margin distribution which translates into a significant reduction in
residual price dispersions (i.e. 8% or 16% depending on the measure).


5.2     Model estimation

In this section we estimate the parameters of the bargaining model using the observed and counter-
factual distributions estimated using the CiC estimator. The model parameters include: (i) the
non-parametric distribution of consumer types H1 (u) in the treated areas, and (ii) the preference
parameter vector {c, ,                 ✏ },   where    ✏   is the parameter determining the importance of firm lend-
ing cost heterogeneity. We assume the idiosyncratic component of lenders’ costs is uniformly
distributed between                ✏    and     ✏,   which leads to expected second-stage prices of c + E ✏(2) |ñ =
c+     ✏ (3   ñ)/(ñ + 1) (where ñ is 2 or n), and gains from searching of                       (n) = 4 ✏ (n     2)/3(n + 1).
      Notice also that the gain from searching is a function of the maximum number of quotes pre-
merger (i.e. n). We set this number to 5, which corresponds to the lower-bound in the actual
number of lenders in our estimated sample. While this number is somewhat arbitrary, it roughly
corresponds to the maximum number of quotes consumers report in surveys of shopping behavior
(Clayton Research (2005)).
      To understand the scale of the model parameters, recall that we use the residual margin, de-
fined in equation 1, as the dependent variable to estimate F̂1,1
                                                             c . Let mI and mN denote the ob-
                                                                      i      i
served (with merger) and counter-factual (without merger) transaction margins for consumer i.
The lending cost parameter c therefore measures the average lending cost above the bond-rate for
consumers with representative characteristics.
      We consider a nested fixed-point estimator that minimizes the distance between the estimated
counterfactual margins and the model predicted margins, conditional on the restriction that the
search-cost distribution is consistent with the observed margin distribution. In practice we impose
these restrictions at S random percentiles. This leads to the following non-linear least-square
(NLS) estimator:

                                         S
                                         X                                2
               min✓={c,   ,   ✏}
                                                c + ⇡(uqi , n|✓)     mN
                                                                      i       s.t. uqi = ⇡     1
                                                                                                   (mIi   c, n    1|✓),     (12)
                                         i=1



                                                                     27
                                      Table 7: Model estimation results

                                         Panel A: Estimation results
                                  c                                          ✏              n              NLS
  Model parameters              0.726                0.585               0.858              5             0.0339
                               (0.037)               (0.11)              (0.14)            (0)            (0.021)

                                         Panel B: Simulation results
                               Marginal              Profit margins                     Merger effect ↵(ui )
                             search-cost ui Without merger With merger                 Predicted Estimated

  Average                       0.259                0.364               0.422           0.0577         0.0585
                               (0.065)              (0.042)             (0.034)          (0.014)        (0.015)
  Std-deviation                 0.221                0.336               0.308            0.028         0.0319
                               (0.018)              (0.007)             (0.004)         (0.0071)       (0.0073)
  25th Percentile              0.0911                0.099               0.179           0.0803         0.0664
                                (0.05)              (0.045)             (0.033)          (0.014)        (0.015)
  Median                        0.199                0.322               0.382           0.0606         0.0841
                               (0.073)              (0.042)             (0.034)          (0.014)        (0.019)
  75th Percentile               0.409                0.641               0.673           0.0324         0.0235
                                (0.09)              (0.041)             (0.037)          (0.018)        (0.035)

    Bootstrap standard-errors are in parenthesis. Number of bootstrap replications = 1000. Number of simulated prices
used in the estimation = 100. The top and bottom 5% are eliminated from the estimated price distributions. Parameter
definitions: c = lending cost, = matching probability parameter, ✏ = cost heterogeneity, n = maximum number of
quotes pre-merger (fixed).


                                                                                                      1
where qi ⇠ U [0, 1] denotes a simulated percentile, and mIi = F̂1,11 (qi ) and mN
                                                                                i = F̂1,1 (qi ) are the
                                                                                      c

inverses of the post-(intervention) and pre-merger margin distributions, respectively.
       Conditional on the distribution H1 (u), the model parameters are identified from the residual
margins at different percentiles of ui . This is because we invert point-by-point the observed post-
merger margin distribution. The objective function is therefore equivalent to minimizing the dis-
tance between the predicted and observed quantile treatment effect of the merger: c + ⇡(uqi , n|✓)
mN
 i ⌘ ↵(uqi |✓)      ˆ qi .
                    ↵
       The distribution of search-costs is non-parametrically identified up to an additional scale re-
striction. This is because the minimum search cost is not separately identified from the intercept
c. We therefore impose a lower bound on the search cost distribution, u0 = 0. This is equivalent to
assuming that consumers receiving the largest discounts in our sample would have obtained the
maximum number of quotes with probability one.21

Estimation results and goodness of fit Table 7 presents the model estimation results. Panel A
  21
    We implement this restriction by adding a penalty to the NLS objective function such that the lowest simulated
percentile u0 = mini {ui } is close to zero.



                                                         28
shows the estimated parameters and the value of the NLS objective function. The standard errors
are calculated using the bootstrapped price distributions estimated in Section 4.2, holding fixed the
S simulated percentiles. Panel B summarizes the model predictions at the estimated parameters
(columns 1-3), and compares the predicted and estimated quantile treatment effects of the merger
(columns 4 and 5).
       The average transaction margin can be calculated as the sum of the estimated average profit,
42 bps, and the estimated lending cost ĉ = 0.726, which can be interpreted as the average lending
cost over the 5-year bond-rate. Scaled up by the bond-rate observed over our sample period, as in
equation 6, this leads to predicted markups ranging between 5% and 10%.
       The second and third columns of panel B show that profit margins vary widely across con-
sumers. Because banks are able to perfectly discriminate, profit margins are less than 18 bps
below the 25th percentile of the post-merger distribution, and more than 67 bps above the 75th .
Undoing the merger would have led to a marked reduction in profit margins, but mostly among
consumers with low search-costs (e.g. 8 bps at the 25th percentile and only 3.2 bps at the 75th ).
Similarly, consistent with our empirical results, the merger significantly reduced the dispersion
of profit margins across borrowers. Our simulation results show that the coefficient of variation
went from 92% before the merger, to 72.8% after (i.e. 0.336/0.364 versus 0.308/0.422).22
       The estimated parameter         ✏   determines the expected gain from searching. At the estimated
value, the gain from obtaining five quotes instead of two corresponds to                        (n) = 57.2 bps, which
leads to an upper bound on the effect of mergers equal to                    (n)       (n     1) = 11.44 bps.23 Taken
literately, this parameter also implies important idiosyncratic cost differences across lenders: the
range of ✏i corresponds to 2 ⇥ 0.858 = 1.716 bps. However, as we discussed above, heterogeneity
across lenders in the competition stage can arise from differentiation and cost heterogeneity with-
out changing the model formulation. Also, this parameter is not used measure the importance
of residual dispersion. In other words, because information is symmetric in the first stage, con-
sumers do not reject the initial quote, and the estimated parameter                      ✏   is not restricted to match
the observed distribution of prices. Therefore, one should not conclude that the model predicts
substantial cost differences between lenders.
       The matching probability parameter             determines the marginal effect of search effort on the
probability of receiving the maximum number of quotes. Since the estimated marginal cost of
effort ui varies greatly across consumers (standard-deviation is 0.221), this marginal product is
highly dispersed. Evaluated at the average cost 0.259, a 1 percent increase in effort leads to a 1.8
percent increase in the probability of receiving 5 quotes. In comparison, the search effort elasticity
is close to one at the 90th percentile of the search cost distribution, and above 6 at the 10th .
  22
      It should be noted that at margins at the very bottom of the price distribution can actually be negative. We interpret
this to mean that financial institutions make lending decisions based on average and not individual profits and that
high-search cost borrowers subsidize low-search cost borrowers. According to our estimates less than 10% of borrowers
have negative margins pre merger, and almost none do post merger.                   ⇥                                     ⇤
   23
      This is calculated by evaluating the change in (n): (n)       (n 1) = ✏ ⇥ 4(4 2)/(3(4+1)) 4(5 2)/(3(5+1)) .


                                                            29
                  3




                                                                                                         3
                  2




                                                                                                         2
 Kernel density




                                                                                        Kernel density
                  1




                                                                                                         1
                  0




                                                                                                         0
                      0         .2             .4               .6            .8   1                            0          .2            .4               .6           .8     1
                               Marginal cost of effort - u (percentage point)                                         Equilibrium search cost - k(u,n-1) (percentage point)


                          (a) Marginal search cost distribution                                              (b) Post-merger search cost distribution (levels)

                                                       Figure 5: Estimated search cost distributions


                  The goodness of fit of the model can be studied by comparing the predicted and estimated
effect of the merger (columns 4 and 5). As we discussed in Section 4.2, the data suggest a fairly
flat merger effect among consumers in the middle and low percentiles of the price distribution.
In contrast, the model predicts a monotonically decreasing merger effect, which tends to over
estimate its effect at the bottom of the distribution, while under-estimating it at the median.
                  These differences arise because the estimated effect is fairly noisy at the top of the distribution
potentially due to outliers, as illustrated by the quantile treatment effect beyond the 90% percentile
(see Table 6). In contrast the model predict a strictly monotonically decreasing effect: If the merger
has a zero effect at percentile q, the effect must also be zero for all percentiles q 0                                                                           q. As a result,
the NLS estimator best fits the counter-factual price distribution by predicting relatively few con-
sumers investing zero search effort (i.e. ui > ū), which leads to a smooth decline in the merger
effect as a function of ui .
                  Finally, Figures 5a and 5b plot the density of the marginal search cost and search cost level
post-merger, respectively. As the table suggested, the distribution of consumers’ marginal cost of
effort ui is highly dispersed, and skewed to the right. For the modal consumer the marginal cost
corresponds to about 17 bps, while the average is equal to 25.9 bps.
                  The cost that consumers incur should they search is obtained by calculating the optimal level
of effort for each type before and after the merger. Overall, that search cost levels are fairly large
for most consumers, and highly dispersed. Post-merger, the average cost is equal to 35 bps, with
a standard deviation of nearly 20 bps. For the average loan size in our data set, a 35 bps mortgage
rate increase leads to an increase in monthly payments of $60, or $4,789.61 over five years.
                  To put this number into context, in Allen et al. (2013) we estimate that the marginal effect
of brokers on the average transaction rate, after correcting for endogenous selection, was 40 bps.


                                                                                       30
Since brokers also provide slightly different services than multi-product lenders (i.e. lower value
given they are a monoline business), it is reasonable to conclude that 40 bps is an upper bound on
the average search cost in the population.

Merger effect decomposition Recently, researchers and policy makers have sought empirical
evidence on the direction of price changes following approved mergers so as to inform antitrust
authorities of the potential impact of prospective mergers (see Ashenfelter et al. (2009)). In posted-
price markets without search frictions, reduced-form estimates provide a direct measure of the
change in firms’ market power caused by a decrease in competition, and can be used to predict
the impact of counter-factual mergers in markets with similar structure. This is not the case in
markets where consumers and firms individually bargain over prices.
   In price-negotiation environments the reduced-form effect of mergers on prices depends not
only on the change in market power, but also on the willingness and ability of consumers to
search and haggle. If, as we have argued, consumers’ abilities to negotiate discounts vary and are
heterogenous in unobserved dimensions across markets, the true effect of counter-factual mergers
will differ, sometimes substantially, from the effects predicted using only retrospective analysis.
   We illustrate this point in two ways. First, we show that the net effect of mergers on the distri-
bution of prices has two components: an endogenous adjustment of consumers’ search effort, and
a pure expected price change. Second, we simulate a counter-factual merger in an environment
with lower search costs to highlight the impact of the search cost distribution on the predicted
merger effects and price dispersion.
   Within our search and negotiation framework, the distribution of search costs interacts with
the degree of market power by determining the search effort and matching probability of con-
sumers, as well as the price they expect to pay if negotiation fails. In particular, following a re-
duction in the number of competitors, the expected competition-stage price increases, while the
optimal search effort decreases, leading to a reduction in the search cost and matching probability
(i.e. e(ui , n) is increasing in n). The effect of a merger on the bargaining leverage of consumers is
therefore the result of two opposite forces: (i) a reduction in search cost post-merger, and (ii) an
increase in the expected competition-stage price. Formally, we can decompose the reduced-form
merger effect that we estimated in Section 4 as follows:

↵(ui ) = m(ui |n      1)       m(ui |n) = [(ui , n     1) + E(m⇤ |ui , n          1)]    [(ui , n) + E(m⇤ |ui , n)]
       = ui ⇥ [e(ui , n 1)          e(ui , n)] + [s(ui , n)      s(ui , n    1)]   (n) + [ (n)          (n 1)] s(n       1) .
         |             {z                    } |                   {z                } |                  {z              }
                  Search cost effect<0                        Sorting effect>0                   Market power effect>0
                                                 |                                       {z                               }
                                                                    Expected competition-stage price effect>0


The last two terms are positive and measure an increase in the average price that consumers expect
to pay if negotiation fails.


                                                         31
                           Table 8: Counterfactual and decomposition analysis

                                         Estimated search cost                Counterfactual             ↵        m
                                                                             (low) search cost       (5)-(3)   (6)-(4)
                                            E(m⇤ )     ↵(u)      m(u|n)     ↵(u0 ) m(u0 |n)
                                  (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)      (6)            (7)       (8)
 Distribution
   u5%                           -0.71       10.93      10.21       57.81    10.62      53.20         0.41      -4.60
   u25%                          -1.99       10.02       8.03       82.48     9.17      69.65         1.13     -12.83
   u50%                          -3.14       9.21        6.06      104.74     7.85      84.49         1.79     -20.25
   u75%                          -4.79       8.03        3.24      136.66     5.97      105.76        2.73     -30.89
   u95%                          -0.15       0.15        0.00      181.42     3.33      135.60        3.33     -45.82
 Average                         -2.82       8.59        5.77      108.97     7.60      87.31         1.84     -21.67
 Coefficient of variation       -50.82       29.46      48.59       30.81    26.01      25.63        -22.58     -5.19

    The first four columns present the simulation results using the estimated search cost distribution.  is the change
in search costs in going from 5 to 4 lenders. E(m⇤ ) is the change in the expected competitive transaction margin.
Columns (5) and (6) present the counter-factual net merger effect and pre-merger margins for a low search-cost distri-
bution (i.e. u0 = û/2). Columns (7) and (8) show the change in the merger effect and price levels from a reduction in
the marginal search-cost. All results are presented in basis points.


    As discussed above, given our estimate of             ✏,   the pure market power effect corresponds to an
11.44 bps increase in the competition-stage price for consumers expecting to receiving the max-
imum number of quotes. However, the adjustment in the matching probability and search cost
vary greatly across consumers with different values of ui . In Table 8 we illustrate the result of this
decomposition for consumers located at five percentiles of the marginal search cost distribution
(i.e. 5th , 25th , 50th , 75th and 95th ), as well as the overall average effects in the population.
    In the first two columns, we estimate that the average effect of going from five to four lenders
of 5.77 bps is the sum of a change in the expected competition-stage price of 8.59, and a decrease in
search cost of 2.82 bps. Therefore, on average, the effect of the merger on the expected competition-
stage price is roughly fifty percent higher than the reduced-form estimate (i.e. E ( (ui )/↵(ui )) =
2.82/5.77 = 48%), since the merger also decreases the search costs of consumers.
    This decomposition is highly heterogeneous, since consumers with high marginal search cost
shrink their levels of effort by a larger margin than consumers at the bottom of the distribution.
The same price change ratio is near 100% for consumers at the 75th percentile of the search cost dis-
tribution, and less than 18% for consumers below the 5th percentile. Notice also the level changes
in these two components are not monotonically increasing in ui , since consumers at the very top of
the price distribution react to the merger by reducing their search effort completely, which leads
to a near zero net merger effect as illustrated by the consumers located at and above the 95th
percentile of the distribution.
    In columns (5) and (6) we simulate the equilibrium price distribution and merger effects for an
alternative lower search cost distribution. Such a decrease might come about if, for example, the


                                                          32
development of online mortgage shopping platforms lowers the cost of search for all consumers.
We simulate the effect of a decrease by half for every u. Columns (7) and (8) calculate the difference
between the estimated pre-merger price levels and merger effects, and the counter-factual ones.
    The simulated change in the pre-merger price distribution (column (8)) shows that a 50% re-
duction in search cost would lead to large reductions in the level and dispersion of mortgage
rates. We estimate that on average negotiated margins would fall nearly 20%, while the disper-
sion of prices would fall by 15%. These changes mostly come from the fact that consumers at the
top of the price distribution are now able to negotiate substantially lower rates; more than 45 bps
at the very top.
    While this suggests that consumers benefit greatly from a reduction in search cost, we also
estimate that the price effect of mergers in low search-cost environments would be much more
important. On average, the effect of the merger is 32% larger in a low-search cost market. The
effect of the merger is also much more homogenous across consumers, as illustrated by the 50%
reduction in the coefficient of variation of the merger effect (last row). Once again, this reduction
reflects the fact that consumers are the top of the distribution are now much more affected by the
merger, since they are expecting to exert more search effort.
    Overall, our results suggest that regulators evaluating mergers in markets with negotiated
prices should worry, not only, about the pure market-power effect of mergers, measured here by
the number of lenders and importance of heterogeneity (i.e.       ✏ ),   but also about the distribution
of search frictions. In an environment with high search costs, firms enjoy large profits from being
able to discriminate across consumers, despite the fact that mergers have little impact on prices.
The small effects of mergers in this context hide the importance of market power. In contrast, the
effect of losing a lending option can be important in markets featuring sophisticated consumers,
which therefore increases the importance of the antitrust authority’s evaluation of the merger.


6   Conclusion
In contrast to most of the literature studying the effects of horizontal mergers that focuses on
posted prices or average transaction prices, we take advantage of individual transactions to docu-
ment important heterogeneity in the reactions of firms and consumers to a merger. Our empirical
analysis exploits observed differences in the choice sets of consumers and their financial charac-
teristics to estimate heterogenous treatment effects across unobserved consumer types.
    We find that the average effect of the merger yields a statistically significant increase in in-
terest rates. This finding, however, masks important heterogeneity. Some borrowers pay sig-
nificantly higher rates following the merger, while others are barely affected. The evidence we
present suggests that much of the heterogeneity in rates can be explained by differences in search
costs and negotiation ability. Borrowers at the top of the price distribution, those with high search


                                                 33
costs/bargaining abilities, are not affected by the merger, while those lower in the price distribu-
tion are affected. Together these results imply that price dispersion falls as a result of the merger.
   Our findings on the heterogeneous effect of the merger imply that competition appears to
have no impact on rates for consumers who are the most adversely affected by price discrimina-
tion; that is borrowers at the top part of residual price distribution. These results have important
implications for the design of mortgage-market policies. If the objective is to support vulnera-
ble borrowers (those paying the highest rates), policies designed to increase competition, or to
prevent increases in concentration, such as restrictions on merger activity or prevention of bank
failure may be ineffectual. Instead, what would be required would be policies designed to help
borrowers search for and negotiate better terms. For example, policies that improve the financial
literacy of borrowers may help them in their negotiations. Bertrand and Morse (2011), for instance,
found using a randomized experiment at payday lenders that increasing information available to
consumers led to a reduction in the amount people borrowed. In the housing market, Gerardi
et al. (2010) argue that financial illiteracy played an important role in the rate of foreclosures in
the U.S. housing crisis.
   In Canada, these borrowers could be provided with more information on the distribution of
discounts, or be informed as to the benefits of using brokers. Since brokers have fiduciary duties
towards borrowers, their use helps borrowers search for and negotiate better terms. This is in
contrast to the U.S. where, except in California, brokers do not have fiduciary duties. As a result,
and as documented by Hall and Woodward (2012) there is considerable confusion surrounding
the mortgage process generally, and the role of brokers in particular. Although there has been
some discussion about the possibility of assigning fiduciary duties to brokers in the U.S., language
initially appearing in the Dodd-Frank Act that would have done so was ultimately removed.
   Another potential avenue for lowering search costs is through the use of the internet. The de-
velopment of the internet and other technological improvements may lower the costs of gathering
information and of getting approval for particular rates. This could result in a shift in the distri-
bution, similar to what is described in Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004). We would expect that this
would increase bargaining power for all borrowers, but especially those with greater search costs,
resulting in a higher degree of competition.



References
  Abadie, A. (2005). Semiparametric difference-in-differences estimators. Review of Economic Studies 72, 1–19.
  Allen, J., R. Clark, and J. F. Houde (2012). Price negotiation in differentiated product markets: The case of insured
      mortgages. Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.
  Allen, J., R. Clark, and J. F. Houde (2013). Price dispersion in mortgage markets. Forthcoming Journal of Industrial
      Economics.
  Ashenfelter, O., D. Hosken, and M. Weinberg (2009). Generating evidence to guide merger enforcement. CEPS work-
      ing paper No. 183.


                                                         34
Athey, S. and G. Imbens (2006). Identification and inference in nonlinear difference-in-difference models. Economet-
    rica 74, 431–497.
Barron, J., B. Taylor, and J. Umbeck (2005). Number of sellers, average prices, and price dispersion. International
    Journal of Industrial Organization 22, 1041–1066.
Baye, M., J. Morgan, and P. Scholten (2006). Information, Search, and Price Dispersion. Handbook on Economics and
    Information Systems.
Berger, A., R. Demsetz, and P. Strahan (1999). The consolidation of the financial services industry: Causes, conse-
    quences, and implications for the future. Journal of Banking & Finance 23, 135–194.
Bertrand, A. and A. Morse (2011). Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and payday borrowing. Journal of Fi-
    nance 66, 1865–1894.
Borenstein, S. (1985, Autumn). Price discrimination in free-entry markets. The Rand Journal of Economics 16(3), 380–
    397.
Borenstein, S. and N. Rose (1994). Competition and price dispersion in the u.s. airline industry. Journal of Political
    Economy 102(4), 653–683.
Busse, M. and M. Rysman (2005). Competition and price discrimination in yellow pages advertising. Rand Journal of
    Economics 36, 378–390.
Busse, M., J. Silva-Risso, and F. Zettelmeyer (2006). $1,000 cash back: The pass-through of auto manufacturer pro-
    motions. The American Economic Review 96(4).
Clayton Research (2002-2005). Residential mortgage survey. Survey.
Competition Bureau (2003). The merger enforcement guidelines as applied to a bank merger. Technical report.
Crawford, G. and A. Yurukoglu (2012). The welfare effects of bundling in multichannel television market. American
    Economic Review 102, 643–685.
Dafny, L., M. Duggan, and S. Ramanarayanan (2011). Paying a premium on your premium? consolidation in the
    health insurance industry. forthcoming American Economic Review.
Dunning, W. (2010). Annual state of the residential mortgage market in Canada.
Edelberg, W. (2006). Risk-based pricing of interest rates for consumer loans. Journal of Monetary Economics 53, 2283–
    2298.
Einav, L., M. Jenkins, and J. Levin (2012). Contract pricing in consumer credit markets. Econometrica 80(4), 1387–1432.
Focarelli, D. and F. Panetta (2003). Are mergers beneficial to consumers? Evidence from the market for bank deposits.
    American Economic Review 93, 1152–1172.
Gerardi, K., L. Goette, and S. Meier (2010). Financial literacy and subprime mortgage delinquency: Evidence from a
    survey matched to administrative data. mimeo.
Gerardi, K. and A. Shapiro (2009). Does competition reduce price dispersion? Journal of Political Economy 117(1),
    1–37.
Goldberg, P. K. (1996). Dealer price discrimination in new car purchases: Evidence from the consumer expenditure
    survey. Journal of Political Economy 104(3), 622–654.
Gowrisankaran, G., A. Nevo, and R. Town (2013). Mergers when prices are negotiated: Evidence from the hospital
    industry. working paper, Northwestern University.
Grennan, M. (2013). Price discrimination and bargaining: Empirical evidence from medical devices. American Eco-
    nomic Review 103, 145–177.
Hall, R. E. and S. Woodward (2012). Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-optimal shopping effort: Theory and
    mortgage-market evidence. American Economic Review 102, 3249–3276.
Hastings, J. (2004). Vertical relationships and competition in retail gasoline markets: Empirical evidence from con-
    tract changes in southern california. American Economic Review 94, 317–328.
Heckman, J., H. Ichimura, and P. Todd (1997). Matching as an econometric evaluations estimator: Evidence from
    evaluating a job training programme. Review of Economic Studies 64, 605–654.
Hendel, I., A. Nevo, and F. Ortalo-Magne (2009, December). The relative performance of real estate marketing plat-
    forms: Mls versus fsbomadison.com. American Economic Review 99(5), 1878–1898.
Holmes, T. J. (1989). The effects of third-degree price discrimination in oligopoly. American Economic Review 79, 244–
    250.
Hong, H. and M. Shum (2006). Using price distributions to estimate search costs. RAND Journal of Economics 37(2),
    257–275.


                                                        35
Hortaçsu, A. and C. Syverson (2004). Product differentiation, search costs, and competition in the mututal fund
    industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 403–456.
Hortacsu, A. and C. Syverson (2007). Cementing relationships: Vertical integration, foreclosure, productivity, and
    prices. Journal of Political Economy 115, 250–301.
Houde, J.-F. (2012, August). Spatial differentiation and vertical mergers in retail markets for gasoline. American Eco-
    nomic Review 102(5), 2147–2182.
Huynh, K. P., D. T. Jacho-Chávez, and M. C. Voia (2011). Nonlinear difference-in-difference treatment effect estima-
    tion: A distributional analysis. In Chapter 9, pages 251-272, Advances in Econometrics: Missing-Data Methods 27A.
Janssen, M. and J. Moraga-González (2004). Strategic pricing, consumer search and the number of firms. Review of
    Economic Studies 71, 1089–1118.
KPMG (2008). Canada mortgage bonds program evaluation. Audit and Evaluation Services - Final Report.
Langer, A. (2012, August). Demographic preferences and price discrimination in new vehicle sales. working paper,
    University of Arizona.
Lee, J. and J. Hogarth (2000). Consumer information search for home mortgages: Who, what, how much, and what
    else? Financial Services Review 9, 277–293.
Lewis, M. (2008). Price dispersion and competition with differentiated sellers. Journal of Industrial Economics 56(3),
    654–678.
Lewis, M. and K. Pflum (2013). Diagnosing hospital system bargaining power in managed care networks. working
    paper, Ohio State University.
Linton, O., E. Massoumi, and Y.-J. Whang (2005). Consistent testing for stochastic dominance under general sampling
    schemes. Review of Economic Studies 72, 735–765.
Marvel, H. (1976). The economics of information and retail gasoline price behavior: An empirical analysis. Joural of
    Political Economy 84, 1033–1080.
Postel-Vinay, F. and J.-M. Robin (2002). Equilibrium wage dispersion with worker and employer heterogeneity.
    Econometrica 70(2), 2295–2350.
Prager, R. and T. Hannan (1998). Do substantial horizontal mergers generate significant price effects? Evidence from
    the banking industry. Journal of Industrial Economics 46, 433–452.
Sapienza, P. (2002). The effects of banking mergers on loan contracts. Journal of Finance 57, 329–367.
Scott Morton, F., F. Zettelmeyer, and J. Silva-Risso (2003). Consumer information and discrimination: Does the inter-
    net affect the pricing of new cars to women and minorities? Quantitative Marketing and Economics 1, 65–92.
Sorensen, A. (2001, October). An empirical model of heterogeneous consumer search for retail prescription drugs.
    Working Paper 8548, NBER.
Stavins, J. (2001). Price discrimination in the airline market: The effect of market concentration. Review of Economics
    and Statistics 83, 200–202.
Stigler, G. (1961). The economics of information. Jounal of Political Economy 69(3), 213–225.
Stole, L. A. (2007). Chapter 34: Price Discrimination and Competition, Volume 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier. Handbook of
    Industrial Organization.
Town, R. and G. Vistnes (2001). Hospital competition in hmo networks. Journal of Health Ecnomics 20, 733–753.
Varian, H. (1980). A model of sales. The American Economic Review 70(4), 651–659.
Weinberg, M., O. Ashenfelter, and D. Hosken (2013). The price effects of a large merger of manufacturers: A case
    study of maytag/whirlpool. Forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Wildenbeest, M. R. (2011). An empirical model of search with vertically differentiated products. RAND Journal of
    Economics 42, 729–57.




                                                        36
A      Large Canadian Mergers
1993
On January 1, 1993 TD Bank acquired, under duress, Central Guaranty Trust. Even though Central Guaranty Trust had
a poor balance sheet, there was substantial interest by several financial institutions in acquiring its assets from Central
Capital Corporation, which owned 87 per cent of trust. At the official auction TD won over the joint bid from National
Bank, Canada Trust, and Montreal Trust. Given the conditions of the Central Guaranty Trust balance sheet (they had
very high risk mortgages and commercial lending activities), the Canadian Deposit Insurance Corporation provided
financial support to TD in the takeover. In terms of branches, TD acquired 156 locations. TD also inherited nearly 11
billion dollars in deposits.
     Soon after TD Bank’s acquisition of Central Guaranty Trust, the second largest acquisition (in terms of assets) in
Canada occurred, with Royal Bank acquiring Royal Trust. In 1992 Royal Trust’s parent company, Royal Trustco, had
experienced liquidity issues, and in early 1993 announced it was looking for a buyer of the trust company. RBC’s
takeover of Royal Trust was announced on March 18, 1993 and consummated on September 1, 1993. The Royal Trust
brand was well-known and well-respected in the financial industry. Furthermore, most people believed that RBC was
a perfect match for Royal Trust. They shared the same name, colors, and both had distinguished histories. Royal Trust
had 150 branches at the time of the acquisition, largely in Ontario and Quebec, but also with a significant presence in
Alberta and British Columbia. According to Competition Bureau (2003), the RBC-Royal Trust merger was analyzed by
the Bureau when it was first proposed. The Competition Bureau did not place any restrictions on the merger.


1994
The Competition Bureau also did not place restrictions on Bank of Nova Scotia’s (BNS) acquisition of Montreal Trust
on April 12, 1994. In this instance BNS acquired 9 billion dollars in deposits and 125 branches located mostly in Quebec
and Ontario. Montreal Trust had experienced some losses in the early 1990s because of market value deficiencies in the
investments and assets, but was considered a sound financial institution and a good purchase by BNS.


1997
On August 14, 1997 Bank of Nova Scotia acquired National Trust and Victoria and Grey Mortgage Corporation, with-
out restrictions by the Competition Bureau. In this case BNS acquired nearly 12 billion dollars in deposits and 199
branches located in Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba. Most of what is known about National Trust is confidential. We
do know, however, that the transaction was valued at approximately 1.25 billion dollars even though National Trust
was considered a poorly run institution that had acquired an excessive number of small, failing trusts throughout the
1990s. It was largely the mis-management of the infrastructure that led National Trust to look for a buyer.


2000
The last bank merger to be approved in Canada was Toronto-Dominion Banks’ (TD) acquisition of Canada Trust in
2000. The price tag was roughly 8 billion dollars (TD financed the purchase by issuing 700 million dollars in equity)
and it resulted in 440 branches located across the country being acquired as well as a strong share of the mortgage
market. The merger was analyzed by the Competition Bureau and allowed to be completed under minor conditions.
For example, TD had to divest in some of its branches in three of the seventy-four markets defined by the Bureau
(Kitchener-Waterloo-Cambridge-Elmira, Port Hope, and Brantford-Paris). TD also had to sell CT’s MasterCard credit
card business (they sold the consumer credit card business to Citibank in November 2000). TD was issuing Visa credit
cards at the time of the acquisition, and it was not until 2009 that Canadian banks could sell both brands simultaneously.




                                                            37
B   Additional tables
                 Table 9: Definition of Household / Mortgage Characteristics
         Some variables were available only from one of the mortgage insurers.
          Name               Description
          FI                 Type of lender
          Source             Identifies how lender generated the loan (branch, online, broker, etc)
          Income             Total amount of the borrower(s) salary, wages, and income from other sources
          TDS                Ratio of total debt service to income
          Duration           Length of the relationship between the borrower and FI
          R-status           Borrowers residential status upon insurance application
          FSA                Forward sortation area of the mortgaged property
          Market value       Selling price or estimated market price if refinancing
          Dwelling type      10 options that define the physical structure
          Close              Closing date of purchase or date of refinance
          Loan amount        Dollar amount of the loan excluding the loan insurance premium
          Premium            Loan insurance premium
          Purpose            Purpose of the loan (purchase, port, refinance, etc.)
          LTV                Loan amount divided by lending value
          Price              Interest rate of the mortgage
          Term               Represents the term over which the interest rate applies to the loan
          Amortization       Represents the period the loan will be paid off
          Interest type      Fixed or adjustable rate
          CREDIT             Summarized application credit score (minimum borrower credit score).



              Table 10: Average Treatment Effect of the Merger with Covariates
                                                              Margin                    Zero discount
           VARIABLES                                   Baseline With trend          Baseline With trend

           Merger                                       0.0607a       0.0719a        0.0646a       0.0477a
                                                        (0.0183)      (0.0242)       (0.0154)      (0.0180)
           log of Monthly income (X 100K)                0.150a         0.123a        0.109a       0.0909a
                                                        (0.0181)      (0.0237)       (0.0165)      (0.0220)
           Log of house price (X 100K)                  -0.310a        -0.320a       -0.220a       -0.231a
                                                        (0.0194)      (0.0237)       (0.0171)      (0.0219)
           Log of other debt (X 1K)                    -0.0511a      -0.0493a       -0.0310a      -0.0364a
                                                       (0.00759)     (0.00985)      (0.00665)     (0.00883)
           FICO 600                                     -0.225a        -0.235a       -0.197a       -0.198a
                                                        (0.0354)      (0.0435)       (0.0305)      (0.0402)
           Status: Renter                                -0.0101       -0.0112      -0.00935        -0.0221
                                                        (0.0113)      (0.0159)       (0.0101)      (0.0140)
           Status: Parents                             -0.0547a       -0.0541b      -0.0517a      -0.0630a
                                                        (0.0190)      (0.0274)       (0.0155)      (0.0225)
           0.85  LTV  90                              0.0509a       0.0404a        0.0257b         0.0212
                                                        (0.0113)      (0.0150)       (0.0103)      (0.0133)
           0.90  LTV  0.95                            0.0650a       0.0358c        0.0410a         0.0279
                                                        (0.0147)      (0.0204)       (0.0130)      (0.0176)
           I(Min.down)                                   0.118a         0.107a       0.0874a       0.0824a
                                                        (0.0114)      (0.0155)       (0.0112)      (0.0142)
           Switcher                                    -0.0899a       -0.0488b      -0.0564a        -0.0119
                                                        (0.0129)      (0.0189)       (0.0123)      (0.0185)
           Broker                                      -0.0615a       -0.0378b      -0.0945a      -0.0904a
                                                        (0.0141)      (0.0185)       (0.0122)      (0.0176)
           R-squared                                      0.408          0.416         0.181          0.189
               Significance levels:   a   p<0.01, b p< 0.05, c p< 0.1. Number of observations ins 18,121.



                                                             38
C     Theory Appendix
In the interior, the solution to the effort-choice problem in equation (7) gives rise to search effort and match-
ing probability functions that are decreasing in ui and increasing in n:
                                             h                        i
                                                          1/(1+ )
                             e(ui , n) = (ui / (n))                 1                                        (13)
                                             (
                                                               /(1+ )
                                               1 (ui / (n))             if   (n) > ui
                             s(ui , n) =                                                                     (14)
                                               0                        otherwise,

where = /(1        ).
   To study the effect of a merger we consider the effect of ui and n on the equilibrium margin:
                                 ✓                   ◆
                                         1       1           1       1
   ⇡1 (ui , n) = 1 + e(ui , n) 1            +                    +      = 1 + e(ui , n) > 0
                                      1+      1+           1+       1+
                   ui (e(ui , n) + 1) 0     ui (e(ui , n) + 1) 0
   ⇡2 (ui , n) =                        (n)                      (n) s(ui , n) 0 (n) = s(ui , n) 0 (n) < 0.
                       (n)(1 + )                (n)(1 + )

Therefore price is increasing in ui , and decreasing in n. We can also use equation (14) to determine the
threshold level ū(n), associated with positive search effort: e(ui ) = 0 if ui >         (n). If the search function
s(ui , n) is such that s(ui , n) = 0 for all ui > ū, the marginal effect of changing n is zero for consumers at the
top of the price distribution.
    Using these two results leads to our first prediction: A merger raises prices for all ui < ū: ⇡(ui , n 1)
⇡(ui , n) > 0 for all ui < ū(n).
    We are also interested in the effect of the merger along the distribution. From the above results we can
calculate the following cross-partial derivates:

                            @ 2 ⇡(ui , n)   @ 2 ⇡(ui , n)        e(u, n)             0
                                          =               =                              (n) > 0.                  (15)
                                @u@n            @n@u            (n)(1 + )

From these we see that because the marginal effect of n is increasing in ui , the effect of a merger is larger
(more negative) at the bottom of the price distribution:

                     0  ⇡(uq1 , n     1)   ⇡(uq1 , n)  ⇡(uq2 , n        1)       ⇡(uq2 , n),      if q2 < q1 .   (16)

   Since the function is continuous and the cross-partial derivatives are strictly positive (in the interior),
we can establish the following effect of a merger on price dispersion as measured by the interquartile range
(IQR):
                                                0 u                                                1
                                                     Z 75                     Zu75
                                                   1      @⇡(u i , n 1)     1      @⇡(u i , n)
        sign (IQR(n 1) IQR(n)) = sign @                                 dui                    dui A  0
                                                   2           @u           2        @u
                                                         u25                                     u25

The second equality comes from the fact that:
                                                               Zu75
                                                                      @⇡(ui , n)
                                     ⇡(u75, n) = ⇡(u25, n) +                     dui ,                             (17)
                                                                        @u
                                                               u25

and its sign is negative since from equation (15):

                                            @⇡(ui , n)   @⇡(ui , n        1)
                                                                               .                                   (18)
                                              @u             @u


                                                           39
