NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SELECTION AND ECONOMIC GAINS IN THE GREAT MIGRATION OF AFRICAN AMERICANS:
NEW EVIDENCE FROM LINKED CENSUS DATA
William J. Collins
Marianne H. Wanamaker
Working Paper 19124
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19124

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

The authors are grateful for suggestions from Ran Abramitzky, Jeremy Atack, Hoyt Bleakley, Leah
Boustan, Robert Margo, Chris Minns, Greg Niemesh, and seminar participants at the University of
Chicago, Northwestern University, University of Tennessee, Vanderbilt University, European Historical
Economics Society Congress (2011), and Economic History Association Meetings (2011). Ye Gu,
Greg Niemesh, Tom Markle, Dawn Edwards, and Kiana Jackson have provided excellent research
assistance. The Grey and Dornbush Funds at Vanderbilt University and Office of Research at the
University of Tennessee have provided generous research support. NSF support (SES 1156085 and
1156057) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by William J. Collins and Marianne H. Wanamaker. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Selection and Economic Gains in the Great Migration of African Americans: New Evidence
from Linked Census Data
William J. Collins and Marianne H. Wanamaker
NBER Working Paper No. 19124
June 2013
JEL No. J15,J61,N32,N92,R23
ABSTRACT
The onset of World War I spurred the “Great Migration” of African Americans from the U.S. South,
arguably the most important internal migration in U.S. history. We create a new panel dataset of more
than 5,000 men matched from the 1910 to 1930 census manuscripts to address three interconnected
questions: To what extent was there selection into migration? How large were the migrants’ gains?
Did migration narrow the racial gap in economic status? We find evidence of positive selection, but
the migrants’ gains were large. A substantial amount of black-white convergence in this period is attributable
to migration.

William J. Collins
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu
Marianne H. Wanamaker
524 Stokely Management Center
The University of Tennessee
Knoxville, TN 37996
wanamaker@utk.edu

In this paper we create a new panel dataset to study labor market outcomes of African
American men during the early decades of the “Great Migration” from the U.S. South. This
unique and detailed dataset allows us to estimate the migrants’ gains while narrowing the scope
for bias from selection into migration. Although there is some evidence of positive selection, we
estimate that the migrants’ gains were large on average, between 60 and 70 log points.
Moreover, to the extent that we can gauge black-white convergence in economic status between
1910 and 1930, it appears that blacks’ relative gains may be accounted for fully by their interregional migration.
The Great Migration was a pivotal event in American history, with close connections to
the origins of the Civil Rights Movement, the redistribution of black workers across industries
and occupations, and the rise of black ghettos. It began in earnest during World War I, as more
African Americans left the region than during the previous four decades combined (Eldridge and
Thomas 1964, p. 90). It continued through the 1920s, and by 1930, approximately one-quarter of
30-to-40 year-old southern-born black men resided outside the South. After slowing during the
Depression, there was a resurgence in migration during World War II. The movement stalled in
the 1970s, but not before reducing the share of African Americans residing in the South from
approximately 90 percent in 1910 to 50 percent in 1970.
The Great Migration raises economic questions and empirical challenges that are
common to studies of inter-regional migration.1 Although it is evident from the vast literature on
this event that black migration from the South had profound economic and social ramifications,
fundamental questions about the migrants and their outcomes have been obscured by the
limitations of existing datasets and basic econometric concerns.2 In particular, it is difficult to

1

For contemporary examples, see Zhao (1999), Hatton and Williamson (2003), Chiquiar and Hanson
(2005), and Blanchflower, Saleheen, and Shadforth (2007) among others.
2
The economics literature on the Great Migration includes U.S. Department of Labor (1919), Lewis
(1931), Higgs (1976), Vickery (1977), Gill (1979), Wright (1986), Margo (1988), Collins (1997), Vigdor
(2002), Boustan (2009), and Black et al. (2011). The Great Migration has also been a prominent area of
study for historians (e.g., Woodson 1918, Gottlieb 1987), sociologists (e.g., Long and Heltman 1975,
Lieberson 1978, Tolnay 2003, Eichenlaub, Tolnay, and Alexander 2010), and journalists (Lemann 1991
and Wilkerson 2010).
2

measure the migrants’ income gains due to self-selection into the migrant stream.3 Without such
measures, it is impossible to assess the Great Migration’s contribution to black-white income
convergence, a key theme in the long-run story of American economic inequality.
This paper makes significant advances in the face of these measurement problems. First,
as mentioned above, we have created a new dataset that matches southern-resident African
American males from the public-use microdata sample of the 1910 Census of Population
(Ruggles et al. 2010) to the same men in the hand-written manuscripts of the 1930 Census. We
have transcribed key variables on labor market outcomes from the 1930 manuscripts. The
resulting linked dataset includes an extensive set of personal, family, and local characteristics for
more than 5,000 black males before and after the start of the Great Migration.
With this new information, we can document and account for selection into migration to
a far greater extent than with cross-sectional data. In the initial year, 1910, we observe the
sample’s younger men while they still resided with their parents and siblings. The analysis of
later outcomes, therefore, can control for a rich set of observable background characteristics, as
well as county-of-origin and household-of-origin unobservable fixed effects using pairs of
brothers (i.e., by comparing brothers who left to brothers who stayed in the South). In this, our
paper has much in common with Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson’s study of Norwegian
migrants to the United States (2012). In addition, we first observe the sample’s older men after
they have entered the southern labor force but before the start of the Great Migration. This
provides direct evidence of selection on the basis of pre-World War I labor market outcomes,
and it allows us to measure the migrants’ gains from individual-level changes in outcomes
relative to those of similar non-migrants. Comparisons of naïve estimates of the migrants’ gains
with estimates from the fully specified regressions provide empirical perspective on the scope for
selection bias (Altonji, Elder, and Taber 2005). None of this is possible in standard crosssectional data sources.
Finally, with more reliable measures of the migrants’ gains, we can assess the
contribution of inter-regional migration to black-white convergence in economic status in the
early 20th century by using the IPUMS microdata samples of black and white men in 1910 and
1930 (Ruggles et al. 2010). Economists studying long-run black-white income convergence
3

For discussion and examples in other migration settings, see inter alia Borjas (1987), Chiquiar and
Hanson (2005), Hanson (2006), McKenzie, Gibson, and Stillman (2010), or Abramitzky, Boustan and
Eriksson (2012).
3

have focused primarily on the 1940s and 1960s, periods of relatively rapid black progress (Smith
and Welch 1989, Donohue and Heckman 1991, Maloney 1994, Margo 1995, Chay 1998, Bailey
and Collins 2006). By the 1960s, migration played a small role in promoting convergence. In
comparison, the quantitative significance of black migration for income convergence before
World War II is relatively unexplored and potentially much different from what is observed in
the post-war years.
Our analysis focuses on the period from 1910 to 1930 for several reasons. Constructing a
dataset that links individuals across census years requires full information on the names of
individuals and access to the entire collection of handwritten census manuscripts. Until very
recently, 1930 was the latest census year for which this was possible.4 This vantage point
captures the experiences of the first major wave of black migrants. This group blazed the trail
for subsequent migration from the South, but comparatively little is known about their origins,
outcomes, and role in narrowing the racial gap in economic status. We observe them before the
full effects of the Great Depression were felt and, of course, before the extraordinary expansion
of industrial production in World War II reignited migration flows from the South.
A significant limitation of studying this period is that the census did not collect
individual-level income data before 1940. Therefore, we must rely on information on earnings
by industry, occupation, region, and race from a variety of sources to create detailed earnings
estimates (“scores”) and to check the sensitivity and plausibility of the results.
Despite this limitation, there are advantages to studying long-distance migration in the
U.S. in this period. Because the movement was internal to the U.S., the migrants were not
filtered by selective immigration policies, which often complicate international migration
patterns. And because regional income gaps at this time were large and southern black human
capital levels were low, the Great Migration provides perspective on migration’s potential for
alleviating poverty (Clemens 2011). Finally, with historical census manuscripts, it is possible to
create a large, representative panel dataset that connects the origins and outcomes of those who
left the South and those who chose to stay in the early years of the Great Migration.

4

Linking census data requires access to information (full name) that is confidential in later years. The
1940 census manuscripts have very recently been released to the public. These should, in principle, be
useful for characterizing the Depression’s effects on worker outcomes (after transcription of the
handwritten manuscripts), but in this paper we focus on the first decades of the Great Migration.
4

1. Background on the Great Migration
A. Brief History
Relatively few southern blacks migrated to the North prior to World War I. Existing
scholarship suggests that a number of factors restrained out-migration. First, following the Civil
War, newly emancipated African Americans had extremely low levels of human and physical
capital and were heavily concentrated in agricultural employment (Ransom and Sutch 1977,
Margo 1990).5 It is common for such groups to have low rates of long-distance migration, even
when there are large differences in prevailing wage levels and few policy barriers to mobility
(Hatton and Williamson 1998).6 Second, there was widespread and open reluctance among
northern industrial employers to hire black workers, except as occasional strikebreakers, prior to
World War I (Myrdal 1944, Collins 1997). Third, it has been argued that northern employers’
recruiting networks did not extend into the South but did extend across the Atlantic, a legacy of
slavery’s regional concentration and the timing of mass European immigration (Wright 1987,
Rosenbloom 2002).
Exogenous events decisively altered the patterns of inter-regional migration in the early
part of the 20th century. World War I was accompanied by both a labor demand boom in
northern industrial centers and a temporary halt to mass European immigration. In turn, many
northern employers recruited large numbers of southern black migrants for the first time. This
was sustained through the 1920s, as new immigration policies tightly restricted European
immigration and as northern firms became accustomed to employing black laborers and drawing
on the southern labor supply (Whatley 1990; Foote, Whatley and Wright 2003).
In addition, to the extent that ignorance, illiteracy, and sheer poverty constrained interregional migration after the Civil War, this constraint loosened with each generation’s
educational and economic advances in the South (Higgs 1982, Margo 1990, Collins and Margo
2006).7 As the stock of black migrants in the North increased, the dynamics of chain migration
5

In 1870, only 17 percent of African Americans over age 9 could read and write, and less than 5 percent
of men, age 20 to 60, owned real property. Calculations are based on the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series (IPUMS, Ruggles et al. 2010). Learning to read was generally prohibited under slavery (Williams
2005), and there was no large-scale redistribution of land after the war.
6
Impediments to economic mobility among sharecroppers may have been significant (Ransom and Sutch
1977, Naidu 2010), but there were no formal barriers to internal migration in the United States.
7
Only 13 percent of southern blacks (age 20-40) were literate in 1870, whereas 83 percent were literate in
1930. However, there is evidence that the black-white gap in educational attainment widened in the early
20th century (Collins and Margo 2006).
5

were set in motion—migration became less costly once friends and family were able to assist
(Carrington, Detragiache, and Vishwanath 1996, Chay and Munshi 2012). Improved
transportation networks within the South also may have diminished the cost of out-migration.
Finally, after the Reconstruction period, local amenities for African Americans appear to have
deteriorated in many facets in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including political
disenfranchisement, mob violence, de jure segregation, and, in general, the ominous ascendance
of the Jim Crow regime.8

B. Selection and Key Measurement Challenges
There are straightforward connections between the economics of the Great Migration and
other migration flows from low-wage to high-wage regions (Sjaastad 1962, Todaro 1969, Borjas
1987, Carrington, Detragiache, and Vishwanath 1996). A simple starting point posits that a
person would move from the South to the North if the expected benefits of residing in the North
exceeded those of residing in the South, net of the cost of relocating and conditional on having
sufficient resources to cover the cost of migrating. The expected benefits of residing in the
North may have included higher lifetime income, consumption, and amenities (e.g., more secure
civil rights), whereas the costs would have included travel, searching for a new job and housing,
and other aspects of assimilating to a new environment and leaving behind a familiar one.
Because expectations about the costs and benefits of migration may vary substantially from
worker to worker and may depend on workers’ characteristics, the nature of selection into
migration is an important consideration.
In this paper we seek to estimate black migrants’ average gain in earnings—essentially
the average treatment effect on the treated—to better assess the contribution of the Great
Migration to blacks’ economic progress relative to whites in the early 20th century. Net welfare
gains, which we cannot identify, could be greater than or less than gross income gains depending
on migration costs and the value of place- and job-specific amenities (and disamenities) in the
North relative to the South.9
8

See Kousser (1974) and Woodward (1974) on disenfranchisement. See Tolnay and Beck (1995) on mob
violence and lynching. See Margo (1990) on widening racial gaps in school quality. Myrdal emphasized
that blacks were shut out of growing employment in southern manufacturing (1944, p. 188). “Jim Crow”
is a commonly used embodiment of the segregated South.
9
This point is clear in standard models of spatial equilibrium with mobile workers and firms (Roback
1982, Moretti 2011). In this setting, we interpret the early years of the Great Migration as a response to
6

To fix ideas, if a worker’s productivity were uncorrelated with the likelihood of migration
(e.g., if migrants were randomly selected from the southern population), then a simple
comparison of migrants’ and non-migrants’ ex post earnings would measure the average gain
associated with migration. In practice, however, assuming (quasi) random migrant selection is
untenable. In migration-based interpretations of the Roy model (Roy 1951, Borjas 1987), a
worker’s net benefit from migration is related to his skill level, and skilled workers tend to move
(or stay) where skills are relatively highly rewarded. The model can be modified so that
migration costs are also a function of skill, and Chiquiar and Hanson (2005) show that different
patterns of selection can result depending on the nature of the costs and distribution of skill
within the population. In any case, self-selected migrants complicate the interpretation of
earnings differences between migrants and non-migrants, potentially confounding measurement
of the gains from migration.
In the context of the Great Migration, there is some evidence that the stock of southernborn blacks residing in the North had more formal education than southern-born non-migrants
(Margo 1990, Vigdor 2002), which is consistent with positive selection on worker productivity.
But one might hypothesize that the labor demand shock of World War I drew migrants
disproportionately from those who were less experienced, less skilled, or faced worse labor
market opportunities in the South than others. In addition, there is some evidence suggesting
that returns to literacy for African Americans were higher in the South than in the North in this
period (Collins and Margo 2006).10 If so, it would tend to induce negative selection on education
in a simple Roy model. Finally, the best evidence on international migrants to the U.S. North at
the turn of the 20th century reveals negative selection among Norwegian immigrants
(Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson 2012).
Overall, in the early decades of the Great Migration, the nature and strength of migrant
selection are not easily documented—some factors may have promoted positive selection while
others may have worked in the opposite direction. The central empirical challenge of this paper
what blacks would perceive as a productivity shock in northern cities. The large and continuing volume
of migration suggests that establishing a spatial equilibrium took several decades. We address potential
general equilibrium effects later in the paper.
10
Collins and Margo (2006) rely on occupational scores that are derived from earnings in the 1960
census, separately by race and region. In the 1940 IPUMS microdata, where years of schooling and wage
and salary income are first recorded, the coefficient on the interaction of years-of-education and South is
positive in a sample of black men, controlling for age. This pattern might reflect the relative scarcity of
education in the South, but more research is needed.
7

is to measure the migrants’ gains as accurately as possible in the presence of these selection
issues. Better data can help meet this challenge.11

2. New Data
A. Linking Micro-level Census Data from 1910 to 1930
Scholarship on the Great Migration has traditionally relied on aggregate data found in
published census volumes or, more recently, from cross-sectional public use samples of census
microdata.12 But, as discussed above, the absence of pre-migration characteristics in crosssectional datasets and the nature of self-selection into the migrant stream have made credible
measures of the migrants’ gains elusive. Our approach to the problem entails the construction of
a new panel dataset, which links a large and representative sample of men from 1910 to 1930.
We started with the IPUMS one-percent cross-section of the 1910 Census of Population
(Ruggles et al. 2010), limiting it to black male residents of southern states between the ages of 0
and 40.13 This generated an initial sample of 28,215 individuals, some of whom were brothers.
Images of the hand-written manuscripts of the 1930 Census of Population are indexed and can be
searched by name, age, and place of birth via the genealogy website Ancestry.com. We used
each individual’s name, age, and place-of-birth information from the 1910 IPUMS sample as
search criteria in the 1930 manuscript database.14 A successful match was generated by locating

11

An alternative approach to the challenge entails finding a valid instrumental variable for migration, but
even this is likely to entail constructing better data than a post-migration census cross section can provide
because candidates for valid instruments are likely to be associated with pre-migration information
whereas the outcomes of interest are naturally post-migration.
12
There are some exceptions. For the pre-Great Migration period, Logan (2009) examines migration in
the Colored Troops Sample of the Civil War Union Army Data. Collins (2000) studies retrospective data
for workers in six non-southern cities to characterize black occupational upgrading during the 1940s and
its connection to inter-regional migration. Bodnar et al. (1982) study migrants in Pittsburgh prior to 1920.
Maloney (2001) studies migrants in Cincinnati between 1910 and 1920. Doetsch (2011) links 1930
census data to World War I draft records. Black et al. (2011) study mortality rates of migrants and nonmigrants using Social Security and Medicare data.
13
Southern states for our purposes are Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Despite the official census classification, we exclude Delaware, Maryland, and the District of Columbia
from the list of southern states.
14
Our search criteria include a SOUNDEX version of the individual’s last name, the first three letters of
the individual’s first name, the individual’s state of birth and their birth year within two years.
SOUNDEX is a common algorithm used to generate alternative spellings of a surname. SOUNDEX
matches include the exact last name and any reasonably close approximation to that last name. We ran a
8

exactly one person with these characteristics in the 1930 manuscripts. This linking process
yielded 5,929 successful matches (a 21 percent match rate).15 Deleting duplicate matches
(different individuals in 1910 matched to the same individual in 1930) and other discrepancies
leave a sample size of 5,465 individuals. In addition to the individual and household data from
the census manuscripts, we have appended data specific to the 1910 county of residence from the
National Historical Geographical Information System (Minnesota Population Center 2011) and
Haines (2010).
An important challenge for linked datasets is to ensure that selection into the matched
sample is not biased. For example, if children from wealthier or more urban households were
more likely than others to be found and matched in the 1930 manuscripts, the sample would
provide a skewed perspective on the experiences of African Americans in this period. Table 1
compares the 1910 characteristics of the matched sample and the full 1910 IPUMS sample of
southern black males (age 0 to 40). It is reassuring that the matched sample’s properties are very
similar to those of the full sample in terms of state-of-residence, literacy and school attendance,
likelihood of residing in owner-occupied housing, urban residence, and age distribution. The
statistically significant differences (as indicated by the p-value in the last column) in owneroccupied housing residence, city residence, and job characteristics are small in magnitude,
suggesting limited scope for bias in the linked sample to skew our interpretation. In sum, we
find no strong evidence of biased selection into the matched sample relative to the base 1910
IPUMS cross-sectional sample.
A separate check with the 1930 IPUMS cross-sectional sample of southern-born black
men, age 20 to 60 (to correspond to those 0 to 40 in 1910), reveals that 22.0 percent resided
outside the South at the time of the 1930 census. This is close to the 20.2 percent of our matched
sample who resided in the South in 1910 but not in 1930.16 For more detail, Table 2 compares
the 1930 characteristics of matched black migrants in the linked sample (first column) with the
1930 IPUMS cross-sectional sample of southern-born, northern-resident black men (second
column). A caveat here is that some of the northern-resident men in the IPUMS cross-section
sensitivity test on our results, restricting the sample to exact last name matches and found no significant
change in our estimates. See Section 1 of the Supplemental Appendix.
15
This match rate is similar to that in Ferrie and Long (forthcoming) and Abramitzky, Boustan, and
Eriksson (2012) who also create samples of linked census records.
16
We do not expect these numbers to be exactly the same because of interregional mobility prior to 1910
and sample variability.
9

may have migrated prior to 1910, whereas all the men in the linked sample migrated after 1910.
Nonetheless, we find relatively minor differences across the samples. Statistically significant
differences are apparent in age (35.7 compared to 36.2), urban residence (87.1 compared to
89.7), and residence in Ohio and Missouri, but again these differences are quantitatively small.17

B. Earnings Scores for Southern-born African American Men
The 1930 census records are available in their entirety—every handwritten manuscript
with full disclosure of information—but census enumerators did not collect information on
earnings before 1940. We must, therefore, establish estimates of earnings for the men in our
dataset, which we do on the basis of their industry or occupation and region of residence. We
also allow the earnings scores to vary with employment status at the time of census enumeration,
which is important in the context of this study because blacks in the North reported substantially
higher unemployment rates than in the South.18 This process is described below and in more
detail in Appendix A. We refer to workers’ “scores” throughout the analysis to emphasize that
earnings per se are not reported at the individual-level in the 1930 census records. The scores
will allow us to estimate the returns to migration based on differences or changes in industry or
occupation, region, and employment status (conditional on background characteristics). But we
cannot observe differences or changes in earnings within job-region-employment status
categories. Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012) face a similar challenge and develop an
approach that is similar in spirit.We have taken two independent routes to assigning annual
earnings scores to the men in our sample. In the first method, we matched each individual to
industry-specific average annual earnings data in 1928, as reported in Margo (1996) based on
Lebergott (1964). Then, we adjusted the industry-level average earnings to reflect southern-born
black-male-specific earnings levels in each industry for the South and Non-South, conditional on
17

A puzzling aspect of the 1930 data is the high level of literacy recorded for southern-born blacks in the
North. While it is likely that some men acquired literacy between 1910 and 1930, the extremely high rate
recorded in the North raises questions about the consistency of this variable’s enumeration over time and
across regions. This issue requires more research.
18
The 1930 census inquired whether the person had been employed on the previous workday. Of course,
differences in employment status at a point in time do not necessarily imply large differences in annual
weeks of work or, by extension, earnings. In 1910, the census inquired about weeks unemployed in the
previous year. From this basis, and using the IPUMS data, it appears that black men in the North who
were unemployed at the time of enumeration worked approximately 85 percent as many weeks in the
previous year as those who were employed at the time of enumeration. In 1940, the census inquired
directly about weeks worked in the previous year, and the ratio was only about 65 percent.
10

employment status at the time of census enumeration. This adjustment factor is based on
individual-level census data from the 1940 IPUMS, the first year in which enumerators collected
annual earnings data, which pertain to the previous calendar year. For example, if construction
workers earned X in 1928 according to Lebergott, and the average southern-born, southernresident, employed, black male construction worker earned 50 percent of the average for all
construction workers according to the 1940 microdata, then the assigned annual earnings score
for southern, employed, black construction workers in the linked dataset is 0.5X.19 Note that
workers who were unemployed at the time of census enumeration are assigned a different
earnings score than those who were employed. If unemployed southern-born, southern-resident
black males who previously worked in construction earned 25 percent of the average of all
construction workers in the 1940 microdata, then the assigned score would be 0.25X in the
linked dataset. The industry categories in Lebergott (1964) are broad (we work with 18 industry
categories), but this approach brings us as close as possible to pre-Depression, black-specific
earnings levels that vary by industry, region of residence, and employment status.20
For an alternative and fully independent approach, we used the individual-level data from
the 1960 IPUMS sample to calculate average annual earnings for southern-born black men in
19

There is no presumption in our approach that the unemployment rate was the same in 1930 as in 1940,
only that the ratios of annual earnings for the unemployed were similar. Industry and occupation were
asked of all men in the labor force in 1940. Enumerators were instructed to record the last industry and
occupation for those unemployed. The modern definition of “labor force” did not apply in 1930, but
industry and occupation were asked of all men in 1930, whether employed or unemployed. Those retired
or incapable of work were to be recorded as having no occupation or industry. We report the sensitivity
of our main results to alternative methods of assigning earnings to the unemployed, including an
assumption that the unemployed had $0 in annual earnings, in the Supplemental Appendix, Section 5.
These adjustments reduce the estimated return to migration by about 10 to 16 percent compared to the
paper’s base results.
20
Rather than base our estimates on Lebergott’s reported figure for agricultural workers, we dug deeper
into Lebergott’s original source (U.S. Department of Agriculture 1957) to find an income figure that
covered both farmers and farm laborers, including the estimated value of perquisites and in-kind income.
This figure is substantially higher than that for farm workers alone and, if overestimated, will bias our
estimated returns to migration towards zero as most farm sector workers were southern residents. The
adjustment factor derived from 1940 microdata is by necessity based on earnings of black farm laborers
relative to other farm laborers. If within this category, black workers received more income in kind than
whites, then the adjustment factor could be too low. We undertake two robustness tests to assess the
sensitivity of our results to reasonable alternatives. First, we use an adjustment factor equal to the
average income ratio across all non-agricultural industries rather than in agriculture itself. Second, we
limit the universe of individuals used to calculate the 1940 adjustment factor to only those who received
less than $50 in in-kind income (the only census variable that attempts to capture in-kind pay). Our
estimated magnitudes of earnings score gains for migrants are essentially unchanged. See Supplemental
Appendix, Section 4 for further discussion.
11

each three-digit occupation category within each major region (South, Northeast, Midwest, and
West) by employment status.21 The within-cell average earnings are assigned directly to men in
the linked dataset according to their occupation, region, and employment status. The advantages
of this approach are that the 1960 microdata provide a direct measure of all black workers’
earnings, and the sample is large enough to allow detailed coverage across hundreds of
occupation-region-employment-status cells for southern-born black men. Of course, 1960 is far
from 1930, and this method could understate the 1930 earnings differences between migrants and
non-migrants to the extent that regional convergence in wages occurred between 1930 and 1960
among black workers.22 An offsetting factor is that the 1960 census did not count in-kind
income, which may be disproportionately important for southern agricultural workers. We
examine sensitivity to this issue in Section 4’s discussion of “base results.”
Nominal earnings score differences between migrants and non-migrants will tend to
overstate the real income gains associated with migration because price levels were, on average,
higher outside the South. We rely on work by Stecker (1937), who studied cost of living (COL)
differences across cities, and Koffsky (1949), who studied rural-urban cost of living differences,
to adjust nominal earnings scores. Stecker’s original city-based COL measures are used for
those who lived in cities, and a Koffsky-based adjustment sets relative COLs for those residing
outside cities within each state. Appendix A describes this approach in more detail.

3. Evidence on Selection into the Great Migration
Different workers perceived different expected utility to living in the North relative to the
South, and because these expectations may have been systematically correlated with observable
and unobservable characteristics (e.g., age and ability, respectively) there may have been nonrandom selection into the migrant stream. Table 3 splits the linked sample into two groups for
21

This is similar in spirit to the IPUMS “occscore” variable, which is based on median income in
occupations in 1950, but it improves on the occscore variable by focusing specifically on the earnings of
southern-born black men within each region, occupation, and employment status. We do not use the 1940
census here because it does not report the earnings of self-employed workers, such as farmers and
because we wanted a set of estimates that were fully independent of the first approach, which is based on
a combination of Lebergott (1964) and 1940 microdata. The 1950 IPUMS sample reports income for a
“sample line” subset of observations, and the resulting sample is too small to support a fine division of
southern-born black workers across occupation-region-employment status cells.
22
Easterlin (1960) estimates significant inter-regional convergence in personal income per capita between
1930 and 1950, and Mitchener and McLean (1999) estimate convergence in income per worker between
1940 and 1960.
12

comparison: those who left the South after 1910 and resided in the North in 1930 (“migrants”)
and those who resided in the South in both 1910 and 1930 (“non-migrants”).23 The last column
of the table reports the p-value of the difference in these group means. Differences in several
observable background characteristics between the two groups are statistically significant, but
most are relatively small in magnitude. For instance, prior to moving, migrants had a slightly
higher rate of literacy than non-migrants (68 compared to 65 percent), were more likely to be
attending school if age 5 to 20 (51 compared to 48 percent), and were more likely to reside in
owner-occupied housing (25 compared to 22 percent).24 On average, they were also about 70
miles closer to major destinations in the urban north, such as Chicago and Philadelphia.
Differences in county-level economic characteristics are also relatively small.
Larger differences are evident in 1910 job categories for those old enough to be in the
labor force. The eventual migrants had disproportionately sorted out of agricultural occupations
prior to leaving the South: 43 percent of migrants worked as farmers or farm laborers in 1910
compared to 57 percent of non-migrants. This difference extends backward at least one
generation, to the cohort of parents who would have been born soon after Emancipation. In the
subsample where we observe young males living with their parents in 1910 (those aged 0-20),
the fathers of migrants were 7 percentage points less likely to be farmers than the fathers of nonmigrants.
A simple metric for selection comes from examining the subset of men who were already
in the labor force in 1910.25 If higher ability translated into better-paying jobs in the South and is
positively correlated with subsequent migration, then the migrants should exhibit higher earnings
scores than non-migrants before leaving the South. We estimate the difference in pre-Great
Migration earnings in an ordinary least squares (OLS) regression:

(1)

,

,

23

A preliminary link to the 1920 census manuscripts indicates that less than 5 percent of men in our
sample are return migrants (i.e., in South in 1910, in North in 1920, and back in South in 1930). Return
migrants will tend to attenuate the measured effects of migration if return migrants acquired human
capital or financial capital while in the North relative to those who never left the South.
24
The difference in school attendance is partly explained by the difference in average age between
migrants and non-migrants.
25
McKenzie, Gibson, and Spillman (2010) take a similar approach when investigating selection on
unobserved skill in migration from Tonga to Australia.
13

where

is a (log) earnings score based on the job held in 1910;

post-1910 migration (=1 if residing in North in 1930); and

,

is an indicator of

is a set of background variables.

For comparability with later regressions, we assign the earnings scores and cost-of-living
adjustments using the same methods described above and in Appendix A. The

variables,

generally measured in 1910, include age fixed effects, small and large city-of-residence
indicators, headship status and owner-occupied housing status (and their interaction), state-level
log income per capita, veteran status (in 1930), and several county-of-origin attributes, including
black percentage of total population, black adult literacy rate, black children’s school attendance
rate, and the percent of farm acres in cotton.26
If there is positive selection into the migrant stream, we expect to estimate

0 in a

regression that does not control for . If there is positive selection on unobservables, we expect
to estimate β

0 even when controlling for . Estimates of

are shown in Table 4. Column

1 includes no control variables, and so the reported coefficient is just the difference in means
between groups. In both nominal and real terms, migrants fared better than non-migrants before
leaving the South, by about 10 to 15 log points. The addition of observable background
characteristics in column 2 leaves a difference of only about 5 log points. Column 3 adds 1910
county-of-residence fixed effects, which further reduces the estimates of

to less than 2.5 log

points, and the differences are no longer statistically significant.
Despite this evidence of limited selection into the migrant stream, conditional on
observables, the underlying differences in earnings scores might mask differences between
migrants and non-migrants in earnings within industry or occupation categories. Given the data
limitations, we simply cannot see whether migrants were relatively high earners within job
categories. However, for variables that are observable prior to migration, we find no evidence of
significant differences in 1910 literacy, home ownership, employment status, or residence in a
large city between migrants and non-migrants, conditional on occupation or industry category
and age.27 In other words, observable characteristics that are often associated with earnings are
similar for migrants and non-migrants within job categories. It is also reassuring that the results
26

The veteran status variable is missing for a nontrivial number of men in 1930. Rather than exclude
them from the analysis, we have dummy variables for both “veterans” and “missing vet status” (both
expressed relative to the omitted non-veteran category). For consistency with later regressions, we omit
literacy from the controls in Table 4. The results are very similar with 1910 literacy included as a righthand side variable (shown in Supplemental Appendix, Section 2).
27
See Supplemental Appendix, Section 7.
14

are similar whether based on broad industry groups or narrow occupation groups. That is, using
finer job categories to allow more differentiation among workers does not reveal larger pre-WWI
differences between migrants and non-migrants. Nonetheless, we return to this issue at the end
of Section 4.
The pre-migration differences found in Table 4, in combination with the simple
comparisons in Table 3, suggest that there was some positive selection into the migration stream,
which is consistent with other views of the Great Migration (Margo 1990, Vigdor 2002). But we
find that the differences are diminished substantially by including controls for background
observables and county-of-origin fixed effects. This suggests that the new panel dataset may
provide a useful basis for estimating the migrants’ gains, one that leaves a reasonably small
scope for selection bias.

4. Measuring the Migrants’ Gains
Although the migrants and non-migrants had much in common in terms of 1910
observables (Table 3), by 1930, their lives had clearly taken divergent paths. Table 5 shows that
more than half of the non-migrants were farmers or farm laborers in 1930, compared to just 2
percent of the migrants. The migrants were disproportionately employed as operatives and
unskilled laborers (in sum, nearly 60 percent). Given their overwhelmingly urban destinations, it
is not surprising that migrants had higher rates of unemployment and lower rates of owneroccupancy in 1930. Table 6 shows the occupational transition matrix for migrants, nonmigrants, and the full sample of men who were age 21 to 40 in 1910 and reported an occupation
in both census enumerations. For this exercise, farmers and farm workers have been grouped
together, as have non-agricultural laborers and operatives, and the occupation distribution
includes the relatively rare professional and clerical/semi-skilled categories. The majority of
those who worked in farming in 1910, whether as a farmer or farm laborer, still worked in
farming in 1930 (Panel A, 58 percent = 33.1/56.8), especially if they stayed in the South (Panel
B, 66 percent = 38.8/59.1). The single largest cell among the regional migrants in Panel C is the
group that shifted from farm to non-farm labor (33.5 percent), but this group is nearly matched in
size by the group that worked as non-farm laborers before leaving the South.
The question at hand is whether these divergent career paths led to significant gains in
average earnings for the migrants. It is well understood that the North was no “Promised Land.”
15

Discrimination in labor and housing markets was pervasive (Sundstrom 1994, Meyer 2000), and
events like the 1919 Chicago riot underscored the degree of racial tension in some northern
cities. Moreover, recent sociological work has questioned whether the migrants gained much at
all by leaving the South in later periods (Eichenlaub, Tolnay, and Alexander 2010). The linked
census data provide a new and unique opportunity to measure the migrants’ gains circa 1930,
while addressing the potentially confounding influence of selection.

A. Empirical Framework and Strategy
We consider the following baseline regression, estimated by OLS:

(2)

,

where the

and

,

variables are similar to those described in equation 1, but

is log

earnings score based on the observation’s 1930 industry or occupation, region of residence, and
employment status.28 The coefficient of interest is

, which we would like to measure the effect

of migration on the earnings of those who moved. A central concern is that the error term (u)
may be correlated with migrant status, as suggested by evidence in the preceding section, leading
to biased estimates of

.

We take three steps to address this possible selection while paying close attention to the
sensitivity of our estimates to changes in the basis for identification. First, to absorb omitted
place-of-origin effects, we add county-level fixed effects to the regression. Then, to absorb
omitted family-background effects, we add household-of-origin fixed effects and identify the
migrants’ gains by comparing brothers. Finally, for the subsample of men we observe in the
labor force in both 1910 and 1930, we estimate difference regressions and identify

from

within-individual changes in labor market outcomes, differencing out unobservable fixed effects
at the individual level. In this specification, including

28

helps control for differential changes in

includes age fixed effects, small and large city-of-residence indicators, headship status and owneroccupied housing status (and their interaction), state-level log income per capita, veteran status (in 1930),
and several county-of-origin attributes, including black percentage of total population, black adult literacy
rate, black children’s school attendance rate, and the percent of farm acres in cotton. To maintain a large
and consistent sample, we do not control for own literacy in Table 7’s regressions. Adding 1910 literacy
status to the regressions drops everyone under age 10 in 1910 but has little effect on the magnitude of the
migrant-status coefficient. See Section 2 of the Supplemental Appendix.
16

earnings that are associated with pre-migration observables.29 This leaves only unobserved
heterogeneity in the rate of change in earnings across individuals as a potential source of
selection bias.
If the estimates of τ1 are highly sensitive to these controls for unobservables, then our
concern with bias from remaining unobservables will be heightened. On the other hand, stability
of estimates of

across different specifications would be consistent with limited remaining bias

from unobservables. We pursue this intuition more formally below, following Altonji, Elder,
and Taber (2005) and Bellows and Miguel (2009).

B. Base Results
The baseline results are reported in Table 7. Each entry in the table is a separate
regression estimate of

. The regression specifications vary across columns, and the dependent

variable varies across rows. In Panel A, the annual earnings score is based on the worker’s
industry, using 1928 earnings-by-industry adjusted to black-specific levels as described above.
The first row reports results for nominal annual earnings, whereas the second row adjusts for
cost-of-living differences. In Panel B, the earnings score is based on the worker’s occupation,
and is derived from the earnings distribution in the 1960 IPUMS.
Column 1 reports the difference in earnings scores between migrants and non-migrants
without controls for

or fixed effects—a naïve difference-in-means estimate of the gains from

migration, but a useful benchmark for comparison. In row 1, the difference in nominal earnings
scores is large. On average, the migrants’ earnings scores were 88 log points higher than those
of non-migrants. Although it is difficult to imagine such large inter-regional wage differences in
the U.S. today, the figures are roughly comparable in magnitude to regional differences in
personal income per capita in 1930 (Easterlin 1960).30 Independently, large regional differences
in the value of consumption among African Americans are evident in the 1935/36 Consumer
Purchases Study (U.S. Department of Labor 2009).31
29

Men who are old enough to be in the labor force in 1910 rarely live with their brothers. Therefore, it is
not possible for us to have household-of-origin fixed effects in the change-in-Y regressions.
30
For 1930, Easterlin (1960, p. 140) estimates a per capita income ratio of 137/55 (ln 137/55 = 0.91) for
the Middle Atlantic relative to the South Atlantic and a ratio of 115/50 (ln 115/50 = 0.83) for the East
North Central to the East South Central.
31
The Consumer Purchases Study (CPS) (U.S. Department of Labor 2009) attempted to value farmers’
full consumption, not just their purchases. Outside the South, the CPS includes blacks only in Columbus,
17

In row 2, the results show that accounting for cost-of-living differences significantly
scales down the migrants’ advantage. Nonetheless, the difference in real earning scores is still
large at 68 log points. Panel B’s results are very similar to those in Panel A. Making an upward
adjustment to the income levels of farmers and farm laborers in Panel B to reflect the value of
omitted in-kind income in the 1960 census lowers the estimated returns to migration, but they
remain large.32
In column 2, we include

in the regression to control for observable personal,

household, and county characteristics (measured for the 1910 county of origin). In each row, the
estimate of

is diminished by only one to two log points relative to the first column. This

suggests that selection on observables, even the rich set of observables available in our linked
census data, accounts for a small share of the raw difference in earnings scores between migrants
and non-migrants. Comparison with the results in Table 4 (based on 1910 jobs) suggests that
observable characteristics circa 1910 account for a diminished portion of the difference in
earnings between migrants and non-migrants in 1930.
Column 3 adds county-of-origin fixed effects to the base specification described by
equation 2. So,

is identified from comparisons of men who lived in the same county in 1910,

conditional on . The estimates of

are very similar in magnitude to those in column 2, and we

conclude that there is little selection bias from location-specific unobservables.33
The linked dataset contains a sufficient number of brothers for us to estimate

based on

within-household-of-origin comparisons, following Abramitzky, Boustan, and Eriksson (2012).
This should eliminate bias from unobserved household-level effects on the children’s later labor
market outcomes. In column 4a, we repeat the specification from column 3, but we restrict the
Ohio and New York City. Within the South, blacks are observed in farm, village, and city categories.
The log ratio of blacks’ per capita consumption in Columbus to that in villages and small cities of the
South is 0.80 (weighted). The log ratio of consumption in New York to that on southern farms is 1.48.
Other combinations are in between. We thank Greg Niemesh for providing these calculations.
32
Specifically, if we add 20 percent to farmer and farm laborer income to offset the omission of in-kind
income in the 1960 census, the estimates are reduced by about 8 log points. The ad hoc adjustment is
based on the ratio of farm labor total income (including value of perquisites) over farm labor wage
income in 1956 (USDA 1957). See Section 4 of the Supplemental Appendix for discussion of other
sensitivity checks related to agricultural workers.
33
There is some evidence that veterans fared better in terms of labor market outcomes than
observationally similar men. In this specification (with county-of-origin fixed effects) the veteran dummy
is associated with a 0.03 to 0.06 higher score in 1930 (t-statistics are from 1.5 to 2.1), depending on which
method is used to assign earnings scores. This could be a causal effect of military experience or evidence
of positive selection into veteran status.
18

sample to observations from households with more than one linked record whose relation to the
household head was “child” in 1910 (i.e., a sample of brothers). There are 403 such brothers
from 201 separate households. The estimated return to migration is somewhat reduced in column
4a relative to column 3, but this is entirely due to the change in sample composition. In column
4b, we add the household fixed effect for comparison with column 4a. The estimate of

is

reduced by only about 1 log point, suggesting that there is non-trivial positive selection across
households within counties. The earnings score gains attributable to migration remain large.
Finally, for the subset of men with occupation and industry information available in
1910, we first-difference

and

(

Δ ) to absorb person-specific fixed effects in a

difference-in-difference estimator. For the sake of comparison, column 5a estimates the same
specification as column 2 (using level of

as the dependent variable), but with the reduced

sample of men for whom Δ is available. Column 5b uses Δ as the dependent variable, and
components of

are included to capture differences in earnings trends associated with 1910

observables. Estimates of

are somewhat smaller than in column 5a, by between 4 and 6 log

points, but the average difference in real earnings score gains from 1910 to 1930 is still 63 log
points in favor of the migrants (rows 2 and 4, column 5b).
From every econometric perspective—whether identification comes from comparisons
across the whole sample, or is restricted to within-county, within-household, or within-individual
differences —inter-regional migration was associated with large increases in measures of
nominal and real earnings scores. We discuss the implications of these gains for changes in
black-white inequality in Section 5.

C. Further Analysis of Unobservables and Potential Omitted Variable Bias
Because an extensive set of observable characteristics and fixed effects account for a
relatively small share of the earnings difference between migrants and non-migrants in Table 7,
we believe that the scope for unobservables to account for the difference is also small. Altonji,
Elder, and Taber (2005) establish a more formal procedure for assessing the plausibility that
omitted variables may account for differences in outcomes. In essence, the difference in
estimates of τ1 from a regression specification without controls for observables and a
specification with controls provides quantitative perspective on how strong selection on
unobservables would have to be, relative to selection on observables, to generate enough bias to
19

result in an OLS estimate of τ1 equal to that observed in column 2 if the null hypothesis (

0)

were actually true. We provide the details of the argument and calculations in Appendix B.
The key result is that selection on unobservables would have to be between 52 and 72
times as strong as selection on observables to fully account for the estimated return to migration.
Further, the true return to migration will be below 50 log points only if the ratio of selection on
unobservables to observables is greater than 12:1. Given the rich set of observable background
characteristics in the linked dataset, it therefore seems highly unlikely that selection on
unobservables can account for a large share of the estimated returns to migration in Table 7.
An additional concern relates to selection on unobservables and the nature of the earnings
score assignments. Recall that after controlling for observables (Table 4, column 3), there is
little evidence of selection into the migrant stream among workers observed in 1910 (based on
earnings in their 1910 occupation or industry). It is possible, however, that we miss selection
from within job-specific cells.34 Because score assignments are based on the earnings of black
men observed in the 1940 or 1960 microdata, such selection could lead us to misinterpret the
earnings advantage of migrants relative to non-migrants. In this scenario, the estimated returns
to migration would exhibit an upward bias even in a difference-in-difference framework akin to
columns 5a and 5b of Table 7.
To develop an approach in which the assigned scores do not depend on the observed
earnings of black migrants, we proceeded in two steps. First, we assigned scores to the black
migrants that are equal to those of southern blacks in the same industry or occupation,
conditional on employment status. In measuring the migrants’ gains, this isolates the role of
industry/occupation upgrades while omitting North-South differences in wage levels. Next, we
adjust the migrants’ scores upward according to the regional wage premium found among whites
within industry/occupation and employment status cells (based on 1940 or 1960 microdata).
This incorporates a regional wage premium that is insulated from unobserved selection of black
migrants, though it also omits any black-specific northern wage premium within job categories
(e.g., from entering a less discriminatory market). The results are comparable in magnitude to

34

As mentioned in the previous section, we have run simple regressions of observables in 1910 on
migrant status and job-specific fixed effects, to see whether there are systematic differences between nonmigrants and migrants within pre-World War I job categories. For 1910 literacy, home ownership,
employment status, and large-city residence, we find no statistically significant differences.
20

our baseline results, typically about 80 percent as large as those estimated in Table 7. These are
reported in the Supplemental Appendix, Section 6.

5. The Great Migration’s Contribution to African Americans’ Relative Economic Status
An important corollary of the finding that the migrants’ gains were large is that the
opportunities afforded by the Great Migration may have been a central avenue for overall black
economic advances in this period. To date, economists have focused primarily on two periods in
which the black-white income gap narrowed rapidly—the 1940s and 1965 to 1975.35 In the
1940s, it appears that inter-regional migration played a positive but secondary role in blacks’
relative gains (Maloney 1994, Margo 1995), and it played only a minor role after 1964 (Donohue
and Heckman 1991), by which time migration had slowed considerably. Prior to the 1940s,
where our paper focuses, the story is comparatively uncharted.
We are constrained here, as elsewhere, by the lack of direct, micro-level information on
workers’ earnings in this period. Consequently, our insights are limited to changes that are
associated with relative improvements in job-specific and place-specific earnings scores. This
may lead us to understate the change in blacks’ relative status after 1910 because we cannot
observe within-cell racial convergence in earnings, where a cell is defined by industry, region,
and employment status, or across-cell compression of the earnings structure.36
We quantify the Great Migration’s role in raising the national average black-white
earnings ratio by combining the key results from the previous section’s analysis of the linked
dataset (i.e., the magnitude of the migrants’ gains) with information from the full IPUMS crosssectional datasets for 1910 and 1930. Because we are interested in the national black-white
earnings ratio, we need nationally representative datasets for both black and white men, hence
our reliance on the IPUMS cross-sections. The cross-sectional data cover a broader sample of
men than our linked dataset, but of course they are not as rich in terms of background
characteristics.

35

See Freeman (1973), Smith and Welch (1989), Donohue and Heckman (1991), Maloney (1994), Margo
(1995), Chay (1998), and Bailey and Collins (2006).
36
This is in the spirit of Smith (1984), but our approach allows the index to reflect changes in the
distribution of workers across regions and is based on pre-World War II earnings levels. Smith estimates
roughly similar ratios using the 1970 income distribution, which he allows to vary across occupation and
race, but not across region. His index rises from 0.455 to 0.479 from 1910 to 1930.
21

The first step is to estimate the baseline change in the black-white earnings score ratio
between 1910 and 1930, following the methods described above and in Appendix A to assign
earnings on the basis of industry, region of residence, region of birth, employment status, and
race. In this framework, as emphasized above, changes in relative earnings scores are driven
chiefly by changes in industry of employment and region of residence. This abstracts from black
migration’s potential general equilibrium effects, which we believe were small in comparison to
the direct effects on blacks’ earnings.37 In the absence of general equilibrium effects, the full
impact of the Great Migration on the black-white earnings gap would have operated through the
returns to inter-regional migration for black migrants.
We estimate that the black-white real earnings score ratio among men ages 20 to 60 and
in the labor force, increased from 0.44 to 0.47 from 1910 to 1930.38 What portion of this change
is attributable to the Great Migration of African Americans? To answer this, we estimate a
counterfactual black-white earnings ratio in which the gains from migration are stripped away
from black men who migrated from the South between 1910 and 1930. There are two main
challenges in making this calculation—one must have a tenable estimate of the gains from
migration for this group of migrants, which we take from the previous section’s results, and one
must have an estimate of the share of southern-born black men residing in the Non-South who
departed between 1910 and 1930. (Stripping the gains from migration from all migrants in 1930,
including those who left the South before 1910, would overstate the role of the Great Migration
per se in driving black-white convergence after 1910.)
Equation 3 describes the counterfactual estimate of black earnings in 1930:

37

Our expectation is that the Great Migration tended to raise black wages in the South and lower black
wages in the North. This would have offsetting effects in the numerator of the overall black-white
income ratio in 1930. For empirical perspective, Boustan (2009) estimates that from 1940 and 1970,
when the volume of black migration was even higher than from 1910 to 1930, migration lowered black
wages in the North by 7 percent and had no effect on white wages. There is no comparable estimate for
wage effects in the South.
38
This gain might seem modest relative to the changes witnessed in the 1940s, when the black-white ratio
increased by about 13 percentage points (Maloney 1994, p. 358; Smith and Welch 1989, p. 522). The
1940s were a truly extraordinary decade of economic and geographic mobility as well as wage
compression.
22

(3)

1

where

is average earnings,

,

1

,

,

1

,

,

is the share of non-migrant black men (age 20-60 in 1930),

the share of migrants who moved between 1910 and 1930, and
migrants’ earnings scores by the average migration effect (e.g.,

is

scales the post-1910
.

1.9), based on the

coefficient from the previous section’s log earnings regressions. In this equation, “migrants” are
southern-born blacks who reside outside the South in 1930; “non-migrants” are all other blacks.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to know from the 1930 cross-section when men moved
from the South—the data reveal only birthplace and place of residence. We therefore estimate μ
by following the geographic distribution of the southern-born black male birth cohorts that were
age 0 to 40 in 1910 and 20 to 60 in 1930, based on full counts of census manuscript data. The
change in the number of men from these cohorts who reside outside the South between 1910 and
1930, with an adjustment for mortality between 1910 and 1930, reflects inter-regional migration
in that period.39 Expressed relative to the stock of such men in 1930, this provides a measure of
.
Our best estimates of the key parameters are:

0.81 and

0.74. With estimates of

falling in the range of 0.6 and 0.7 in the real earnings regressions (Panel A of Table 7),
equation 3 implies that in the absence of the Great Migration, the counterfactual black-white real
earnings score ratio would have been between 0.42 and 0.43 in 1930. This is 4 to 5 percentage
points lower than the actual ratio (0.47) and slightly lower than the 1910 ratio (0.44), suggesting
that blacks might have lost ground relative to whites were it not for the opportunities afforded by
migration from the South. This counterfactual relative decline seems plausible given that white
workers were rapidly urbanizing and acquiring high-school degrees in this period (Goldin 1998).
Blacks in these birth cohorts were likely falling behind native-born whites in educational
attainment (Collins and Margo 2006) and continued to be shut out of most manufacturing
39

In 1930, we observe the stock of migrants, age 20 to 60, but not the breakdown between those who
arrived before 1910 and those who arrived afterwards. We can observe the stock of migrants from the
same birth cohorts in 1910. Assuming this “early migrant” stock experienced mortality at the same rate
as others in the cohort gives us an estimate of the surviving stock of early migrants, which we subtract
from the total stock of migrants observed in 1930 to estimate the number of 1910-30 migrants. The
mortality rate is calculated using the full count of southern-born black men in the relevant birth cohorts
from Ancestry.com.
23

opportunities in the South (Myrdal 1944), as well as most lines of clerical, sales, and professional
work. Against these trends, regional migration appears to have been a powerful countervailing
force for black economic advance in the early 20th century. Even if the true overall black-white
earnings ratio increased by more than the score-based approach suggests, the contribution
associated with migration would still register as historically and quantitatively significant.

6. Conclusions
The pitfalls of answering questions about migration from cross-sectional datasets have
been pointed out many times, but large, representative, panel datasets that span both the origins
and destinations of migrants are scarce. We assembled a new dataset that links African
American males between the 1910 and 1930 census manuscripts, spanning the first two decades
of the Great Migration. We use the dataset to answer fundamental questions about selection into
migration, the size of the migrants’ gains, and the contribution of the Great Migration to blackwhite income convergence.
We find some evidence of positive selection into migration. Although it is difficult with
existing data to pin down regional differences in the returns to education in this period, if we take
the estimated returns to literacy in Collins and Margo (2006) at face value, then the pattern of
black migration is not consistent with a simple interpretation of the Roy model, in which
relatively low returns to education in the North would tend to lead to negatively selected
migrants. A richer model, in which better-educated blacks placed a higher value on northern
amenities (Margo 1990, Vigdor 2002), in which the poorest southerners were discouraged by
fixed migration costs (Chiquiar and Hanson 2005), or in which returns to ability (apart from
education) were higher for blacks in the North would be consistent with the weakly positive
selection that we observe.40
Even so, a first-order characterization of the Great Migration would emphasize how
widespread it was—across rural and urban origins, across literate and illiterate men, and across
pre-migration occupational categories. The breadth of the movement is more impressive to us
than the pre-existing differences between those who chose to migrate and those who chose to
40

Grogger and Hanson (2011) also show that within a Roy model framework, changing the functional
form of utility from logarithmic to linear can result in positive selection from low to high-income areas
even when traditionally-measured returns to skill are relatively high in the home region.
24

stay in the South. This is consistent with the sharp demand-side forces that initiated the
migration, which were not specific to skilled workers, and the widespread fall in the cost of
migration once networks were established. Unlike modern flows of international migrants to
high-wage regions, the Great Migration was not distorted by policies that disproportionately
discouraged less-skilled workers, either implicitly (e.g., by adding to the fixed costs) or explicitly
(e.g., by selecting migrants based on education or occupation).
Every approach we take to measuring the migrants’ gains indicates that they were large
on average. This is true across a variety of econometric specifications, and it remains true after
we adjust for cost-of-living differences. Given the empirical results, it seems implausible that
omitted variables could account for a large share of the observed difference in earnings score
between migrants and non-migrants. The high volume of black migration in this period is
certainly consistent with the existence of significant economic returns to migration. For
comparison, the gains we estimate are similar to those estimated by Abramitzky, Boustan, and
Eriksson (2012) for late 19th century European immigrants (around 60 log points), but are likely
smaller on average than those earned by late 20th century Mexican immigrants (Hanson 2006).
Although it may seem surprising that such large gains could exist within a country, the facts of
relative southern poverty, especially southern black poverty, and limited regional convergence
prior to World War II are well-established. In this context, new techniques for linking census
records, turning cross-sections into panels, can shed light on the emergence of better integrated
labor markets in the United States.
Our best estimates suggest that the Great Migration was a key force in driving blackwhite convergence in economic status in the early 20th century, when regional income gaps were
comparatively large and when black economic mobility in the South was severely circumscribed.
This is in contrast to later periods when migration made a more modest contribution to blackwhite convergence, especially after 1964. It is important to acknowledge that what awaited the
early migrants was not a “Promised Land.” The work available to migrants was often drudgery,
discrimination was common, and new evidence (Black et al. 2011) suggests that the migrants
may have paid a price in terms of long-term health outcomes. Nonetheless, for the first waves of
those who left the South, the gains we observe were a real and significant step away from
slavery’s legacy of poverty.

25

APPENDIX A: DATA APPENDIX

A1.Occupation Codes and Industry Codes
The data for 1930 are transcribed from the hand-written manuscripts of the Census of
Population, including string variables for occupation and industry and a four-digit
occupation/industry code that is unique to the 1930 Census. There is not a precise, 1-to-1
crosswalk between the 1930 occupation/industry codes and the 1950 occupation and industry
codes that are fundamental to the IPUMS microdata and embedded in our data for 1910.
Creating variables that correspond to the 1950-based occupation and industry classification
scheme helps us make consistent comparisons of the 1910 and 1930 outcomes, and will facilitate
use by other researchers because this classification scheme is so common. Hereafter, we use
“occ1950” and “ind1950” to refer to the 1950 classification codes.
We made a number of passes through the dataset to establish and then refine the
assignment of occ1950 and ind1950 codes. First, the 1930 IPUMS dataset includes both the
1950 and 1930-based classification codes, as well as the 1930 strings for occupation and
industry. This gives us a starting point for assigning occ1950 and ind1950 in a manner that is
consistent with the IPUMS data. By tabulating the 1930-based codes and the occupation and
industry text strings, we could see whether the overwhelming majority of cases fell into a single
occ1950 or ind1950 code. In many cases, there is a close correspondence, which was then
applied to the assignments of occ1950 and ind1950 for the linked dataset.
For cases where the 1930-based codes and strings were less clearly concentrated in
specific occ1950 or ind1950 codes in the IPUMS sample, we took two additional approaches to
making assignments. A website constructed by Morse, Weintraub, and Kehs
(http://stevemorse.org/census/ocodes.htm; accessed 2012), provides descriptions of the unique
four-digit 1930-based coding scheme. In some cases, reading these descriptions and checking
them against the descriptions for the 1950-based coding scheme (provided on the IPUMS
website: http://usa.ipums.org/usa/; accessed 2012) allowed us to make occ1950 and ind1950
assignments. In other cases, simply reading the 1930 occupation and industry strings and
checking them against the descriptions for the 1950-based coding scheme allowed us to make or
refine the assignments.
The steps above provide the main basis for our assignments of occ1950 and ind1950, but
we (and research assistants) also visually checked each observation’s combination of occupation
string, industry string, occ1950 code, ind1950 code, and 1930-based code. When we found
anomalies, we edited our algorithm to fix the assignment. For instance, in cases where we relied
on the occupation or industry string to assign the occ1950 or ind1950 code, it is sometimes the
case that the string includes a misspelling, an extra space, or a slight variation in description
relative to our first pass (e.g., “grocer”, “groceries”, “grocery” or “blacksmith”, “black smith” or
“Blacksmith”).
Finally, in a relatively small number of cases, we have a 1930-based code but no strings,
or vice versa, or perhaps one string field is filled in but the other is not. When possible, we
assigned occ1950 and/or ind1950 on a case by case basis with the information at hand. For
instance, a case with “farmer” listed as “occupation” but missing an industry string would
typically be assigned to the ind1950 code for “agriculture.”
A2.Earnings Score Estimates
Once the occ1950 and ind1950 codes are in place, it is possible to assign annual earnings
levels to each observation. The IPUMS includes a variable called “occscore” which assigns
26

annual earnings levels to occupations based on the 1950 median earnings of all workers in that
specific occupation category. Our approach is similar in spirit, but attempts to assign income
levels that are specific to southern-born black men and vary by region. Moreover, because we
also observe employment status in 1930, we can allow earnings assignments to vary on this
basis.41
The first set of annual earnings assignments are based on fairly broad industry-level data
from 1928. These data are reported in Historical Statistics of the United States (Margo 1996, p.
2-273) and were originally compiled by Lebergott (1964, pp. 525-527). These industries are
mapped as closely as possible to the corresponding industries based on the ind1950 codes,
yielding 18 industry categories.42 Because there is considerable scope for differences between
the earnings of black men and the “full time equivalent earnings” of all workers (from Lebergott
1964), we have made black-specific adjustments to the Lebergott data as follows. Using the
1940 IPUMS microdata, we calculated the mean earnings of southern-born black men, age 1865, in each industry/region/employment-status cell (
). The sample includes wage and salary
workers who earned more than $0 in the previous year and were in the labor force at the time of
the census. In this case, “region” pertains to South or Non-South residence (reflecting
migration), and “employment status” pertains to employed or unemployed. For each cell, we
divide this black-specific earnings figure (
) by the average for all wage and salary workers
with positive earnings, age 18-65, who worked for the full year (48 weeks or more) in industry i
( ). Then, for each observation in the linked dataset, the ratio (
/ ) is multiplied by the
annual earnings by industry from Lebergott to estimate the annual earnings of southern-born
black men by industry, region of residence, and employment status.43
We make one substantial adjustment to the base Lebergott (1964) data. Following
Lebergott’s description of sources and replicating his earnings estimate for agriculture, it is clear
that his figure pertains to hired labor. Using the same sources (USDA 1957), we calculated an

41

This flexibility (by employment status) may be useful to the extent that unemployment is more or less
prevalent in 1930 than in 1940 or 1960, the years that supply microdata on the previous year’s earnings
by job, location, and employment status category.
42
In some instances, the coverage from Lebergott is not complete, and we make minor adjustments to fill
in gaps. For example, Lebergott does not have earnings for those in the “business and repair services”
category, but the 1940 IPUMS data suggest that those in business and repair services had nearly the same
average earnings as those in professional services (which is available from Lebergott). Industry-level
earnings can be assigned accordingly. Likewise, Lebergott does not have a separate “entertainment and
recreation” category, but the IPUMS data show that entertainment and recreation workers earned about
1.17 times more than those in the wholesale or retail trade category (which is available from Lebergott).
Again, earnings can be assigned accordingly.
43
Not surprisingly, the ratio (
/ ) is almost always less than 1—black men earn less than the national
average in each industry. An exception is male migrants employed in household service because the
denominator includes a large number of southern black female domestic servants. In cells where there are
few (less than 10) available observations in the 1940 IPUMS sample, we assign ratios from a collection of
broader but similar industry categories. This is most commonly an issue for “unemployed” cells since a
small share of black men were unemployed. For example, the most common substitution is made for
unemployed men who last worked in specific non-personal-service industries (e.g., entertainment,
medical, legal services, education), where we use an earnings ratio from pooling observations from such
industries together (e.g., pooling workers from communications/utilities, entertainment/recreation,
medical/hospital, legal, education, religious/non-profit, and government industries).
27

average earnings figure that also includes the net income of farmers in 1928. This raises the base
assignment of income for those in agriculture, including a significant share of non-migrants.
To construct a second and independent set of earnings estimates, we started with the
comparatively large 1960 IPUMS dataset. The 1960 dataset has the advantage of reporting both
wage and self-employment income in the previous year for a large number of southern-born
black men. This allows us to use three-digit occupation codes and observe self-employed
farmers. After sorting the men (age 18 to 65, in the labor force, worked at least 1 week in the
previous year) into detailed cells defined by four region of residence categories (Northeast,
Midwest, South, and West) and three-digit occupation codes, we collapsed the data and retained
the mean value of earnings within each cell. In cases where there were less than 10 observations
in the cell, we moved to broader region-of-residence groupings (South and Non-South) to
estimate median earnings. If there were still less than 10 observations, we moved to broader
occupational groupings (basically one-digit of detail), while returning to the original four regionof-residence distinctions.
Again, this provides a basis for the earnings score assignment that is completely
independent from the industry-based assignments described above. The disadvantage is that
between 1930 and 1960, the South began convergence on the Non-South in terms of income
(Mitchener and McLean 1999), and the overall wage distribution compressed in the 1940s
(Goldin and Margo 1992). So, this approach may tend to underestimate the earnings differences
between migrants and non-migrants circa 1930.
A3. Cost of Living Adjustments
Williamson and Lindert (1980) provide one basis for adjusting nominal earnings for
geographic differences in the cost of living circa 1930. Their data are reported at the state level
and are built up from city-level information located in Stecker (1937). Williamson and Lindert
essentially create a weighted average of cost-of-living at the state level by adjusting Stecker’s
city-based figures according to the share of the labor force in agriculture in each state and an
estimate of the difference in price levels between rural and urban areas. This adjustment
incorporates Koffsky’s (1949) estimate of the difference between farm and city price levels in
1941. Higher shares working in non-agricultural jobs imply more weight on the city-based price
levels.
The approach we favor works with the same underlying price index data, but it stays
closer to Stecker’s city-specific data when possible. This allows the COL measure to correspond
more closely to the black population distribution (predominantly urban), whereas the original
Williamson and Lindert estimates pertain to the whole population of each state. First, we assign
Stecker’s city-specific values to those living in the cities she covered (e.g., this fixes Chicago
relative to Birmingham). Then, for residents of cities not covered by Stecker but with at least
25,000 residents, we assign values that are equal to the black population-weighted average for
Stecker-covered cities in the same state (e.g., this assigns Montgomery the average cost-of-living
of Birmingham and Mobile). Then, we assign values to those in places with less than 25,000
residents by applying the same “Koffsky adjustment” factor as Williamson and Lindert—this
scales down Stecker’s city-based values for that state by a factor of 1.205. In a few states,
Stecker covers no cities, the most important of which for our purposes is Mississippi, where we
use Alabama’s data as a substitute.
We attach one significant caveat to these estimates. Stecker’s figures are not specific to
African Americans, and it is possible that black city dwellers faced a higher cost of living than
28

white city dwellers, arguably due to discrimination and residential segregation. In this case, the
cost-of-living adjustments may be too small and real wages may appear too large. On the other
hand, many blacks in northern cities had access to goods, services, and amenities that were
unavailable in the rural South (e.g., running water, urban entertainment, political rights), which is
not captured in the COL differences. The Supplemental Appendix presents results calculated
using the COL adjustments based on Williamson and Lindert (1980).
APPENDIX B: ASSESSING THE PLAUSIBILITY THAT OMITTED VARIABLE BIAS ACCOUNTS FOR
THE ESTIMATED GAINS FROM MIGRATION
We follow the structure of Bellows and Miguel (2009), who build on the work of Altonji,
Elder, and Taber (2005), to assess the impact of omitted variable bias in a linear OLS
framework. Suppose earnings of African Americans in 1930 are determined by the following
equation:
(B1)

,

where represents earnings, ,
1 if the individual resides in the north in 1930 and is a
vector of individual characteristics. The coefficient of interest, , is measured and reported in
Table 6. However, when components of are unobserved, suffers from standard omitted
variables bias and
,
,

where
is the OLS estimate of with no controls. Suppose, then, that
,
observable components and an unobservable component such that

consists of

.
Then, the earnings equation can be written as
(B2)

,

where only

,

and

are observable. Now, the OLS estimate of τ will be biased as follows:
,
,

where

,

is the OLS estimate of

when controls (

Then,

are included in the estimation.
,

,

,

29

Setting τ =0, the ratio of covariances can be written as:
,

,
,

,

,

We solve for the left-hand side using the estimates for without controls (Column 1 of Table 6)
and with controls for observable characteristics (Column 2 of Table 6). The range of values
corresponding to the four rows of Table 6 is [51.6,72.4].
As a result, the amount of selection on unobservables (the covariance between migration
status and above) would need to be 52 to 72 times as great as the amount of selection on
observables (the covariance between migration status and τ X) to satisfy the null hypothesis
τ =0. We note that Altonji, Elder, and Taber (2005) are skeptical of unobservable/observable
selection ratios equal to 3.55 while Bellows and Miguel (2009) are skeptical of ratios ranging
from 5 to 17.
It seems highly unlikely, then, that selection on unobservables is masking a return to
migration equal to 0. But our estimates for
may still be too high if
,
0. In
the table below, we estimate the “true” return to migration, , under various assumptions about
the ratio of
, to Cov M
, τ X . For simplicity, we use row 4 of Table 7 where
earnings are estimated using the 1960-based method and adjusted for cost-of-living increases.
Table B1: Relationship between

and the ratio of variances

Ratio of Variances:
,
,
0
1
5
15
25
50
51.62

“True” value of

0.671
0.658
0.606
0.476
0.346
0.021
0.000
,

If there is no selection on unobservables (

,

0), then the true value of

is 0.671 as

reported in Table 7, column 2. If selection on unobservables and observables are equivalent, i.e.,
,
1, is reduced by 2.3 log points to 0.658. Only if the ratio of selection on
,τ

unobservables to selection on observables rises above 15 does the model predict a return to
migration below 50 log points. Again, we conclude that the returns to inter-regional migration
were large and our estimates are unlikely to be biased by selection on unobserved characteristics.

30

References
Abramitzky, Ran, Leah Platt Boustan, and Katherine Eriksson. 2012. “Europe’s Tired, Poor, Huddled
Masses: Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration.” American Economic
Review 102, 5: 1832-1856.
Altonji, Joseph G., Todd E. Elder and Christopher R. Taber. 2005. “Selection on Observed and
Unobserved Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools.” Journal of Political
Economy 113, 1: 151-184.
Bailey, Martha J. and William J. Collins. 2006. “The Wage Gains of African-American Women in
the 1940s.” Journal of Economic History 66, 3: 737-777.
Bellows, John and Edward Miguel. 2009. “War and Local Collective Action in Sierra Leone.”
Journal of Public Economics 93: 1144-1157.
Black, Dan A., Seth G. Sanders, Evan J. Taylor, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2011. “The Impact of the
Great Migration on Mortality of African-Americans: Evidence from the Deep South.” Working
paper.
Blanchflower, David G., Jumana Saleheen, and Chris Shadforth. 2007. “The Impact of Recent
Migration from Eastern Europe on the UK Economy.” IZA Discussion Paper 2615: Bonn, Germany.
Bodnar, John, Roger Simon, and Michael P. Weber. 1982. Lives of Their Own: Blacks, Italians, and
Poles in Pittsburgh, 1900-1960. Urbana-Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Borjas, George. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American Economic Review
77, 4: 531-553.
Boustan, Leah Platt. 2009. “Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migration and Racial Wage
Convergence in the North, 1940-1970.” Journal of Economic History 69,3: 755-782.
Carrington, William J., Enrica Detragiache, and Tara Vishwanath. 1996. “Migration with
Endogenous Moving Costs.” American Economic Review 86, 4: 909-930.
Chay, Kenneth Y. 1998. “The Impact of Federal Civil Rights Policy on Black Economic Progress:
Evidence from the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 51, 4: 608-632.
Chay, Kenneth, and Kaivan Munshi. 2012. “Black Networks after Emancipation: Evidence from
Recronstruction and the Great Migration.” Unpublished working paper.
Chiquiar, Daniel, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2005. “International Migration, Self-Selection, and the
Distribution of Wages: Evidence from Mexico and the United States.” Journal of Political Economy
113, 2: 239-281.
Clemens, Michael. 2011. “Economics and Emigration: Trillion-Dollar Bills on the Sidewalk?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 25, 3: 83-106.
31

Collins, William J. 1997. “When the Tide Turned: Immigration and the Delay of the Great Black
Migration.” Journal of Economic History 57, 3: 607-632.
Collins, William J. 2000. “African-American Economic Mobility in the 1940s: A Portrait from the
Palmer Survey.” Journal of Economic History 60, 3: 756-781.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2006. “Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in
Schooling in the United States.” In Handbook of the Economics of Education: Volume 1, edited by E.
Hanushek and F. Welch. New York: North-Holland: 107-154.
Doetsch, Ethan. 2011. “Selection and Success during the Great Migration: New Evidence on the
Roles of Race, Urban Origins, and Skills from 1890-1930.” Unpublished working paper.
Donohue, John J. (III) and James Heckman. 1991. “Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The Impact
of Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks.” Journal of Economic Literature, 29, 4:
1603-1643.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1960. “Interregional Differences in Per Capita Income, Population, and Total
Income, 1840-1950.” In Trends in the American Economy in the Nineteenth Century. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press: 73-140.
Eichenlaub, Suzanne C., Stewart E. Tolnay, and J. Trent Alexander. 2010. “Moving Out but Not Up:
Economic Outcomes in the Great Migration.” American Sociological Review 75(1):101-125.
Eldridge, Hope T., and Dorothy Swaine Thomas. 1964. Population Redistribution and Economic
Growth, United States, 1870-1950, Vol. 3: Demographic Analyses and Interrelations. Philadelphia:
American Philosophical Society.
Foote, Christopher L., Warren C. Whatley, and Gavin Wright. 2003. “Arbitraging a Discriminatory
Labor Market: Black Workers at the Ford Motor Company, 1918-1947.” Journal of Labor
Economics 21, 3: 493-532.
Freeman, Richard B. 1973. “Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans, 1948-72.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 4,1: 67-132.
Gill, Flora. 1979. Economics and the Black Exodus : An Analysis of Negro Emigration from the
Southern United States, 1910-70. New York: Garland Publishing.
Goldin, Claudia. 1998. “America's Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of
Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century.” Journal of Economic History 58, 2: 345-74.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in the United
States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, 1: 1-34.

Gottlieb, Peter. 1987. Making Their Own Way: Southern Blacks' Migration to Pittsburgh, 1916-1930.
Chicago: University of Illinois Press.

32

Grogger, Jeffrey and Gordon H. Hanson. 2011. “Income Maximization and the Selection and Sorting
of International Migrants.” Journal of Development Economics 95, 1: 42-57.
Haines, Michael R. and Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research. 2010.
Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States, 1790-2002 [computer file].
ICPSR02896-v3. Ann Arbor, MI: ICPSR [distributor].
Hanson, Gordon H. 2006. “Illegal Migration from Mexico to the United States.” Journal of
Economic Literature 44, 4: 869-924.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration: Causes and
Economic Impact. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2003. “Demographic and Economic Pressure on
Emigration out of Africa.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 105, 3: 465-486.
Higgs, Robert. 1976. “The Boll Weevil, the Cotton Economy, and Black Migration 1910-1930.”
Agricultural History 50, 2: 335-50.
Higgs, Robert. 1982. “Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War I.”
American Economic Review 72, 4: 725-737.
Koffsky, Nathan. 1949. “Part II: Farm and Urban Purchasing Power.” In Studies in Income and
Wealth, Volume 11, pp. 151-220. New York, NY: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kousser, J. Morgan. 1974. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the
Establishment of the One-party South, 1880-1910. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Lebergott, Stanley. 1964. Manpower in Economic Growth: the American Record Since 1800. New
York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Lemann, Nicholas. 1991. The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed
America. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.
Lewis, Edward E. 1931. The Mobility of the Negro: A Study in the American Labor Supply. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Lieberson, Stanely. 1978. “A Reconsideration of the Income Differences Found between Migrants
and Northern-born Blacks.” American Journal of Sociology 83, 4: 940-966.
Logan, Trevon D. 2009. “Health, Human Capital, and African-American Migration before 1910.”
Explorations in Economic History 46, 2: 169-185.
Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie. forthcoming. “Intergenerational Occupational Mobility in Britain and
the U.S. Since 1850.” American Economic Review.
Long, Larry H. and Lynne R. Heltman. 1975. “Migration and Income Differences between Black and
White Men in the North.” American Journal of Sociology 80, 6: 1391-1409.
33

Maloney, Thomas N. 1994. “Wage Compression and Wage Inequality between Black and White
Males in the United States, 1940-1960.” Journal of Economic History 54, 2: 358-381.
Maloney, Thomas N. 2001. “Migration and Economic Opportunity in the 1910s: New Evidence on
African-American Occupational Mobility in the North.” Explorations in Economic History 38, 1:
147-165.
Margo, Robert A. 1988. “Schooling and the Great Migration.” NBER Working Paper 2697.
Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South 1880-1950: An Economic History.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Margo, Robert A. 1995. “Explaining Black-White Wage Convergence, 1940-1950.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review 48, 3: 470-481.
Margo, Robert A. 1996. “Wages.” In Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition,
edited by Susan B. Carter et al., pp. 2-254-2-300. New York: Cambridge University Press.
McKenzie, David, John Gibson, and Steven Stillman. 2010. “How Important is Selection?
Experimental vs. Non-Experimental Measures of Income Gains from Migration.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 8, 4: 913-945.
Meyer, Stephen Grant. 2000. As Long as They Don’t Move Next Door: Segregation and Racial
Conflict in American Neighborhoods. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
Minnesota Population Center. 2011. National Historical Geographic Information System: Version
2.0 Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota.
Mitchener, Kris James and Ian W. McLean. 1999. “U.S. Regional Growth and Convergence, 18801980.” Journal of Economic History 59, 4: 1016-1042.
Moretti, Enrico. 2011. “Local Labor Markets.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4B, edited
by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, pp. 1237-1313. San Diego, CA: North Holland.
Morse, Stephen P., Joel D. Weintraub, and David R. Kehs. 2002. “Deciphering Occupation Codes
Appended to the 1930 Census in One Step.” http://stevemorse.org/census/ocodes.htm. Accessed
2012.
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy. New
York: Harper & Brothers Publishers.
Naidu, Suresh. 2010. “Recruitment Restrictions and Labor Markets: Evidence from the Postbellum
U.S. South.” Journal of Labor Economics 28, 2: 413-445.
Ransom, Roger L. and Richard Sutch. 2001 [1977]. One Kind of Freedom: The Economic
Consequences of Emancipation, Second Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political Economy 90, 6:
1257-1278.
34

Rosenbloom, Joshua L. 2002. Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: American Labor Markets
during Industrialization. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Roy, A. D. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic Papers 3, 2:
135-146.
Ruggles, Steven, J. Trent Alexander, Katie Genadek, Ronald Goeken, Matthew B. Schroeder, and
Matthew Sobek. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable
database]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Sjaastad, Larry. 1962. “The Cost and Returns of Human Migration.” Journal of Political Economy
70, 5: 80-93.
Smith, James P. 1984. “Race and Human Capital.” American Economic Review 74, 4: 685-698.
Smith, James P. and Finis R. Welch. 1989. “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal.” Journal of
Economic Literature 27, 2: 519-564.
Stecker, Margaret Loomis. 1937. Intercity Differences in Costs of Living in March 1935, 59 Cities.
Works Progress Administration, Division of Social Research, Research Monograph XII. Washington,
DC: GPO.
Sundstrom, William A. 1994. “The Color Line: Racial Norms and Discrimination in Urban Labor
Markets, 1910-1950.” Journal of Economic History 54, 2: 382-96.

Todaro, Michael P. 1969. “A Model of Labor Migration and Urban Unemployment in Less
Developed Countries.” American Economic Review 59, 1: 138-148.
Tolnay, Stewart E. 2003. “The African American ‘Great Migration’ and Beyond.” Annual Review of
Sociology 29: 209-232.
Tolnay, Stewart E. and E. M. Beck. 1995. A Festival of Violence: An Analysis of Southern Lynchings,
1882-1930. Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1957. Major Statistical Series of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture. Volumes 3 and 7. Washington, DC: GPO.
U.S. Department of Labor. 1919. Negro Migration in 1916-17. Washington, DC: GPO.
U.S. Department of Labor. 2009. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Cost of Living Division, U.S. Department of
Agriculture. Bureau of Home Economics. Economics Division, U.S. National Resources Committee.
Consumption Research Staff. Industrial Section, U.S. Central Statistical Board, and U.S. Works Progress
Administration. Study of Consumer Purchases in the United States, 1935-1936. ICPSR 08908-v3. Ann
Arbor, MI: ICPSR [distributor], 2009-06-29.

Vickery, William E. 1977. The Economics of Negro Migration, 1900-1960. New York: Arno Press.

35

Vigdor, Jacob L. 2002. “The Pursuit of Opportunity: Explaining Selective Black Migration.” Journal
of Urban Economics 51, 3: 391-417.
Whatley, Warren. 1990. “Getting a Foot in the Door: ‘Learning,’ State Dependence, and the Racial
Integration of Firms.” Journal of Economic History 50, 1: 43-66.
Wilkerson, Isabel. 2010. The Warmth of Other Suns: The Epic Story of America’s Great Migration.
New York, NY: Random House.
Williams, Heather. 2005. Self-Taught: African American Education in Slavery and Freedom. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. and Peter H. Lindert. 1980. American Inequality: A Macroeconomic History.
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Woodson, Carter G. 2002 [1918]. A Century of Negro Migration. Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
Woodward, C. Vann. 1974. The Strange Career of Jim Crow, Third Revised Edition. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wright, Gavin. 1986. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy since the Civil
War. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Wright, Gavin. 1987. “Postbellum Southern Labor Markets.” In Quantity and Quiddity: Essays in
US. Economic History, edited by Peter Kilby, 98-134. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Zhao, Yaohui. 1999. “Leaving the Countryside: Rural-to-Urban Migration Decisions in China.”
American Economic Review 89, 2: 281-28.

36

Table 1: Comparison of Linked and Full Samples, Southern Black Males, 1910
Linked Sample
Distribution of state of residence
Alabama
Arkansas
Florida
Georgia
Kentucky
Louisiana
Mississippi
North Carolina
Oklahoma
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia
West Virginia
Personal characteristics
Attending school (age 0-20)
In owner-occupied housing
Literate (age 10-20)
Literate (age 10-40)
Father is farmer (age 0-20)
1910 city population
Not in city
City pop. <=25,000
City pop. >25,000
Job Characteristics (age 21-40)
Farmer
Farm laborer
Operative
Non-agricultural laborer
Employed
Class of worker, wage or
salary employee
Age Distribution
Min Age
Max Age
Median Age
Mean Age
Std. Dev.

Full IPUMS Sample

p-Value
of Difference

9.8
5.0
4.0
13.5
3.2
8.2
13.0
8.9
1.5
10.9
5.3
9.2
6.8
0.7

10.3
4.9
3.8
13.9
3.0
8.7
12.2
8.0
1.7
10.2
5.5
9.0
7.9
1.0

0.24
0.62
0.43
0.47
0.44
0.27
0.14
0.03
0.31
0.11
0.54
0.61
0.01
0.04

36.8
22.4
62.4
65.7
63.5

36.3
23.5
62.6
65.6
62.3

0.54
0.06
0.86
0.91
0.28

74.5
16.3
9.2

73.2
17.3
9.5

0.05
0.07
0.52

36.8
18.0
7.3
29.1
93.5
61.2

32.9
18.7
7.2
29.2
95.3
63.8

0.00
0.46
0.88
0.91
0.00
0.02

0
40
16
17.0
11.2

0
40
15
16.7
11.3

0.06

Notes: The linked sample is created by taking the 1910 IPUMS sample of black men, age 0 to 40, who reside in the
South, searching for them in the 1930 census manuscripts, and transcribing information from the manuscripts. The
text contains more details on sample construction.
Sources: Ruggles et al. (2010) and linked dataset of census records described in text.

37

Table 2: Comparison of Linked and Full Samples, Southern-born Black Males in the North, 1930
Linked Sample of
Migrants

IPUMS Sample of
Migrants

p-Value
of Difference

Distribution of state of residence
Arizona
California
Connecticut
Delaware
District of Columbia
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Missouri
Nebraska
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
Ohio
Pennsylvania
Utah
Washington
Wisconsin

0.5
3.4
0.7
0.2
3.3
0.1
14.2
4.4
0.5
1.5
4.2
1.0
9.6
0.2
8.0
0.4
6.2
0.3
11.7
13.8
15.0
0.1
0.3
0.7

0.6
3.1
0.9
0.3
3.7
0.0
14.9
4.5
0.3
1.8
4.5
0.7
8.9
0.3
6.4
0.4
7.1
0.1
12.3
11.9
15.9
0.0
0.2
0.5

0.69
0.59
0.50
0.66
0.50
0.13
0.56
0.76
0.23
0.51
0.61
0.22
0.45
0.50
0.04
0.78
0.24
0.08
0.52
0.06
0.40
0.13
0.68
0.41

Personal characteristics
Mean age
In owner-occupied housing
Literate
Veteran
Urban

35.7
18.5
95.2
13.1
87.1

36.2
18.3
95.0
11.9
89.7

0.08
0.93
0.83
0.29
0.01

1.0
84.0

1.0
83.7

0.89
0.76

6.6
2.2
20.5
70.7

7.3
2.7
20.1
69.9

0.41
0.30
0.74
0.59

Job Characteristics (age 21-40)
Farmer
Employed
Occupation categories in 1930
Professional/Clerical
Farm
Crafts/Semi-Skill
Non-Ag Laborer

Notes: The IPUMS sample includes all southern-born black males observed outside of the south in the 1930 census.
The text contains more details on the paper sample construction. A small number of states (CO, ME, MT, NV, NH,
OR, RI, SD, VT, and WY) contained a small number of migrants in the IPUMS sample, but none of our matched
migrants. In each case, the percent share of the IPUMS sample was less than 1.
Sources: Ruggles et al. (2010) and the linked dataset of census records described in text.

38

Table 3: 1910 Characteristics of Males in Linked Dataset, by Subsequent Inter-regional Migration Status
Non-Migrants
(Total N=4,361)

Migrants
(Total N=1,104)

p-Value
of Difference

Personal characteristics
Attending school (age 5-20)
Literate (age 10-40)
Owner-occupied housing
Mean age in 1910
1910 city population
Not in city
City pop. <=25,000
City pop. > 25,000
Latitude (county)
Longitude (county)
Distance to Chicago or Philadelphia (min.)

47.6
65.1
21.7
17.3

51.2
68.4
25.1
15.7

0.11
0.08
0.01
0.00

75.8
15.4
8.9
33.4
86.6
578.2

69.4
19.8
10.8
34.1
84.9
510.3

0.00
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.00

Job characteristics (ages 21-40)
Farmer
Farm laborer
Operative
Non-agricultural laborer
Employed
Class of worker, wage or salary employee

38.9
18.2
7.0
27.5
93.5
58.9

26.3
16.7
9.0
37.0
93.5
72.8

0.00
0.52
0.20
0.00
0.98
0.00

Household characteristics (ages 0-20)
Parent present
Parent literate
Father is farmer
Father is farm laborer
Number of siblings in household
Place in birthorder (among those in hh)

87.4
66.9
65.0
11.8
4.7
2.9

86.5
69.6
58.2
12.0
4.7
2.9

0.55
0.18
0.00
0.94
0.75
0.74

Local characteristics
Black percent of population
Black percent of farmers
Percent of black farmers who were tenants
Percent of white farmers who were tenants
Percent of farm acres in cotton
Percent of crop value in cotton
Adult black literacy
Adult white literacy
Black school attendance (6-14)
White school attendance (6-14)

49.0
45.9
69.3
40.8
16.0
40.4
60.8
91.8
57.9
75.5

47.3
43.5
65.7
39.6
14.5
36.4
61.9
92.1
59.2
75.5

0.02
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.84

Notes: The total number of observations in each group is listed in the column heading. Some variables pertain only
to subsets of the observations. For example, literacy pertains only to those age 10 and higher. The farm laborer
category includes unpaid family workers.
Sources: Personal and household characteristics are based on the linked dataset of census records described in the
text. Most county-level characteristics are from Minnesota Pop Center, NHGIS (2004). Data on cotton acreage and
value are from Haines (2010).

39

Table 4: 1910 Log Earnings Score Differences between Subsequent Migrants and Non-Migrants
1

2

3

Panel A: Earnings score based on Lebergott, 1928
Nominal
0.126
(0.0249)
Real
0.115
(0.0238)

0.0468
(0.0198)
0.0443
(0.02)

0.0221
(0.0225)
0.0230
(0.0227)

Panel B: Earnings score based on IPUMS, 1960
Nominal
0.152
(0.0287)
Real
0.142
(0.0277)

0.0519
(0.0228)
0.0495
(0.023)

0.0160
(0.0264)
0.0169
(0.0265)

Controls for personal,
household and county
characteristics in 1910

No

Yes

Yes

1910 County fixed effects

No

No

Yes

2,079

2,079

2,079

Observations

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression of log earnings score on migrant status (=1 if inter-regional
migrant). Earnings are assigned according to the industry or occupation held in 1910, as described in the text. The
control variables differ across the columns. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the household level.
Column 1 has no control variables. Column 2 controls for age fixed effects, veteran status, a binary variable for
blank veteran status, city status, owner-occupied housing interacted with headship status, state-level log income per
capita, black percent of county population, black adult literacy rate in the county, black children’s school attendance
in the county, and percent of farm acres in cotton. All variables pertain to 1910 status except veteran status. The
specification in column 3 includes county fixed effects.
Sources: Linked dataset of census records. See the text and data appendix for description of industry and
occupation-based earnings scores, which draw on Lebergott (1964) and Ruggles et al. (2010).

40

Table 5: 1930 Summary Statistics of Men in Linked Dataset by Migrant Status
Non-Migrants
Job characteristics
Farmer
Farm laborer
Operative
Non-agricultural laborer
Employed
Class of worker, wage or
salary employee
Personal characteristics
Owner-occupied housing
Mean age
Marital status
Latitude
Longitude
Veteran status

Migrants

39.4
11.6
8.3
25.2
94.1
57.3

1.0
1.0
14.4
42.6
84.0
94.4

23.3
37.3
81.6
33.5
86.6
6.2

18.5
35.7
73.2
40.3
83.4
11.3

Notes: Data for 1930 were transcribed from the hand-written census manuscripts as described in the text. All men in
the sample resided in the South in 1910. Migration status pertains to region of residence in 1930. The farm laborer
category includes a small number of unpaid family workers.
Sources: See text.

41

Table 6: Occupational Transition Matrix for Men Working in 1910 and 1930
Distribution
in 1910

Panel A: Full Sample
(N=1,829)
Professional/Clerical
Farm
Crafts/Semi-Skill
Non-Ag Laborer/
Operative
Panel B: Non-Migrants
(N=1,548)
Professional/Clerical
Farm
Crafts/Semi-Skill
Non-Ag Laborer/
Operative
Panel C: Migrants
(N=281)
Professional/Clerical
Farm
Crafts/Semi-Skill
Non-Ag Laborer/
Operative

Professional/
Clerical in
1930

Farm in 1930

Crafts/
Semi-Skill in
1930

Non-Ag
Laborer/
Operative in
1930

1.5
56.8
8.0
33.8

0.4
1.8
0.9
1.6

0.7
33.1
2.5
13.8

0.2
4.7
1.1
4.3

0.3
17.2
3.5
14.1

1.6
59.1
7.6
31.7

0.5
1.7
0.8
1.3

0.8
38.8
3.0
15.9

0.1
4.4
1.0
3.0

0.3
14.3
2.8
11.6

0.7
43.8
10.3
45.2

0.0
2.5
1.4
3.2

0.0
1.8
0.0
2.5

0.4
6.1
1.4
11.4

0.4
33.5
7.5
28.1

Notes: The base sample for this table includes men from the linked dataset who were age 21 to 40 in 1910 and had
occupation reported in both 1910 and 1930. Each cell reports the percentage of the panel’s sample that transitioned
from one category to another between 1910 and 1930 (e.g., 17.2 percent of all workers transitioned from farming in
1910 to non-farm, unskilled labor by 1930). Within each panel, the 1930 percentages sum to 100.
Sources: See text.

42

Table 7: Log Earnings Score Differentials in 1930 by Migrant Status
1
2
Panel A: Earnings score based on Lebergott, 1928
Nominal
0.881
0.869
(0.00981)
(0.0100)
Real
0.677
0.667
(0.00950)
(0.00968)
Panel B: Earnings score based on IPUMS, 1960
Nominal
0.887
0.873
(0.0135)
(0.0138)
Real
0.684
0.671
(0.0133)
(0.0136)

3

4a

4b

5a

5b

0.860
(0.0124)
0.661
(0.0119)

0.788
(0.0795)
0.604
(0.0759)

0.789
(0.0982)
0.595
(0.0935)

0.878
(0.0177)
0.680
(0.0167)

0.832
(0.0273)
0.636
(0.0268)

0.860
(0.0166)
0.661
(0.0161)

0.788
(0.0996)
0.604
(0.0993)

0.786
(0.121)
0.592
(0.121)

0.889
(0.0249)
0.691
(0.0243)

0.829
(0.0345)
0.633
(0.0342)

Controls for personal,
household and county
characteristics in 1910
1910 County fixed effects
1910 Household fixed
effects
Differenced dependent
variable (1930-1910)

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No
No

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

No
Yes

No
No

No
No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

N

5055

5055

5055

403

403

1935

1935

Notes: Each coefficient is from a separate regression of log earnings on migrant status (=1 if inter-regional migrant). All are statistically significant at the 5
percent level. Control variables and sample sizes vary across columns. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the household-of-origin level. Column 1
has no control variables; it is simply the difference between migrants’ and non-migrants’ earnings. Column 2 controls for age fixed effects, veteran status, city
status, owner-occupied housing interacted with headship status, state-level log income per capita, black percent of county population, black adult literacy rate in
the county, black children’s school attendance in the county, and percent of farm acres in cotton. All control variables pertain to 1910 except veteran status.
Column 3 adds county fixed effects. Columns 4a and 4b are based on a subsample of brothers, and 4b includes household level fixed effects. Columns 5a and
5b are based on a subsample of men observed in the labor market in both 1910 and 1930, and the dependent variable in 5b is change in log earnings from 1910 to
1930. Cost-of-living adjustments are applied to the “real earnings” rows, based on Stecker (1937) and Koffsky (1949).
Sources: Linked dataset of census records. See the text and data appendix for description of industry and occupation-based earnings scores and cost-of-living.

43

