NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CALIFORNIA ENERGY EFFICIENCY:
LESSONS FOR THE REST OF THE WORLD, OR NOT?
Arik Levinson
Working Paper 19123
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19123

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

Thanks to Jason Bordoff for asking the question that led to this project, Joe Aldy, Matt Harding, and
James O’Brien, and Rob Stavins for helpful feedback, Jenna Kirschner for exceptionally thorough
and resourceful research assistance, and Randy Becker at the Census Bureau for help with the crosswalk
between SIC and NAICS industry codes. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Arik Levinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

California Energy Efficiency: ¸˛Lessons for the Rest of the World, or Not?
Arik Levinson
NBER Working Paper No. 19123
June 2013
JEL No. Q4
ABSTRACT
Starting in the 1970s California's residential electricity consumption per capita stopped increasing,
while other states' electricity use continued to grow steadily. Similar patterns can be seen in non-electric
energy, industry, and transportation. What accounts for California's apparent energy savings? Some
credit the strict energy efficiency standards for buildings and appliances enacted by California in the
mid-1970s. They argue that other states and countries could replicate California's gains, and that California
should build on its own success by tightening those standards further. Skeptics might point to three
long-run trends that differentiate California's electricity demand from other states: (1) shifting of the
U.S. population towards warmer climates of the South and West; (2) relatively small income elasticity
of energy demand in California's temperate climate; and (3) evolving differences between the demographics
of households in California and other states. Together, these trends account for around 90 percent of
California's apparent residential electricity savings, thus providing no lessons for other states or countries
considering adopting or tightening their energy efficiency standards.

Arik Levinson
Department of Economics ICC 571
Georgetown University
3700 O St., NW
Washington, DC 20057
and NBER
aml6@georgetown.edu

California’s Energy Efficiency: Lessons for the Rest of the World, or Not?
For the past 40 years, residential electricity consumption per capita has remained nearly
constant in California while growing by 75 percent in the rest of the United States. These starkly
different trends, plotted in Figure 1, serve as a key piece of evidence supporting the types of
government-mandated energy-efficiency policies California implemented in the 1970s. Yet the
figure by itself does not reveal the reason for California's slower electricity consumption growth
or whether those savings could be replicated by other states or countries.
Proponents of regulations give credit for California’s apparent savings to the California
Energy Commission (CEC), which set the nation's first energy efficiency standards for
appliances and buildings, and to the California Public Utility Commission (CPUC), which led
the country in decoupling utility profits from sales of electricity and natural gas (Rosenfeld and
Poskanzer, 2009). California regulators claim that "because of its energy efficiency standards
and program investments, electricity use per person in California has remained relatively stable
over the past 30 years, while nationwide electricity use has increased."1 U.S. Energy Secretary
Steven Chu attributes California’s savings to its "progressive energy policies."2 The Natural
Resources Defense Council asserts that California's policies "offer lessons to states and utilities
outside California" (Ettenson, 2011). And the World Bank devoted an entire page of its 2010
World Development Report to California and a reproduction of Figure 1 as a lesson for the rest of
the world. In this view, other states and countries could achieve California-sized energy savings
by adopting California-style regulations like those in Table 1.
There are, however, reasons to be skeptical about attributing California's apparent savings
in Figure 1 to regulatory changes. First, appliance manufacturers quickly began meeting
California's energy efficiency standards nationwide, rather than designing and producing two
sets of products. Second, other states and the federal government soon followed California's lead.
Third, California's relative energy savings, depicted by the bottom line in Figure 1, appear as a
steady trend that begins before 1970, long before the state's regulations took effect. And fourth,
the energy savings have occurred in all sectors, even those not targeted by the regulations. That
leaves open the question of what does explain the savings.
If regulations do not deserve credit for California’s declining relative electricity
consumption, what can? This paper investigates three hypotheses: population migration, climate,
and demographics.3 First: migration. Over the past several decades, the United States population
has shifted from the North and East to the South and Southwest. The Southwest has larger homes
and higher demand for air conditioning, leading to higher energy consumption. Second: climate.
1

California Public Utilities Commission and California Energy Commission, "Energy Efficiency: California's
Highest-Priority Resource" June 2006.
2
Steven Chu interviewed by Larry Klein and published in NOVA Online January 20, 2009.
(www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/tech/energy-secretary-chu.html)
3
See, for example, Tanton (2008), Clemente (2011), and Mitchell et al. (2009).

1

California's mild climate means that five decades of income and home size growth nationwide
has translated into less increased heating and cooling in California than in other states. And third:
demographics. Household sizes have shrunk less in California than in the rest of the country, so
that California households have gained on average 0.6 members relative to households in other
states. Since energy use per capita declines with household size, Californians’ electricity use has
increased less than that in other states. In this skeptical view, California's declining relative
energy consumption has been coincidental, has little to do with regulatory decisions the state
made in the 1970s, and cannot be replicated by other states or nations.
This paper is not the first to attempt to assess the cause of California's energy efficiency
gains, but the approach I take is somewhat new. I do not take the bottom-up engineering
approach typical of regulatory impact analyses conducted by government agencies proposing
efficiency standards. Engineering analyses typically disregard consumers' reactions to changes in
energy efficiency. One potentially important reaction would be to use more energy – the Jevons
paradox or "rebound effect." Standards that make appliances and buildings more energy efficient
lower the cost of energy services, which may in turn increase energy consumption and offset
some of the mandated efficiency gains. If bottom-up analyses assume that a regulation requiring
air conditioners to be 30 percent more energy efficient will result in 30 percent less energy
consumption, those analyses will overstate the energy-per-capita savings resulting from the
regulation.
Nor do I take a completely top-down approach and try to work all of the explanations into
one comprehensive model, such as a regression framework where multiple state characteristics
explain state energy consumption. Mitchell, et al. (2009), for example, discuss a regression of
per capita energy use on energy efficiency standards and other state characteristics, finding that
only 20 percent of California's per capita energy savings come from the standards. But that type
of approach is sensitive to the choice of functional form and complicated by interaction effects
among the various external factors. An increasingly less energy intensive industrial base might
drive down the relative price of electricity and increase consumer demand. An increasing share
of immigrants in the population has changed California's household size and income distribution,
with different effects on energy consumption. Costa and Kahn (2010) regress electricity
consumption on house and household characteristics for customers of a California utlity from
2000 to 2009. That approach provides an excellent characterization of California households'
current electricity consumption, but less information about how that consumption compares to
other states or has changed since the 1960s.
Instead of a bottom-up or top-down model, I take more of a piece-by-piece accounting
approach, similar to that taken by Sudarshan (2010). Taking each of the three skeptical
hypotheses in turn, I ask how much of the perceived residential electricity savings can be
explained by factors unrelated to the regulations. How much less electricity would the rest of the
country be using had the population not shifted to states with warmer climates and greater
demand for air conditioning? How much of California’s apparent savings stem from the fact that
2

nationwide income growth leads to more space-heating and cooling in states with less temperate
climates? And how much California’s savings can be explained by changes in California's
demographics – age, household size, income, etc. – relative to other states?
The question posed here, how much of California's energy savings can be explained by
coincidental trends rather than the state's regulations, takes on increasing importance as both
California and federal regulators propose tightening energy efficiency standards even further.
California's Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in
the state to 1990 levels by 2020; 18 percent of those reductions are expected to come from new,
stricter energy efficiency standards for buildings and utilities, and another 26 percent from
stricter standards for vehicles (CARB, 2008, p.17). Massachusetts's Global Warming Solutions
Act of 2008 proposes to reduce GHG emissions in that state by 27 percent below its 1990 levels;
36 percent of those gains are projected to come from energy efficiency improvements to
buildings and appliances.4 And similarly the climate bill that passed the U.S. House of
Representatives in 2009 would have required substantially increased energy efficiency from new
buildings, appliances, and vehicles.
The results of this exercise suggest that California's regulations have not been the main
cause of its electricity savings relative to the rest of the U.S. The trend began before 1973, seems
unaffected by regulatory changes, and appears in sectors not targeted by those changes.
Residential electricity shows the most dramatic apparent savings, but those gains appear almost
entirely driven by the shifting of the U.S. population to the Southwest, California's relatively
mild climate, and other demographic differences between California and other states.
Aside: Energy Savings in Other Sectors
Although residential electricity has been the focus of claims about the success of
regulatory policy, figures similar to Figure 1 drawn for other energy uses show similar patterns.
Table 2 makes this point. The top row of Table 2 displays the data for California's total energy
consumption, which was 217 Million BTU (MBTU) per capita in 2009. If California energy use
had grown at the same rate as other states in percentage terms, it would have been 269 MBTU
per capita in 2009; if California energy use had grown at the same rate in absolute terms, it
would have been 283 MBTU.5 The difference, 52 or 66 MBTU in columns (5) and (6) of Table
2, means that total energy consumption in California fell 19 or 23 percent relative to those other
states. Had the rest of the country mimicked California’s trajectory, total national energy
consumption by 2009 would have been lower by an amount sufficient to achieve the Obama

4

Massachusetts Secretary of Energy and Environmental Affairs, 2010, p. ES-6.
Since California had lower per-capita energy consumption than other states in 1963, an equal proportional increase
in California's energy use would result in a smaller absolute increase.
5

3

Administration’s goal of reducing U.S. greenhouse gas emissions to 17 percent below 2005
levels by 2020.6
Figure 2 graphs these calculations, using the data from columns (1) and (5) of Table 2.
The height of each column represents what each sector's per capita energy consumption would
have been in 2009 in California had it changed by the same percentage as in other states since
1963. The height of the solid portion of each column represents California's actual consumption
in 2009. The difference, cross-hatched in the figure, represents California's per capita savings
from each sector relative to national energy use.
Table 2 and Figure 2 make two important points. First, all sectors contributed to the
relative decline in California's energy consumption per capita. Even sectors where per capita
consumption grew substantially in California, such as transportation and commercial energy,
consumption grew faster in other states. Second, sectors with the most dramatic apparent savings
– residential and commercial electricity – account for a relatively small fraction of overall
savings because they represent a small part of states' energy budgets. In the end, how much each
sector really contributes to energy efficiency savings depends on how much of those savings
comes from energy efficiency and how much comes from other factors driving energy
consumption, including geography and climate, household demographics, industrial composition,
and transportation patterns.
In what follows I briefly discuss manufacturing and transportation, sectors with smaller
percentage savings but larger shares of states' overall energy budgets. But first I focus on the
sector featured in Figure 1 and numerous campaigns to promote mandated efficiency standards:
residential electricity.

I.

Residential Electricity: Population Shifts, Climate, and the Income Elasticity of
Heating and Cooling

Figure 1 shows that from 1963 to 2009, residential electricity consumption per capita
grew by 120 percent in California and 245 percent in other states. Skeptics of regulations as an
explanation for the difference offer three main alternatives. First, the U.S. population shifted
from the North and East to the South and West, driving up demand for air conditioning and
electricity in states other than California. Second, even if the population hadn't moved,
household incomes grew. Because California has a mild climate, the income elasticity of demand
for space heating and cooling is lower there and energy consumption grew less. In this section, I
discuss each explanation in turn. In the next section I discuss a third explanation; California

6

Energy use accounted for 87 percent of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions in 2009 (EPA, 2011, p.3-1), and 20 percent
reduction of 87 is just over 17 percent.

4

incomes shrank and household sizes grew relative to other states, and with those changes came
declines in energy consumption per capita.
Population Shifts
Since 1963 the population of the Northeast and Midwest grew by 23 percent, while the
South grew 96 percent, the West 130 percent, and the Mountain West 190 percent. This
disproportionate growth in regions with different patterns of energy use could be one reason why
California's energy consumption per capita fell behind that of other states.
The simplest way of assessing how population shifts contributed to California's apparent
energy savings is to create a version of Figure 1 that holds the populations of the other states
fixed. Figure 1 compares California's energy consumption per capita to energy consumption per
capita in all other states combined:
∑
where θt is the energy use per capita in year t in states other than California, is the total
population of the other, non-California, states, and θst represents the energy consumption per
capita of state s in year t, or θst=Est/Pst. This measure, θt , is simply the weighted average of other
states' energy use per capita, where the weights are the other states' populations. It is plotted as
the top line in Figure 1, and changes over time because of changes in various states' energy
intensities (θst) and state populations (Pst).
Instead consider holding population fixed. Compare California's energy intensity to a
weighted average of other states' individual energy consumption per capita each year, where the
weights are each state's population in 1963:
̂

∑

This measure changes over time only because energy consumption per capita changes. It
describes what would have happened had the population of the U.S. not shifted toward the
Southwest, but other states' energy consumption changed. Figure 3 plots this line for residential
electricity. By 2009 the line ̂ had grown by 234 percent, a bit less than the line plotting other
states' actual consumption, and this adjustment accounts for 15 percent of the gap between other
states' and California's consumption.
Table 3 summarizes this calculation for residential electricity and several other relevant
categories of energy use. From 1963 to 2009 other states' residential electricity consumption
grew 11.5 MBTU per capita, or 249 percent. Without migration, other states' consumption ( ̂)
would have grown 0.7 MBTU less. That difference accounts for 15 percent of California's
5

apparent 4.7 MBTU of savings as calculated from other states percentage growth over the
period, or 9 percent of California's apparent 7.7 MBTU of savings calculated from other states'
absolute growth.
For residential non-electric energy use, however, in the second row of Table 3, the
pattern is reversed. Without migration, other states' consumption per capita would have grown
7.7 MBTU per capita rather than the actual 6.4 MBTU, or 1.28 MBTU more. The U.S.
population shifted to states that use less non-electric residential energy. Rather than explaining
California's apparent non-electric energy savings documented in Table 2 and Figure 2, migration
and geography mask some of those savings.
The final column of Table 3 helps explain this difference. It reports the correlation across
all 50 states plus the District of Columbia between each jurisdiction's population growth and the
various measures of energy intensity, averaged across the time period. That correlation is 0.093
for residential electricity because population grew more in states with higher average residential
electricity consumption per capita. Hence migration helps explain 9 to 15 percent of California's
apparent savings relative to the rest of the United States. The correlation is -0.42 for residential
non-electric energy because the population grew more in states with lower average non-electric
energy consumption per capita. So migration masks 12 to 15 percent of California's savings in
this category.
The bottom panel of Table 3 presents the same calculation for commercial buildings such
as offices, hospitals, hotels, and universities. Most of this sector's energy use comes from space
heating, cooling, and lighting, and so it follows the same geographic pattern as residential
energy. Two or three percent of California's commercial buildings' electricity savings are
explained by population shifts in other states, and that is offset by a 6 or 7 percent swing in the
other direction for non-electric energy. The reason the commercial sector's population-related
swings are smaller than the residential sector's is also apparent from column (6). State
commercial energy use per capita is less strongly correlated with state population growth.
A likely explanation for these patterns is climate. Residences and commercial buildings
use electric energy for air conditioning in the Southwest and non-electric energy for space
heating in the Northeast. The population shift from Northeast to Southwest has increased demand
for residential and commercial electricity nationwide, and decreased demand for other categories
of residential and commercial energy. As a result, California's residential and commercial
electricity consumption per capita has grown more slowly than in the rest of the United States,
and other energy consumption has grown more quickly.
Population Shifts and Climate
This climate-related explanation for California's efficiency gains can be examined
separately. Line (1) of Figure 4 plots the weighted average number of heating degree days in the

6

48 contiguous U.S. states other than California, where the weights are the states' populations in
each year:
∑
where HDDs,t is the heating degree days in state s in year t.7 This calculation changes year-toyear because of both temperature changes and population changes. Line (2) uses the average
number of heating degree days for the entire period for each state:
∑ ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
where ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ is the average number of heating degree days for state s from 1960 to 2010. Its
smooth decline results from population changes alone. The average number of heating degree
days experienced by a typical non-California American has declined 10 percent, simply because
the population has shifted out of the colder Northeast and Midwest.
The bottom two lines in Figure 4 plot cooling degree days in an analogous way. The
average number of cooling degree days experienced by a typical non-California American has
increased by 19 percent, again simply because the population has shifted to warmer regions. A
similar graph for California would show heating degree days flat at 2600 per year, and cooling
degree days flat at 900 per year.8
To sum up the analysis at this point, geographic shifts in the U.S. population have
increased residential and commercial electricity demand, largely due to the increased cooling
degree days experienced by the average American outside of California. And the shifts have
decreased residential and commercial demand for non-electric energy, largely due to the
decreased number of heating degree days.
There may be, however, a second climate-related explanation for California's residential
energy savings. Even if the population had not moved disproportionately to states with different
patterns of energy use, residential energy consumption might have increased nationwide simply
because space heating and cooling are normal goods and household incomes have risen. That
trend would matter less in California, where the relatively mild climate means that income

7

A degree day is the difference between the average of the daily maximum and minimum temperatures and 65°F. A
heating degree day occurs when that average temperature is less than 65°, and a cooling degree when it is greater
than 65°.
8
California is large and has had its own share of internal population shifts. Since 1960 California's population has
migrated to less temperate but also less wealthy regions, with more heating and cooling degree days but less
electricity use per capita. If California's internal migration were added to Figure 3 and Table 3, population shifts
would explain even more of the state's apparent energy savings relative to the rest of the country.

7

elasticities of heating and cooling are smaller. California may have thus avoided some of the
increased energy consumption associated with income growth in less temperate states.
Climate and Income
To test whether California energy demand is less income elastic than other states, and
whether this is due to California's mild climate, I regress energy use on regional climate as
measured by average heating and cooling degree days, household income, and the interaction
between the two.
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅

̅̅̅̅̅̅

̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
∑

̅̅̅̅̅̅

(1)

Equation (1) cannot be estimated with the aggregate state data used in the previous
sections, because aggregate state incomes only differ across years and it is not possible to
separately identify income growth from the other trends that influence residential energy use.
Instead, I need to use household data, so that I can compare energy use by households with
different incomes, in the same year and place, and then to forecast how much energy use
increases with income, and how that increase might differ for California's mild climate. For that I
turn to the Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS). The RECS does not identify
individual states, except a few large ones including California, but does identify nine census
divisions, so in equation (1) ̅̅̅̅̅̅̅ and ̅̅̅̅̅̅ refer to the average annual HDD and CDD in
household i's census division, and δd refers to fixed effects by census division. I include
household size as the one extra demographic covariate.
Table 4 contains an estimate of equation (1). Marginal effects calculated from interaction
coefficients at the means of right-hand-side variables are at the bottom of the table. Electricity
use increases with household income at the mean levels of HDD and CDD, and electricity use
increases faster with income in hotter areas (higher CDD). The coefficient on cooling days and
its interaction with income, for example, suggests that an extra 100 cooling degree days (or 10
days of 10-degree hotter weather) is associated with an extra 680 BTUs of electricity use for a
household with the mean income, or about 4 percent.9
Table 5 reports the magnitude of these effects. Using the point estimates in Table 4, an
extra $1000 of income increases per capita electricity consumption for the average household by
11,900 BTUs in California and 50,200 BTUs in other states.10 Income growth adds less to
California's residential electricity demand than to other states because of California's mild
climate. How large is this effect? From 1963 to 2009, real mean household income in the United
States grew by more than 50 percent, from $44 thousand to $69 thousand. Applying the
predictions from Table 4 and Table 5, this would increase electricity use per capita by 959,000
9

680=100×(4.73+0.0386×53.1).
For California: 11.9=1×(-52.02 + 0.0112 × (2601 HDDs) + 0.0386 × (901 CDDs)).

10

8

BTUs in California relative to other states. Recall from Table 2 that California appears to have
saved 4.7 MBTU per capita of residential electricity relative to other states. It seems that a
significant fraction – around 20 percent – of those savings come from California's mild climate
and low income elasticity of energy consumption. This calculation is reported in the bottom row
of Table 5.
The first of the skeptical explanations is that California's apparent electricity savings
come from the particular geography of the United States combined with regional patterns of
population shifts and California's mild climate. Figure 1 suggests that since 1963 California has
saved 4.7 MBTU of residential electricity per capita relative to other states, or 36 percent. The
calculations in this section indicate that part of those savings is illusory: 15 percent of the savings
can be explained by the U.S. population shift to warmer climates that use more air conditioning
and 20 percent by the fact that income growth in California's mild climate has not led to more air
conditioning. But that leaves another 65 percent of the residential electricity savings in Figure 1
unexplained, and it does not account for the apparent savings in non-electric energy use, where
migration patterns work in the opposite direction and mask some potential energy efficiency
gains in California. For those reasons, in the next section I explore the other proffered
explanation for Figure 1: differences between the demographic changes in California and in
other U.S. states.

II.

Residential Electricity: Population and Housing Characteristics

A second hypothesis for California's apparent energy savings involves the changing
composition of California's demographics relative to other U.S. states. Table 6 documents a set
of simple descriptive statistics and their changes.11 Some of the differences between California
and other states are stark. Household incomes grew nationwide, but by 26 percent less in
California relative to other states. The number of occupants per home fell nationwide, but fell by
0.6 fewer in California.
In considering how these demographic changes might affect energy consumption and
explain California's apparent savings, we need to be careful as to which characteristics are
exogenous and not replicable elsewhere, compared with those that may be driven by policy,
either intentionally or not. For example, the number of children living in the average household
fell throughout the U.S., but fell less quickly in California. Over the past 50 years, the average
California household gained 0.23 children relative to other states' households. This change in
household size could have implications for energy consumption, but it seems unlikely that
energy regulations caused those fertility changes and implausible that states would use fertility
policies as a mechanism for energy savings. On the other hand, while house sizes have been
growing throughout the U.S., the number of rooms in the typical California home fell over the
11

Some statistics come from the decennial U.S. Census and are only available for 1960, which is why columns (1)
and (4) are labeled "1960-1963".

9

past 50 years relative to the number of rooms in homes in other states. Perhaps regulations have
been indirectly responsible for part of the slowing growth of California home sizes, and if they
have that would in principle be a mechanism that other states or countries could replicate.
Smaller homes do use less energy, but home size reduction has not been touted as an objective
by proponents of energy efficiency regulations.
Begin by singling out one important characteristic, household size, in the seventh row of
Table 6. In 1960 the average California house had 3.19 people living in it; by 2009 that had
fallen to 3.03. During the same time period in other states household sizes fell from 3.43 to 2.67.
Although household sizes fell everywhere, they fell more slowly in California. California went
from having smaller household sizes than other states in 1960 to having larger household sizes in
2009, gaining 0.6 members per household.
California's growing relative household size matters because energy use per capita
shrinks with household sizes. Examine Figure 5. While electricity use increases with the number
of people in the home, it does so at a decreasing rate. As a consequence, electricity use per
household member, or per capita, declines with household size. On average, an additional 0.6
household members in the RECS is associated with 1.9 fewer MBTUs of annual electricity use
per household member.12 Recall from Table 2 that California's apparent savings, depicted in
Figure 1, amount to 4.7 MBTUs per person. Household size alone, without accounting for any
other demographic differences between California and other states, explains 40 percent of
California's apparent savings. For non-electric energy, the household-size explanation is even
larger. An additional 0.6 household members reduces non-electric energy use by 7.0 MBTUs per
capita, or 81 percent of California's apparent savings of 8.6 MBTUs per capita.
Household size is only one of the demographic changes depicted in Table 6, and is
certainly correlated with the others. To predict how all of the combined demographic changes
combined affected residential energy use, I use the pooled 1993 through 2009 RECS to estimate
a version of equation (1) in which the dependent variable is BTU per household member, and
which includes additional demographic characteristics chosen to match those in Table 6: number
of children, number of rooms and bedrooms, an indicator for owner occupation, and indicators
for homes built pre-1950 and post-1980.
Table 7 presents results of this regression. Although the RECS contains information
about many other household and demographic characteristics, in column (2) I limit the covariates
to those available separately for California in the 1960 Census of Population and Housing, so
that I can use the results to predict energy use changes over time due to the changing relative
nature of California households. Key omitted variables include the size of the home in square
feet and details about the home's energy-using appliances. To the extent those omitted variables
are correlated with included measures such as the number of rooms in the home and the
12

Based on a regression of energy per household member on a cubic in household size (plotted in Figure 5).

10

household income, the included measures will help predict those changes as well. In other words,
in Table 7 the "rooms" variable is correlated with higher energy use partly because houses with
more rooms have more square feet of living space.
In general the coefficients in Table 7 conform to intuition. Household income increases
electricity use at the mean levels of heating and cooling degree days. Large households use less
energy per resident, and households with proportionally more kids use more energy per resident.
Homes with more total rooms or proportionally more bedrooms use more energy. Older homes
use less electricity.
In column (3) of Table 7 I add a slate of other home characteristics. The coefficients on
the number of rooms and bedrooms shrink. Owner-occupancy is associated with more energy use
in column (2), almost certainly because it is correlated with omitted home characteristics such as
size in square feet, appliance use, and whether or not the home is an apartment. When other
covariates are included in column (2) the coefficient on owner occupancy reverses becomes
negative. This makes more intuitive sense, given that rental properties' tenants typically either
don't pay their utility bills or don't choose their homes' appliances (Levinson and Neimann,
2004).
Table 8 combines the results in Table 7 with the relative changes in key household
characteristics from Table 6. Real median household income in California fell by $11,408
relative to other states over the past 50 years. At the mean heating and cooling degree days, this
would result in "savings" of 31 thousand BTUs per household member – a small amount relative
to the average electricity consumption of 16.5 million BTUs in the RECS, or relative to
California's apparent savings of 4.7 million BTUs of residential electricity per capita reported at
the top of the table.13 So California's apparent residential electricity savings are not an artifact of
its relatively slower personal income growth. If income has anything to do with California's
savings, it is because California's income growth has not translated into higher energy use the
way it has in less temperate states, as documented in the previous section.
The number of people per household in California grew by 0.6 relative to other states.
Using the coefficient in Table 7, this would result in a decline of 2509 thousand BTUs per
household member – a significant fraction of average consumption and of California's apparent
savings. In fact, this one demographic change alone explains nearly half of California's 4.7
million BTUs of apparent residential electricity savings per capita.
Together, the predicted effects of the long-term changes in household and home
characteristics account for 2.9 million BTUs of residential electricity per household member – 61
percent of California's apparent residential electricity savings. Without migration from the North
to the Southwest, without accounting for California's temperate climate, and without any energy
13

31 thousand BTUs is calculated from the coefficients on income and the interaction terms with HDD and CDD in
Table 7: 31=-$11.4× (-74.1+0.0077×4830 HDDs + 0.0316×1248 CDDs).

11

efficiency improvements, the predictions in Table 7 imply that the long-run changes in
household and home characteristics explain the majority of the apparent energy savings
documented in Table 2 and Figure 2 and promoted by pictures like Figure 1.
Putting the three parts of this together, Figure 1 looks like an artifact of changes having
nothing to do with energy efficiency. Fifteen percent of the apparent electricity changes can be
explained by the U.S. population shift to the Southwest, ignoring all of the other changing
differences between Californian's and residents of other states. Another 20 percent can be
attributed to the fact that nationwide income growth did less to increase energy demand in
California's temperate climate, again ignoring all of the other changing differences. And a
remaining 61 percent comes from a collection of demographic changes, such as California's
rising relative household sizes, ignoring changing relative climates and household incomes.
It may be tempting to add the three parts together and say that 95 percent of California's
apparent electricity savings can be explained by coincidental trends, but that would be inaccurate
because the three parts interact. The comparison group, US states other than California,
simultaneously shifted from the Northeast to the Southwest, experienced income growth
resulting in more energy use, and underwent the demographic changes detailed in Table 6. We
would like to estimate all of these effects simultaneously, to know how much each contributes to
California's apparent energy savings holding constant the other concurrent changes.
Unfortunately, no data on energy use and household characteristics have been collected
consistently back to the 1960s. At best we can use current data to estimate how much of the
current differences between California and other states energy consumption results from
observed differences in household characteristics having nothing to do with energy efficiency.
The remainder may or may not be attributable to California's energy regulations, but at least the
size of that remainder provides an upper bound on the share of the apparent energy savings that
could possibly be attributed to efficiency rules. The analytical tool for such an exercise –
decomposing differences into those explained by observed characteristics and those possibly due
to policy changes – was first described by Oaxaca (1973) and Blinder (1973).
A Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition of Residential Electricity Use in 2009
The first step is to run two separate regressions of household electricity use per capita (E)
on household characteristics (X):
(2a)
(2b)
where subscript CA denotes data for households in California and subscript O denotes data for
households in other states. The goal is to explain the difference between the mean electricity
̅
̅ . Using
consumption per capita in California and elsewhere: call that difference ̅
equations (2a) and (2b) we can decompose that difference as follows:
12

̅

(3)

The first term on the right is the part of the difference in electricity use explained by the
difference in the household characteristics (ΔX). These characteristics include income, climate,
home size, household composition, and other building features unrelated to energy efficiency.
The first term thus indicates the portion of the difference between California and other states'
energy use clearly not related to California's regulations. The second term is the part explained
by the differences in the estimated parameters ( ). This might be due to energy efficiency, or
some other unobserved characteristics of households that cause energy use to vary differently
with observed characteristics in different regions.
Column (1) of Table 9 contains an estimate of equation (2a) – energy use for California
households. Columns (2) and (3) of Table 9 contain estimates of equation (2b) – energy use for
households in other states. The only difference between columns (2) and (3) is that the third
column includes 26 regional fixed effects.14 Two particular features of the table stand out. First,
there are large differences between the coefficients (the βs) for California and for other states.
And second, adding the regional fixed effects in column (3) does not have a dramatic effect on
the βs for other states, with the obvious exception of the climate variables HDD and CDD which
are inherently regional.
Table 10 uses the coefficients in Table 9 to estimate versions of the Oaxaca-Blinder
decomposition in equation (3). The difference in 2009 electricity consumption per capita in
California and other states ( ̅ ) is 8,126 thousand BTUs. Most of that difference is due to
underlying differences in the household characteristics between the two samples (ΔX). Without
including the regional fixed effects, those observable characteristics explain 61 percent of the
difference. When regional fixed effects are included, the observable characteristics explain 88
percent. Only 12 percent is left to be explained by differences in the coefficients ( ). This
additional 12 percent includes other omitted household characteristics that are correlated with
electricity use, are correlated with other included household characteristics, and differ between
California and other states. One such variable might be energy efficiency. But at most, energy
efficiency accounts for 12 percent of the 2009 difference between residential electricity
consumption in California and other states.
In sum, the first part of this paper showed that California's relative decline in residential
energy consumption per capita from 1963 to 2009 can largely be explained by factors unrelated
to energy efficiency: the migration of the US population to hotter states; the smaller income
elasticity of demand for electricity in California's mild climate; and relative changes in
household characteristics, particularly household size. This part – the Oaxaca-Blinder
decomposition – has shown that California's absolute difference in residential energy
14

The 2009 RECS identifies 27 geographic regions – 16 large states including California and 11 clusters of smaller
states.

13

consumption per capita in 2009 can also largely be explained by household and regional
characteristics unrelated to energy efficiency. Figure 1, held up by regulators, environmental
advocacy groups, and the international development banks to demonstrate the efficacy of energy
efficiency standards for buildings and appliances, demonstrates nothing of the kind. The vast
majority of California's apparent conservation relative to the rest of the country comes from
coincidental features of the geography and demographics. They have nothing to do with energy
efficiency, are not replicable by other states or countries, and have no lessons for the rest of the
world.
To be fair, this analysis does not mean that California's regulations have not been
effective or beneficial. It simply means that figures like Figure 1 are uninformative as to those
benefits. It might be, for example, that other US states and the US government quickly followed
California's regulatory example, in which case we should not expect to find relative differences
in electricity consumption per capita except those driven by geography and demographics. Also,
as Figure 2 shows, residential electricity accounts for a relatively small part of California's
overall energy use. Other sectors also saw per capita declines in California relative to other
states. Two in particular, manufacturing and transportation, account for the majority of
California's apparent savings. The next section briefly explores each of these.

III.

Other Sectors: Manufacturing and Transportation

Although energy efficiency proponents point to residential electricity as the prime
example of California's difference from other states, California's energy consumption per capita
has been falling in every sector – residential, commercial, industrial, and transportation – and has
been falling for both electricity and non-electric energy in each of those sectors. Figures similar
to Figure 1 can be drawn for each sector and energy type, and the line depicting California
energy use per capita drops below the line for other states, though most sharply for residential
electricity. Table 2 and Figure 2 summarize what those other figures would look like. Although
residential electricity depicted in Figure 1 looks most impressive, the sector accounted for only 4
percent of California's energy consumption in 2009. Transportation and industrial energy use
accounted for 39 and 20 percent, respectively, and so even though California's energy efficiency
gains were smaller for those sectors in percentage terms, those two sectors contributed more to
California's overall energy efficiency gains. This section examines industry and transportation in
turn.
Manufacturing: Scale and Economic Composition
Skeptics have hypothesized that California's four-decade-long improvement in industrial
energy efficiency stems from the changing scale and composition of California's economy
relative to that of other U.S. states. In other words, California may be simply losing
14

manufacturing, and especially energy-intensive manufacturing, at a faster rate than other states.
One might even be concerned that the costs of complying with California regulations could be
the cause of that shift. If California's regulations succeeded in reducing the state's energy demand
by driving energy-intensive industries to relocate out-of-state or overseas, that would not be
replicable in turn by other jurisdictions, and California's regulations would not provide a model
for national or global energy conservation.
To address this, I turn to the Manufacturing Energy Consumption Survey (MECS), which
has been conducted every three to four years from 1991 to 2006 by the Energy Information
Administration. Figure 6 depicts how net electricity use has changed over that time for each 3digit North American Industrial Classification (NAICS) code.15,16 Not surprisingly, there is a
wide variation across industries in electricity use per dollar of value added, and many industries
show a large drop in electricity use. But these are national averages. The energy efficiency
advocates would expect that energy use per dollar of value added will have fallen more in
California than other states. The skeptics contend that California's manufacturing sector has
simply shrunk in size or shifted away from the most energy-intensive industries, relative to other
states.
To begin to assess those claims, Figure 7 plots the share of total manufacturing value
added, in 1963 and 2009, for both California and other states. The pattern is similar. Both
California and other states experienced large increases in petroleum and coal, chemicals, and
electronics, and decreases in transport equipment, textiles and apparel. But the scale of the
changes differ, leading to the possibility that industrial composition changes may have accounted
for some of California's gains.
To separate the technological improvements from the composition changes, I combine
the information in Figure 6 and Figure 7 to predict net electricity use in each year ( ̂ ) based on
each industry's value added in each year and the 1991 national electricity use per dollar of value
added.
̂

∑(

⁄

)

(4)

where the term in brackets is the average electricity use per dollar of value added by industry i
from the 1991 MECS as depicted in Figure 6, and vit is the value added by industry i in year t,
from the Annual Survey of Manufactures (ASM). Subscripts i refer to 3-digit NAICS codes. The
calculation combines both the scale of the manufacturing sector and its composition.
Figure 8 plots equation (4) separately for California and other states, indexed so that 1963
equals 100. The results are dramatic. Over the past 5 decades, California's industrial electricity
15

The comparison is made slightly difficult by the fact that the 1991 survey used Standard Industrial Classifications
(SIC) codes. I converted SIC codes to NAICS codes using a cross-walk provided by the Census Bureau.
16
I use "net" electricity use because some industries cogenerate electricity as part of their production.

15

demand, as predicted by its size and composition, has grown as much or more than the rest of the
nation. If anything, declines in electricity use by California industry have come in spite of the
fact that the state's mix of industries is working against it.
Table 11 shows the details of the calculations in equation (4), combining information
about the contemporaneous size of each industry and the energy intensity of that industry in each
year. Food and beverage production grew 221 percent from 1963 to 2009 in California and 176
percent in other states. With no change in electricity use per dollar of value added, the industry's
energy use would have grown more in California than in other states. But because California's
population grew faster, food and beverage energy use per capita would have grown more slowly
in California. The middle panel of Table 11 presents the weighted average of energy growth of
all 3-digit NAICS codes, weighted by 1991 energy consumption. If every industry used its 1991
electricity consumption per dollar of value added in every year, electricity use by California
manufacturers would have grown 350 percent and only 138 percent in other states. But
California's population also grew faster, doubling since 1960 while other states grew by 50
percent. Conducting exactly the same experiment with per-capita rather than total energy use by
each manufacturing sector, electricity use per capita would still have grown faster in California:
by 115 percent in California and 51 percent in other states.
The rest of that middle panel presents the same calculations using non-electric industrial
energy and the 2006 MECS, with no change in the underlying result. California's manufacturing
industry would have shown faster growth of total and per capita energy consumption than other
U.S. states had it not been for a change in energy use within each 3-digit NAICS code. Rather
than explaining apparent energy efficiency gains from California manufacturers, the changing
mix of industries enlarges it. Something other than the size and mix of industries must explain
the savings shown in Figure 2 and Table 2.
Intra-industry Composition
Some of the observed energy efficiency gains may have come from true increases in
energy efficiency, and some may come from intra-industry composition changes. Primary
metals, for example, includes factories that produce aluminum from raw materials and pipes
from purchased steel. Manufacturing aluminum uses far more energy, and to the extent that
production in the broad primary metals category has shifted away from aluminum and towards
pipes, energy consumption per dollar of value added will have declined, even without
technological changes in energy efficiency.
To address this I need a measure of energy intensity more disaggregate than the 3-digit
NAICS codes used in and Figure 7 and Figure 8. Recent versions of the ASM report net
electricity use by six-digit NAICS code. These can be matched to the value added by each
industry in California and other states using the four-digit SIC codes in the 1963 Census of
Manufactures and the six-digit NAICS codes in the 2007 Census of Manufactures.
16

The task of examining industry composition at this finer level of disaggregation is
complicated for two reasons. First, the match between four-digit SIC codes and six-digit NAICS
codes is not one-to-one. And second, some codes are not reported for California so as to protect
confidential business information. Consequently, at the bottom of Table 11 I report the
percentage growth two ways, with and without the unmatched industry codes. I assigned each
industry its current net electricity use, from the 2009 ASM. If each industry had used its 2009
electricity intensity, electricity demand by manufacturers would have grown by 34 percent in
states other than California, and by an astonishing 645 percent in California. California's faster
population growth accounts for some of this. Dividing by population, other states' industrial
electricity use per capita stayed flat or even shrank slightly, while California's grew by 264 or
333 percent, depending how I treat unmatched industry codes. Rather than revealing industrial
composition changes favoring California that were hidden by the more aggregate analysis, this
disaggregation shows that California's composition tilted even more towards electricity-using
industries.
In sum, per capita energy used by California's manufacturing sector has declined relative
to the energy used by other states' manufacturing. This has not been the result of California's
manufacturing base shrinking relative to other states, nor has it been the result of California's
industrial composition shifting to less energy-intensive products.
Transport
This sector is extremely simple, and this section can be correspondingly brief. Since
1966, motor fuel consumption per capita has grown by 12 percent in California and by 45
percent in other states. But California's relative savings are entirely explained by miles traveled
rather than vehicle efficiency. California vehicles used 32 percent less fuel per mile driven in
2009 than in 1966, while other states' vehicles used 31 percent less. By contrast, California
vehicles travelled 64 percent more miles per capita, while other states' vehicles traveled 111
percent more. California's apparent fuel savings come from other states' residents driving more,
not California vehicles being more energy efficient.
Figure 9 plots California and other U.S. states' motor fuel consumption per capita,
indexed so that 1966 equals 100 (the first year of the DOT data). The pattern looks similar to that
in Figure 1, the same figure drawn for residential electricity. At the bottom of Figure 9 I have
plotted the difference between the two lines, and transportation fuel use shows the same pattern,
a steadily increasing gap between California and the rest of the country. What explains this gap?
The dashed line plots the growth rate using California's vehicle miles traveled per capita, divided
by the national average fuel economy (miles per gallon). In other words, the dashed line plots
what the growth of California motor fuel use would have been had California vehicles had the
national fuel economy rather than California fuel economy. None of the gains are explained by
fuel economy; Californians simply increased their driving miles by less than residents of other
states.
17

IV.

Conclusions: Regulations Did Not Cause California's Energy Savings Relative to
Other States

The poster-child for energy efficiency regulations is residential electricity. Although it
only accounts for 4 percent of California's 2009 energy use, it exhibits the most dramatic
difference between California's energy growth rate since 1963 and that in other states. It turns
out, however, that most of those apparent savings can be explained by long run trends unrelated
to energy efficiency. Fifteen percent comes from the migration of the U.S. population from the
North to the Southwest. Twenty percent comes from California's low income-elasticity of energy
demand that is a consequence of its mild climate. And nearly 60 percent of the apparent savings
can be explained by differences in the way the demographics of California and other states have
changed: household incomes, household sizes, home sizes, etc. Together, nearly 90 percent of
the difference between California's residential electricity consumption in 2009 and that in other
states can be explained by household and geographic differences unrelated to energy efficiency.
The largest share of energy consumption occurs in the transport sector, and here the
energy efficiency gains are also illusory. All of them can be explained by a relative decline in
miles driven by Californians. While that may be a worthy outcome, and may be driven by public
policies such as fuel taxes or public transportation subsidies, it is not a consequence of energy
efficiency. If there is a case to be made for California's energy efficiency gains, the strongest
evidence comes from the industrial sector. Energy consumption by California's manufacturers
has grown less quickly than in other states, despite the fact that the scale and composition of
California's industries would suggest its energy use would have grown faster.
In the end, the findings here undermine Figure 1 as evidence in support of California's
standards, but they do not show that those standards have not been effective or that they should
not be tightened further or promoted elsewhere. All we can say is that pictures such as Figure 1
do not demonstrate those standards' efficacy. Even without California's regulations, its residential
electricity consumption per capita would have been falling steadily relative to other U.S. states
for the past 40 years.

18

References
Allcott, Hunt and Michael Greenstone. 2012. "Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap?" NBER WP
17766.
Baker, David R. 2009. "California's energy efficiency an economic boon." SFGate.com (online
version of San Francisco Chronicle). 26 January 2009.
Blinder, Alan. S. 1973. "Wage discimination: Reduced form and structural estimates." Journal of
Human Resources 8: 436–455.
Brounen, Dirk , Nils Kok and John M. Quigley. 2012. "Residential Energy Use and
Conservation: Economics and Demographics" California Center for Energy and
Environmental Economics Working Paper WP-036, University of California, Berkeley.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2008. "Climate Change Scoping Plan"
(http://www.arb.ca.gov)
California Public Utilities Commission and California Energy Commission. 2006. "Energy
Efficiency: California's Highest-Priority Resource" June 2006.
California Public Utility Commission. 2011. "California's Long-Term Energy Efficiency
Strategic Plan" (http://www.cpuc.ca.gov)
Cebula, Richard J. and Nate Herder. 2010. "An Empirical Analysis of Determinants of
Commercial and Industrial Electricity Consumption" Business and Economics Journal,
Volume 2010: BEJ-7, March 6.
Clemente, Jude. 2011. " Is California's Electricity Policy Really a Model for the United States?"
Innovative Energy Policies Vol. 1 (2011), pp. 1-6.
Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2010. "Why Has California's Residential Electricity
Consumption Been So Flat since the 1980's: A Microeconometric Approach." NBER
Working Paper 15978.
Ettenson, Lara. 2011. "Energy efficiency: California's leading energy resource." Electric Light
and Power. November 9, 2011.
Galbraith, Kate. 2009a. "Deciphering California's Efficiency Successes" New York Times. 14
April 2009.
Galbraith, Kate. 2009b. "California Unveils TV Efficiency Standards." New York Times. 18
September 2009.

19

Kandel, Adrienne, Margaret Sheridan and Patrick McAuliff. 2008. "A Comparison of Per Capita
Electricity Consumption in the United States and California." Staff Paper—California
Energy Commission. August 2008.
Kaufman, Noah and Palmer, Karen. 2010. "Energy-Efficiency Program Evaluations:
Opportunities for Learning and Inputs to Incentive Mechanisms." Resources For the
Future Discussion Paper 10-16. April 2010.
Levinson, Arik and Scott Niemann. 2004. "Energy Use by Apartment Tenants When Landlords
Pay for Utilities," Resource and Energy Economics, 26(1) 51-75.
Massachusetts Secretary of Energy and Environmental Affairs. 2010. "Massachusetts Clean
Energy and Climate Plan for 2020: A report to the Great and General Court pursuant to
the Global Warming Solutions Act" (www.mass.gov/eea/)
Metcalf, Gilbert E. 2008. "An Empirical Analysis of Energy Intensity and Its Determinants at the
State Level," The Energy Journal 29(3): 1-26.
Mitchell, Cynthia, Reuben Deumling, and Gill Court. 2009. "Stabilizing California's Demand:
The Real Reasons Behind the State's Energy Savings" Public Utilities Fortnightly 147,
March, 50-62.
Oaxaca, Ronald L. 1973. "Male–female wage diﬀerentials in urban labor markets." Internationa
Economic Review 14: 693–709.
Roland-Holst, David. 2008. "Energy Efficiency, Innovation, and Job Creation in California."
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California –
Berkeley. October 2008.
Rosenfeld, Arthur H. and Deborah Poskanzer. 2009. "A Graph Is Worth a Thousand GigawattHours: How California Came to Lead the United States in Energy Efficiency"
Innovations. Fall 57-79.
Sudarshan, Anant. 2010. "Deconstructing the ‘Rosenfeld Curve’: Why is Per Capita Residential
Energy Consumption in California so Low? " US Association for Energy Economics
Working Paper 10-063.
Tanton, Thomas. 2008. "California's Energy Policy: A Cautionary Tale for the Nation"
Competitive Enterprise Institute. Washington DC.
U.S. Department of Energy. 2009 "An Investigation into California’s Residential Energy
Consumption." 29 July 2009.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2011. 2011 U.S. Greenhouse Gas Inventory
Report. (April 2011) USEPA #430-R-11-005.

20

Table 1: California Energy Policies
Warren Alquist Act

Title 20
Title 24

Established the California Energy Commission (CEC)
with authority to regulate appliances and (later)
buildings.
First appliance standards in the US.
First building standards in the US.

1974

1976
1978

Decoupling natural gas profits from sales.

1978

Decoupling electric utility profits from power sales.

1982

AB 1890

Restructuring of electricity industry, mandated
investment in public benefit programs.

1996

AB 32

Global Warming Solutions Act

2006

Source: Roland-Holst (2008)

21

Table 2: California per Capita Energy Savings
Relative to Other US States 1963-2009

Actual 2009 CA
consumption

MBTU
(1)
All Energy
Retail Electricity
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
All other energy
Residential
Commercial
Industrial
Transport

216.6
24.0
8.3
11.2
4.4
192.6
33.0
31.5
43.5
84.6

Share of
total
(2)
1.00
0.11
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.89
0.15
0.15
0.20
0.39

Predicted 2009
consumption based on
other states' energy
growth
From
From %
absolute
growth
growth
MBTU
MBTU
(3)
(4)
268.7
38.1
13.0
23.5
6.1
231.8
41.7
45.7
53.6
112.6

282.5
43.8
16.0
18.2
8.0
238.7
44.0
47.5
40.3
108.5

Apparent Savings
1963-2009
From
From %
absolute
growth
growth
MBTU
MBTU
(5)
(6)
[(3)-(1)]
[(4)-(1)]
52.1 (19%)
65.9 (23%)
14.1 (37%)
19.9 (45%)
4.7 (36%)
7.7 (48%)
12.3 (52%)
7.0 (39%)
1.7 (27%)
3.6 (45%)
39.2 (17%)
46.1 (19%)
8.6 (21%)
11.0 (25%)
14.2 (31%)
16.0 (34%)
10.2 (19%)
−3.2 (-8%)
28.0 (25%)
23.9 (22%)

Source: Calculations using data from US Energy Information Administration (EIA).
*Note: Shares of savings do not sum to totals because the shares of consumption in California changed relative to
other states. From 1963 to 2009, retail electricity grew from 6 to 11 percent of total energy consumption in California,
and from 6 to 13 percent in other states.

22

Table 3: Population Shifts and Energy Consumption per Capita
1963-2009
Other States' Energy
Growth
MBTU
(1)
Residential
Electricity
Other energy
Commercial
Electricity
Other energy

%
(2)

Difference without
Migration
MBTU
(3)

Share of Savings from
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 2*
From %
From absolute
change
difference
(4)
(5)

Correlation(state
population growth,
average energy per
capita)
(6)

11.5
6.4

248.9
12.9

0.70
−1.28

0.15
−0.15

0.09
−0.12

0.093
-0.418

11.6
21.3

336.7
88.1

0.21
−1.00

0.02
−0.07

0.03
−0.06

0.039
-0.205

Source: Calculations based on US Energy Information Administration (EIA), State Energy Data Systems. (www.eia.gov/state/seds)
*
Applies the share in columns (5) and (6) to the savings in Table 2.

23

Table 4: Household Electricity Consumption per Household Member
Predicted by Climate and Income
Dependent variable:
1000 BTUs per person

Means
(1)

Coefficients
(2)

HDD

4,338
(1,647)
1,363
(663)
53.1
(37.2)

0.08
(0.12)
4.73*
(0.30)
-52.0*
(13.1)
0.0112*
(0.0018)
0.0386*
(0.0045)
-3,510*
(44)
139*
(10)
11,073*
(1,018)

CDD
Household income
($1000s 2010)
HDD × income
CDD × income
Household size

2.66
(1.49)

Trend
Constant

Mean and std. dev. of
16,530
dependent variable
(12,888)
Observations=34,292
Marginal effects
Income at mean HDD and CDD
HDD at mean income
CDD at mean income

R2=0.24
49.2
0.68
6.8

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*Statistically significant at 5 percent.
Source: Residential Energy Consumption Surveys: 1993, 1997, 2001,
2005, 2009.

24

Table 5: Predicted Increase in Residential Electricity per Capita
From a $1000 Increase in Household Income (2010 dollars)

California
Other states
absolute diff (1000 BTUs/capita)
Difference for a $25,000 income
increase
Share of apparent 4.7 MBTU savings

Average
HDD
(1)
2,601
4,830

Average
CDD
(2)
901
1,248

Predicted Electricity Increase
(1000 BTUs / person)
(3)
11.9
50.2
38.4
959.0
20.4%

Uses regression coefficients in Table 4.

25

Table 6: Housing, Climate, and Household Characteristics
California

Residential electricity per
capitag (MBTU)
Residential other energy
per capitag (MBTU)
Population (1000s)a
Real income per capita
($2010)a
Real median household
income ($2010)f
Occupied housing units
(1000s)b
Household sizeb,c
Rooms per houseb
Bedrooms per houseb
Built pre-1950e
Built post-1980e
Owner occupiedb
Kids < 14d
Cooling degree days
(population wtd avg)
Heating degree days
(population wtd avg)

Other US States

1960-1963
(1)
3.76

2009
(2)
8.29

Change
(3)
+4.53

1960-1963
(4)
4.98

2009
(5)
17.21

Change
(6)
+12.22

CA change
relative to
other states
(7)
-7.70

35.56

33.03

-3.53

53.21

60.65

+7.44

-10.97

38.3

17,668
$16,102

36,962
$38,834

+109%
+141%

171,632
$12,853

270,521
$35,091

+58%
+173%

+51%
-32%

$24,161

40,716

57,718

37,723

63,133

12,215

48,042

101,401

+$28,410
(81.8%)
+111%

-$11,408
(-26%)
+34%

$43,197

4,982

+$17,002
(41.8%)
+145%

3.19
4.49
2.05
0.600
0.584
0.956
901

3.03
5.20
2.58
0.305
0.369
0.566
0.624
901

-0.16
+0.71
+0.53
-0.295
-0.018
-0.332
-

3.43
4.90
2.26
0.738
0.622
1.092
1145

2.67
5.67
2.70
0.312
0.417
0.670
0.535
1349

-0.76
+0.77
+0.44
-0.426
+0.048
-0.557
+17.8%

+0.60
-0.06
+0.08
+0.131
-0.048
-0.066
+0.225
+17.8%

2.66
5.74
2.72
0.230
0.348
0.671
0.540
1363

2601

2601

-

5066

4609

-9.0%

-9.0%

4337

a

RECS
averages
1993-2009
(8)
16.5

Bureau of Economic Analysis http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=70&step=1
1960 Census of Housing, 2009 American Community Survey (ACS).
c
Population / housing units in 1960 in Census and 2009 ACS.
d
1960 Census Table 45 (US) Table 16 (CA), ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates: 2009; Profile of General Population and Housing Characteristics (CA 2010
ACS).
e
1960 Census of Housing, Vol. 1 States and Small Areas, Part 1. United States, Table 5 (Ch. 4 p.1-16); 2009 American Community Survey.
f
1960 Census: U.S. Ch.5, p.225, Table 95; CA p.6-252, Table 66. 2010 American Community Survey. Median income for "other states" assumes distribution same in
California and US.
1960 Census can be found at www.census.gov/prod/www/abs/decennial/1960.html.
g
U.S. Energy Information Administration.
b

26

Table 7: Residential Energy Use per Household Member

Dependent variable: 1000
BTUs per capita
HDD
CDD
Household income
($1000s 2010)
HDD × income

Means
(1)
4,326
(2,275)
1,371
(1,037)
54.4
(37.4)

CDD × income
Household size
Kids
Rooms
Bedrooms
Owner Occupied

2.75
(1.49)
0.54
(0.96)
5.80
(2.00)
2.76
(1.05)
0.67

Built pre 1950

0.22

Built post 1980

0.36

Trend (1963=1)

39.3
(6.4)

Rural, seniors, size, type,
dishwasher, clothes washer,
dryer, TVs, AC, pool
Constant
Mean and std. dev. of
dependent variable
Observations=32,352

Regression Coefficients
Census
Other RECS
Variables
variables
(2)
(3)
0.040
-0.17
(0.12)
(0.11)
4.03*
2.95*
(0.28)
(0.27)
-74.1*
-64.9*
(12.6)
(12.0)
0.0077*
0.0045*
(0.0017)
(0.0016)
0.0316*
0.0249*
(0.0042)
(0.0041)
-4,182*
-4,259*
(69)
(73)
451*
501*
(68)
(70)
1,172*
647*
(95)
(95)
885*
333*
(135)
(129)
1,888*
-668*
(149)
(167)
-2,018*
-774*
(153)
(151)
928*
-502*
(135)
(140)
91.7*
20.0*
(9.2)
(9.1)
no
7,750*
(964)

yes
12,855*
(965)

16,257
(12,592)
R2=0.32

R2=0.38

Robust standard errors in parentheses.
*Statistically significant at 5 percent.
Source: Residential Energy Consumption Surveys: 1993, 1997, 2001, 2005, 2009.

27

Table 8: California Residential Energy Savings -- 1960-2009

Household characteristic
(1) EIA Data
Electricity /capita (1000 BTU)
(2) RECS Data and Predictions
Real median household income ($2010)
Household size
Rooms per house
Bedrooms per house
Built pre-1950
Built post-1980
Owner occupied
Kids < 14

Average
(1)

Electricity
Predicted change
Coeff. from Table 7
(1000 BTUs)
(2)
(3)

11,374

-4,705

-$11,408

2.7a

+0.60
-0.06
+0.08
+0.131
-0.048
-0.066
+0.225

-3,823
994
780
-2,287
585
1,679
394

Total Explained by Table 7 Regressions

-31
-2,509
-70
+71
-264
-45
-125
101
-2,871

Percent of apparent savings explained by regressions [(1)/(2)]
a

61%

The coefficient on income includes the coefficient on interactions with HDD and CDD in Table 7, multiplied by the means of
HDD and CDD.

28

Table 9: Predicted Electricity per Household Member – 2009

Dependent variable: 1000
BTUs per household member
HDD
CDD
Household income
($1000s 2010)
HDD × income
CDD × income
Household size
Rural
Kids
Seniors
Total square feet
Rooms
Bedrooms
Mobile home
Attached
Apt bldg < 5 units
Apt bldg. >= 5 units
Owner occupied

Regression Coefficients
Other with 26
Other
regional fixed
CA
States
effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.345
-0.585*
0.257
(0.426)
(0.233)
(0.265)
0.678
-0.613
0.400
(0.789)
(0.491)
(0.537)
-21.9
-35.3
-27.37
(26.9)
(26.3)
(26.48)
-0.0074
0.0014
0.0011
(0.0072)
(0.0035)
(0.0035)
0.0403*
0.0155*
0.0134
(0.0186)
(0.0074)
(0.0074)
-2,552*
-5,215*
-5,211*
(181)
(137)
(137)
4,543*
2,705*
2,424*
(1,333)
(292)
(298)
432*
860*
821*
(214)
(137)
(136)
720
-651*
-571*
(382)
(180)
(179)
2.24*
0.797*
0.914*
(0.68)
(0.128)
(0.129)
178
767*
719*
(204)
(190)
(190)
-821
582*
597*
(429)
(236)
(235)
105
1,621*
1,948*
(1,042)
(550)
(542)
92
-1,590*
-1,244*
(590)
(355)
(373)
-515
-2,640*
-1,868*
(572)
(449)
(461)
-853
-3,739*
-3,169*
(606)
(449)
(465)
-282
-555
-359
(454)
(304)
(299)

(continued)

29

(Table 1, continued)
Built 1950s
Built 1960s
Built 1970s
Built 1980s
Built 1990s
Built 2000s
Dishwasher
Clothes washer
Dryer
TV sets
Air conditioned
Central air
Swimming pool
Stove/oven electric
Stove electric
Oven electric
Heat electric
Water electric
26 region fixed effects
Constant
Observations
R-squared

-456
(611)
-450
(612)
-738
(595)
-1,559*
(649)
-1,338
(696)
-54
(1,206)
891*
(371)
712
(809)
252
(760)
1,093*
(186)
392
(471)
-38
(566)
3,775*
(783)
816*
(379)
860
(1,006)
-39
(1,060)
1,590*
(452)
3,656*
(987)
no

-681
(349)
-84
(385)
-177
(384)
-687
(390)
-826*
(414)
-2,758*
(429)
680*
(247)
-1,345*
(525)
2,457*
(489)
762*
(96)
1,182*
(313)
1,406*
(267)
5,009*
(509)
788.6*
(220)
-141.5
(752)
3,349*
(619)
6,430*
(311)
4,132*
(261)
no

-797*
(347)
-371
(386)
-491
(394)
-940*
(399)
-1,274*
(428)
-3,190*
(445)
826*
(250)
-1,278*
(522)
2,181*
(491)
797*
(95)
1,460*
(323)
618*
(289)
5,569*
(505)
877*
(232)
-331
(743)
3,271*
(609)
6,203*
(308)
4,081*
(263)
yes

8,016*
(1,844)
1,606
0.50

18,712*
(1,959)
10,477
0.48

12,519*
(2,169)
10,477
0.49

Standard errors in parentheses.
*Statistically significant at 5 percent.
Source: 2009 Residential Energy Consumption Survey.

30

Table 10: Decomposition of Electricity Differences – 2009
Average Electricity Use per
Household Member
(1000 BTUs)
California
Other States
Difference

10,396
18,522
8,126

Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition
Without regional fixed effects
Explained (ΔX’β)
Unexplained (X’Δβ)

4,925
3,200

61%
39%

With 26 regional fixed effects
Explained (ΔX’β)
Unexplained (X’Δβ)

7,158
967

88%
12%

Source: 2009 Residential Energy Consumption Survey and calculations
from Table 9.

31

Table 11: Predicted Manufacturing Energy Growth: 1963-2009

Electricity Use based on 1991 MECS
311/312 food/beverage/tobacco
313/314 textiles
315/316 apparel/leather
321 wood
322 paper
323 printing
324 petroleum/coal
325 chemicals
326 plastic/rubber
327 nonmetal minerals
331 primary metal
332 fabricated metal
333 machinery
334/335 electronics
336 transport equip
337 furniture
339 miscellaneous

Predicted energy use
California
Other States
221%
176%
153%
-18%
249%
-65%
-26%
58%
188%
169%
21%
13%
2558%
1480%
947%
346%
301%
269%
63%
89%
19%
6%
276%
202%
229%
223%
605%
216%
47%
82%
136%
176%
1160%
406%

Per capita
California
Other States
53%
75%
21%
-48%
67%
-78%
-65%
0%
38%
70%
-42%
-28%
1170%
900%
401%
182%
92%
134%
-22%
20%
-43%
-33%
80%
91%
57%
104%
237%
100%
-30%
15%
13%
75%
502%
221%

Weighted Average of All Manufacturing
Electricity based on 1991 MECS
Non-electric Energy, 1991 MECS
Electricity based on 2006 MECS
Non-electric Energy, 2006 MECS

350%
1125%
243%
669%

138%
427%
122%
244%

115%
486%
64%
267%

51%
234%
40%
118%

264%
333%

-13%
2%

Electricity Use 1963-2007 Based on 6-digit NAICS Codes in 2009 ASM
Ignoring missing industry codes
Dropping missing industry codes

645%
788%

34%
58%

Sources: Top two panels: 1991 and 2006 MECS, Annual Survey of Manufactures. Bottom panel: 1963 and 2007
Census of Manufactures, 2009 Annual Survey of Manufactures

32

Figure 1: Residential Electricity Use per Capita 1963-2009
400

California

Other US States

Difference

350

300

1960=100

250

200

150

100

50

0

(50)

Figure 2: California Energy Savings 1963-2009
0.12

0.10

25%

Savings

Billion BTU / Capita

0.08

Actual BTU/Capita 2009
0.06

19%
0.04

0.02

36%

21%

31%

Non-elec.
residential

Non-elec.
commercial

52%
27%

0.00

Elec. residential

Elec.
commercial

Elec. industrial

33

Non-elec.
industrial

Non-elec.
transportation

Figure 3: Population Shifts and Residential Electricity Use Per Capita
400

350

300

1960=100

250

200

150

100

California

Other US States

Other with no migration ̂

50

0

Figure 4: Population-weighted Heating and Cooling Degree Days
48 Contiguous States Aside from California
6000

−10%

5000

Degree Days (F)

4000

3000

(1) HDD annual

(2) HDD average

(3) CDD annual

(4) CDD average

2000

1000

+19%
0

34

10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000

3.35

2.74

0

1000 BTUs

Figure 5: Residential Electricity Use by Household Size

1

2

3

4
5
6
Household Size
Per Household

7

8

9

Per Person

Figure 6: Changing U.S. Manufacturing Electricity Use

311/312 Food/Beverage/Tobacco
313/314 Textiles
315/316 Apparel/Leather
321 Wood
322 Paper
323 Printing
324 Petroleum/Coal
325 Chemicals
326 Plastic/Rubber
327 Nonmetal Minerals
331 Primary Metal
332 Fabricated Metal
333 Machinery
334/335 Electronics
336 Transport Equip
337 Furniture
339 Miscellaneous

1991

0

.005
Million BTU per $ Value Added

35

2006
.01

Figure 7: Changing Manufacturing Composition: 1963-2009
California

Other US States

311/312 Food/Beverage/Tobacco

311/312

313/314 Textiles

313/314

315/316 Apparel/Leather

315/316

321 Wood

321

322 Paper

322

323 Printing

323

324 Petroleum/Coal

324

325 Chemicals

325

326 Plastic/Rubber

326

327 Nonmetal Minerals

327

331 Primary Metal

331

332 Fabricated Metal

332

333 Machinery

333

334/335 Electronics

334/335

336 Transport Equip

336

337 Furniture

337

339 Miscellaneous

339
0

.1
.2
.3
Share of Value Added

1963
2009
0

.1
.2
Share of Value Added

.3

150
100
50

California

0

1963=100

200

250

Figure 8: Predicted Manufacturing Electricity Use Per Capita:
Based on 1991 MECS and Concurrent Industrial Composition

1960

1970

Other US States

1980

1990

36

2000

2010

Figure 9: Motor Fuel Use per Capita

180
160
140
120

1966=100

100
80
60

California

Other US States

Difference

CA VMT at US MPG

40
20
0

37

