                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   BANKING, LIQUIDITY AND BANK RUNS IN AN INFINITE-HORIZON ECONOMY

                                             Mark Gertler
                                           Nobuhiro Kiyotaki

                                         Working Paper 19129
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19129


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




Gertler and Kiyotaki acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.¸˛

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Banking, Liquidity and Bank Runs in an Infinite-Horizon Economy
Mark Gertler and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
NBER Working Paper No. 19129
June 2013
JEL No. E44

                                              ABSTRACT

We develop a variation of the macroeconomic model with banking in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011)
that allows for liquidity mismatch and bank runs as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). As in Gertler
and Kiyotaki, because bank net worth fluctuates with aggregate production, the spread between the
expected rates of return on bank assets and deposits fluctuates counter-cyclically. However, because
bank assets are less liquid than deposits, bank runs are possible as in Diamond and Dybvig. Whether
a bank run equilibrium exists depends on bank balance sheets and an endogenously determined liquidation
price for bank assets. While in normal times a bank run equilibrium may not exist, the possibility can
arise in a recession. We also analyze the effects of anticipated bank runs. Overall, the goal is to present
a framework that synthesizes the macroeconomic and microeconomic approaches to banking and banking
instability.


Mark Gertler
Department of Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
mark.gertler@nyu.edu

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
kiyotaki@princeton.edu
1    Introduction
There are two complementary approaches in the literature to capturing the
interaction between banking distress and the real economy. The first, summa-
rized recently in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011), emphasizes how the depletion
of bank capital in an economic downturn hinders banks ability to intermedi-
ate funds. Due to agency problems (and possibly also regulatory constraints)
a bank’s ability to raise funds depends on its capital. Portfolios losses ex-
perienced in a downturn accordingly lead to losses of bank capital that are
increasing in the degree of leverage. In equilibrium, a contraction of bank
capital and bank assets raises the cost of bank credit, slows the economy and
depresses asset prices and bank capital further. The second approach, pio-
neered by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), focuses on how liquidity mismatch
in banking, i.e. the combination of short term liabilities and partially illiq-
uid long term assets, opens up the possibility of bank runs. If they occur,
runs lead to ineﬃcient asset liquidation along with a general loss of banking
services.
    In the recent crisis, both phenomena were at work. Depletion of capi-
tal from losses on sub-prime loans and related assets forced many financial
institutions to contract lending and raised the cost of credit they did oﬀer.
(See, e.g. Adrian, Colla and Shin, 2012, for example.) Eventually, however,
weakening financial positions led to classic runs on a number of the invest-
ment banks and money market funds, as emphasized by Gorton (2010) and
Bernanke (2010). The asset firesale induced by the runs amplified the overall
financial distress.
    To date, most macroeconomic models which have tried to capture the
eﬀects of banking distress have emphasized financial accelerator eﬀects, but
not adequately captured bank runs. Most models of bank runs, however, are
typically quite stylized and not suitable for quantitative analysis. Further,
often the runs are not connected to fundamentals. That is, they may be
equally likely to occur in good times as well as bad.
    Our goal is to develop a simple macroeconomic model of banking insta-
bility that features both financial accelerator eﬀects and bank runs. Our
approach emphasizes the complementary nature of these mechanisms. Bal-
ance sheet conditions not only aﬀect the cost of bank credit, they also aﬀect
whether runs are possible. In this respect one can relate the possibility of
runs to macroeconomic conditions and in turn characterize how runs feed
back into the macroeconomy.

                                      2
    For simplicity, we consider an infinite horizon economy with a fixed supply
of capital, along with households and bankers. It is not diﬃcult to map
the framework into a more conventional macroeconomic model with capital
accumulation. The economy with a fixed supply of capital, however, allows
us to characterize in a fairly tractable way how banking distress and bank
runs aﬀect the behavior of asset prices.
    As in Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011), endoge-
nous procyclical movements in bank balance sheets lead to countercyclical
movements in the cost of bank credit. At the same time, due to liquidity mis-
match, bank runs may be possible, following Diamond and Dybvig (1983).
Whether or not a bank run equilibrium exists will depend on two key fac-
tors: the condition of bank balance sheets and an endogenously determined
liquidation price. Thus, a situation can arise where a bank run cannot occur
in normal times, but where a severe recession can open up the possibility.
    Critical to the possibility of runs is that banks issues demandable short
term debt. In our baseline model we simply assume this is the case. We
then provide a stronger motivation for this scenario by introducing household
liquidity risks, in the spirit of Diamond and Dybvig.
    Some other recent examples of macroeconomic models that consider bank
runs include Ennis and Keister (2003), Martin, Skeie, and Von Thadden
(2012) and Angeloni and Faia (2013).1 These papers typically incorporate
banks with short horizons (e.g. two or three periods)2 . We diﬀer by mod-
eling banks that optimize over an infinite horizon. In addition, bank asset
liquidation prices are endogenous and aﬀect whether a sunspot bank run
equilibrium exists. We further use our dynamic framework to evaluate the
eﬀect of anticipated bank runs. Our paper is also related to the literature on
sovereign debt crises (e.g Cole and Kehoe, 2000) which similarly character-
izes how self-fulfilling crises can arise, where the existence of these kinds of
equilibria depends on macroeconomic fundamentals.
    Section 2 presents the model, including both a no-bank run and a bank
run equilibria, along with the extension to the economy with household liq-
   1
      See Boissay, Collard, and Smets (2013) for an alternative way to model banking crises
that does not involve runs per se. For other related literature see Allen and Gale (2007),
Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2012), Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011) and Holmstrom and Ti-
role (2011) and the reference within.
    2
      A very recent exception is Robatto (2013) who adopts an approach with some simi-
larities to ours, but with an emphasis instead on money and nominal contracts.



                                            3
uidity risks. Section 3 presents a number of illustrative numerical experi-
ments. While in our baseline model we restrict attention to unanticipated
bank runs, we describe the extension to the case of anticipated bank runs
in section 4. In section 5 we conclude with a discussion of policies that can
reduce the likelihood of bank runs.


2       Basic Model
2.1     Key Features
The framework is a variation of the infinite horizon macroeconomic model
with a banking sector and liquidity risks developed in Gertler and Karadi
(2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki (2011).3 There are two classes of agents -
households and bankers - with a continuum of measure unity of each type.
Bankers intermediate funds between households and productive assets.
   There are two goods, a nondurable product and a durable asset "capital."
Capital does not depreciate and is fixed in total supply which we normalize
to be unity. Capital is held by banks as well as households. Their total
holdings of capital is equal to the total supply,

                                   +  = 1                                (1)

where  is the total capital held by banks and  be the amount held by
households.
   When a banker intermediates  units of capital in period  there is
a payoﬀ of +1  units of the nondurable good in period  + 1 plus the
undepreciated leftover capital:

                                               date t+1
                         date t
                                         ½
                                   ª            capital
                         capital →                                           (2)
                                             +1  output

where +1 is a multiplicative aggregate shock to productivity.
    By contrast, we suppose that households that directly hold capital at 
for a payoﬀ at  + 1 must pay a management cost of ( ) units of the
    3
    See also He and Krishnamurthy (2013) for a dynamic general equilbirum model with
capital constrained banks.

                                         4
nondurable goods at  as follows:

                       date t                     date t+1
                                    ¾       ½
                     capital                    capital
                                        →                                  (3)
                    ( ) goods               +1  output

The management cost is meant to reflect the household’s lack of expertise
relative to banks in screening and monitoring investment projects. We sup-
pose that for each household the management cost is increasing and convex
in the quantity of capital held:
                          ⎧                              
                          ⎪
                          ⎨       
                                    ( )2  for  ≤  
                                  2
                ( ) =                                              (4)
                          ⎪
                          ⎩                 
                                                           
                              ( − 2 ) for    
                                                     
with   0 Further, below some threshold  ∈ (0 1)  ( ) is strictly
                                                      
convex and then becomes linear after it reaches   We allow for the kink
in the marginal cost to ensure that it remains profitable for households to
absorb all the capital in the wake of a banking collapse.
    In the absence of financial market frictions, bankers will intermediate the
entire capital stock. In this instance, households save entirely in the form of
bank deposits. If the banks are constrained in their ability to obtain funds,
households will directly hold some of the capital. Further, to the extent that
the constraints on banks tighten countercyclically, as will be the case in our
model, the share of capital held by households will move countercyclically.
    As with virtually all models of banking instability beginning with Di-
amond and Dybvig (1983), a key to opening up the possibility of a bank
run is liquidity mismatch. Banks issue non-contingent short term liabilities
and hold imperfectly liquid long term assets. Within our framework, the
combination of financing constraints on banks and ineﬃciencies in household
management of capital will give rise to imperfect liquidity in the market for
capital.
    We proceed to describe the behavior of households, banks and the compet-
itive equilibrium. We then describe the circumstances under which bank runs
are possible. For expositional purposes, we begin by studying a benchmark
model where we simply assume that banks issues short term debt. Within
this benchmark model we can illustrate the main propositions regarding the

                                        5
possibility of bank runs and the connection to bank balance sheet strength.
We then generalize the model to allow for household liquidity risks in the
spirit of Diamond and Dybvig in order to motivate why banks issue demand-
able deposits.

2.2    Households
Each household consumes and saves. Households save by either by lending
funds to competitive financial intermediaries (banks) or by holding capital
directly. In addition to the returns on portfolio investments, each household
also receives an endowment of nondurable goods,    , every period that
varies proportionately with the aggregate productivity shock  
    Intermediary deposits held from  to  + 1 are one period bonds that pay
the certain gross return +1 in the absence of a bank run. In the event of a
bank run, a depositor may receive either the full promised return or nothing,
depending on the timing of the withdrawal. Following Diamond and Dybvig
(1983), we suppose that deposits are paid out according to a "sequential
service constraint." Depositors form a line to withdraw and the bank meets
the obligation sequentially until its funds are exhausted. If the bank has
insuﬃcient funds to meet its withdrawal requests, a fraction of depositors
will be left with nothing. In Basic Model, we assume that bank runs are
completely unanticipated events. Thus, we proceed to solve the household’s
choice of consumption and saving as if it perceives no possibility of a bank
run. Then in a subsequent section we will characterize the circumstances
under which people anticipate a bank run may occur with some likelihood.
    Household utility  is given by
                                   Ã∞                !
                                     X
                            =          ln +
                                                 

                                    =0

where  is household consumption and 0    1. Let  be the market
price of capital, The household then chooses consumption, and household
bank deposit  and direct capital holdings  to maximize expected utility
subject to the budget constraint

       +  +   +  ( ) =    +  −1 + ( +  )−1
                                                                   
                                                                          (5)

   Again we assume that the household assigns a zero probability of a bank
run. The first order conditions for deposits and direct capital holdings are

                                      6
given by
                               (Λ+1 +1 ) = 1                          (6)

                                          
                               (Λ+1 +1 )=1                           (7)
where
                                               
                                Λ+ =      
                                               +

                                      +1 + +1
                             +1 =                                          (8)
                                        +  0 ( )
                                                             
and  0 ( ) =  for   (0  ] and =  for   [  1] Λ+ is the
household’s marginal rate of substitution between consumption at date  + 
                
and , and +1   is the household’s gross marginal rate of return from direct
capital holdings.
    Observe that so long as the household has at least some direct capital
holdings, the first order condition (7) will help determine the market price
of capital. Further, the market price of capital tends to be decreasing in
                                                                               
the share of capital held by households given that over the range (0  ],
the marginal management cost  0 ( ) is increasing. As will become clear, a
banking crisis will induce asset sales by banks to households, leading a drop
in asset prices. The severity of the drop will depend on the quantity of sales
and the convexity of the management cost function. In the limiting case of
a bank run households absorb all the capital from banks. Capital prices will
reach minimum as the marginal cost reaches a maximum.

2.3     Banks
Each banker manages a financial intermediary. Bankers fund capital invest-
ments by issuing deposits to households as well as by using their own equity,
or net worth,  . Due to financial market frictions, bankers may be con-
strained in their ability to obtain deposits from households.
     To the extent bankers may face financial market frictions, they will at-
tempt to save their way out of the financing constraint by accumulating
retained earnings in order to move toward one hundred percent equity financ-
ing. To limit this possibility, we assume that bankers have finite expected
lifetime. In particular, we suppose that each banker has an i.i.d probability
 of surviving until the next period and a probability 1 −  of exiting. The

                                         7
                                           1
expected lifetime of a banker is then 1−      Note that the expected lifetime
may be long. But it is critical that it is finite.
    Every period new bankers enter: The number of entering bankers equals
the number who exit, keeping the total population of bankers constant. Each
new banker takes over the enterprise of an exiting banker and in the process
inherits the skills of the exiting banker. The exiting banker removes his
equity stake  in the bank. The new banker’s initial equity stake consists
an endowment  of nondurable goods received only in the first period of
operation. As will become clear, this setup provides a simple way to motivate
"dividend payouts" from the banking system in order to ensure that banks
use leverage in equilibrium.
    In particular, we assume that bankers are risk neutral and enjoy util-
ity from consumption in the period they exit.4 The expected utility of a
continuing banker at the end of period t is given by
                               "∞                        #
                                X
                        =         (1 − )−1 + 
                                     =1

where (1 − )−1 is probability of exiting at date  +  and + is terminal
consumption if the banker exits at  + 
    During each period  a bank finances its asset holdings   with deposits
 and net worth  :
                                 =  +                              (9)
We assume that banks cannot issue new equity: They can only accumulate net
worth via retained earnings. While this assumption approximately accords
with reality, we do not explicitly model the agency frictions that underpin it.
   The net worth of "surviving" bankers is the gross return on assets net
the cost of deposits, as follows:
                                            
                             = ( +  )−1 −  −1                            (10)

For new bankers at , net worth simply equals the initial endowment:

                                         =  
   4
    We could generalize to allow active bankers to receive utility that is linear in con-
sumption each period. So long as the banker is constrained, it will be optimal to defer all
consumption until the exit period.



                                            8
Finally, exiting bankers no longer operate banks and simply use their net
worth to consume:
                                   =  
    To motivate a limit on the bank’s ability to obtain deposits, we introduce
the following moral hazard problem: At the end of the period the banker can
choose to divert the fraction  of assets for personal use. (Think of the way
a banker may divert funds is by paying unwarranted bonuses or dividends to
his or her family members.) The cost to the banker is that the depositors can
force the intermediary into bankruptcy at the beginning of the next period.
For rational depositors to lend, it must be the case that the franchise value
of the bank, i.e., the present discounted value of payouts from operating the
bank,  , exceeds the gain to the bank from diverting assets. Accordingly,
any financial arrangement between the bank and its depositors must satisfy
the following incentive constraint:

                                         ≤                                    (11)
Note that the incentive constraint embeds the constraint that  must be
positive for the bank to operate since  will turn out to be linear in  We
will choose parameters and shock variances that keep  non-negative in a
"no-bank run" equilibrium. (See the Appendix for details).5
    Given that bankers simply consume their equity when they exit, we can
restate the bank’s franchise value recursively as the expected discounted value
of the sum of net worth conditional on exiting and the value conditional on
continuing as:
                        =  [(1 − )+1 + +1 ]                   (12)
                                                         ¡  ¢
The banker’s optimization problem then is to choose    each period to
maximize the franchise value (12) subject to the incentive constraint (11)
and the flow of funds constraints (9) and (10).
    We guess that the bank’s franchise value is a linear function of assets and
deposits as follows
                                =    −    
   5
     Following Diamond and Dybvig (1983), we are assuming that the payoﬀ on deposits
is riskless absent a bank run, which requires that bank net worth be positive in this state.
A bank run, however, will force  to zero, as we show later.




                                             9
and then subsequently verify this guess. Using the flow-of-funds constraint
(9)  we can express the franchise value as:

                                  =    +   

with
                                      
                                     ≡  −  
                                     
We can think of  as the excess marginal dollar value of assets over deposits.
In turn, we can rewrite the incentive constraint as

                                 ≤    +    

  It follows that incentive constraint (11) is binding if and only if the excess
marginal value from honestly managing assets  is positive but less than the
marginal gain from diverting assets  i.e.6

                                      0    

Assuming this condition is satisfied, the incentive constraint leads to the
following limit on the scale of bank assets   to net worth  :

                                      
                                       =        ≡                                (13)
                                        − 
    The variable  is the maximum feasible assets-to-net worth ratio. For
convenience (and with a slight abuse of terminology), we will refer to 
as the maximum leverage ratio, (since the assets-to-net worth ratio reflects
leverage).  depends inversely on : An increase in the bank’s ability to
divert funds reduces the amount depositors are willing to lend. As the bank
expands assets by issuing deposits, its incentive to divert funds increases.
The constraint (13) limits the portfolio size to the point where the bank’s
incentive to cheat is exactly balanced by the cost of losing the franchise value.
In this respect the agency problem leads to an endogenous capital constraint.
    From equations (9) and (10) the recursive expression of franchise value
(12) becomes
                       ©£         ¡                ¢¤ £                              ¤ª
   +   =  1 −  +   +1 + +1 +1 (+1     − +1 )  + +1  
   6
     In the numerical analysis in section 3, we choose parameters to ensure that the con-
dition 0     is always satisfied in the no bank-run equilibrium.

                                            10
       
where +1 is the realized rate of return on banks assets (i.e. capital inter-
mediated by bank), and is given by

                                      +1 + +1
                              +1 =               
                                            
Using the method of undetermined coeﬃcients, we verify the conjecture that
the franchise value is indeed linear in assets and deposits, with
                                      
                           =  [(+1 − +1 )Ω+1 ]                       (14)
                                 = +1  (Ω+1 )                           (15)
with
                      Ω+1 ≡ 1 −  + ( +1 + +1 +1 )
    The excess marginal dollar value of asset over deposit  equals the dis-
counted excess return per unit of assets intermediated. The marginal cost
of deposits   equals the discounted cost of per unit of deposit. In each
case the payoﬀs are adjusted by the variable Ω+1 which takes into account
that, if the bank is constrained, the shadow value of a unit of net worth
to the bank may exceed unity. In particular, we can think of Ω+1 as a
probability weighted average of the marginal values of net worth to exiting
and to continuing bankers at t+1. For an exiting banker at  + 1 (which
occurs with probability 1 − ), the shadow value of an additional unit of
net worth is simply unity, since he or she just consumes it. Conversely, for
a continuing banker (which occurs with probability ), the shadow value is
  =   + (   ) =   +  . In this instance an additional unit
of net worth saves the banker   in deposit costs and permits he or she to
earn the excess value  on an additional  units of assets, the latter being
the amount of assets he can lever with an additional unit of net worth.
    When the incentive constraint is not binding, unlimited arbitrage by
banks will push discounted excess returns to zero, implying  = 0 When
the incentive constraint is binding, however, limits to arbitrage emerge that
lead to positive expected excess returns in equilibrium, i.e.,   0 Note
that the excess return to capital implies that for a given riskless interest
rate, the required return to capital is higher than would otherwise be and,
conversely the price of capital is lower. Indeed, a financial crisis in the model
will involve a sharp increase in the excess rate of return on assets along with
a sharp contraction in asset prices. In this regards, a bank run will be an
extreme version of a financial crisis.

                                         11
2.4    Aggregation and Equilibrium without Bank Runs
Given that the maximum feasible leverage ratio  is independent of individual-
specific factors and given a parametrization where the incentive constraint is
binding in equilibrium, we can aggregate across banks to obtain the relation
between total assets held by the banking system   and total net worth
 :
                                  =                             (16)
Summing across both surviving and entering bankers yields the following
expression for the evolution of  :
                                     
                    = [( +  )−1 −  −1 ] +                 (17)
where   = (1 − ) is the total endowment of entering bankers. The
first term is the accumulated net worth of bankers that operated at  − 1
and survived to , equal to the product of the survival rate  and the net
                                   
earnings on bank assets ( +  )−1 −  −1  Conversely, exiting bankers
consume the fraction 1 −  of net earnings on assets:

                    = (1 − )[( +  )−1
                                            
                                                −  −1 ]             (18)

    Total output  is the sum of output from capital, household endowment
   and bank endowment   :

                            =  +    +                         (19)

Finally, output is either used for management costs, or consumed by house-
holds and bankers:

                            = ( ) +  +                      (20)

2.5    Bank Runs
We now consider the possibility of an unexpected bank run. (We defer an
analysis of anticipated bank runs to Section 4.) In particular, we maintain
assumption that when households acquire deposits at  − 1 that mature in 
they attach zero probability to a possibility of a run at  However, we now
allow for the chance of a run ex post, as deposits mature at  and households
must decide whether to roll them over for another period.

                                      12
     An ex post "run equilibrium" is possible if individual depositors believe
that if other households do not roll over their deposits with the bank, the
bank may not be able to meet its obligations on the remaining deposits.
As in Diamond and Dybvig (1983), the sequential service feature of deposit
contracts opens up the possibility that a depositor could lose everything by
failing to withdraw. In this situation two equilibria are possible: a "normal"
one where households keep their deposits in banks, and a "run" equilib-
rium where households withdraw all their deposits, banks are liquidated,
and households use their residual funds to acquire capital directly.
     We begin with the standard case where each depositor decides whether
to run, before turning to a more quantitatively flexible case where at any
moment only a fraction  of depositors consider running.

2.5.1    Conditions for a Bank Run Equilibrium
In particular, at the beginning of period  before the realization of returns
on bank assets, depositors decide whether to roll over their deposits with the
bank. If they choose to "run", the bank liquidates its capital and turns the
proceeds over to households who then acquire capital directly with their less
eﬃcient technology. Let ∗ be the price of capital in the event of a forced
liquidation. Then a run is possible if the liquidation value of bank assets
            
( + ∗ )−1 is smaller than its outstanding liability to the depositors:7
                                          
                              ( + ∗ )−1   −1                             (21)
If condition (21) is satisfied, an individual depositor who does not withdraw
suﬃciently early could lose everything in the event of run. If any one depos-
itor faces this risk, then they all do, which makes a systemic run equilibrium
feasible. If the inequality is reversed, banks can always meet their obligations
to depositors, meaning that runs cannot occur in equilibrium.8
    The condition determining the possibility of a bank run depends on two
key endogenous variables, the liquidation price of capital ∗ and the condi-
tion of bank balance sheets. Combining the bank funding constraint (9) with
(21) implies we can restate the condition for a bank run equilibrium as
                                           
                     ( + ∗ −  −1 )−1 +  −1  0
   7
     Since banks are homogenous in  the conditions for a run on the system are the same
as for a run on any individual bank.
   8
     We assume that there is a small cost of running to the bank, and that households will
not run if their bank will pay the promised deposit return for sure.

                                           13
We can rearrange this to obtain a simple condition for a bank run equilibrium
in terms of just three variables:
                                  + ∗            1
                        ∗ ≡              (1 −      )                   (22)
                                  −1              −1
where −1 is the bank leverage ratio at −1 A bank run equilibrium exists if
the realized rate of return on bank assets conditional on liquidation of assets
∗ is suﬃciently low relative to the gross interest rate on deposits  and
the leverage ratio is suﬃciently high to satisfy condition (22). Note that
the expression (1 −  1 ) is the ratio of bank deposits −1 to bank capital
                        −1
        
−1 −1  , which is increasing in the leverage ratio.
    Since ∗   and  are all endogenous variables, the possibility of a bank
run may vary with macroeconomic conditions. The equilibrium absent bank
runs (that we described earlier) determines the behavior of  and   The
behavior of ∗ is increasing in the liquidation price ∗  which depends on
the behavior of the economy.
    Finally, we now turn to a more flexible case that we use in the quantita-
tive analysis, where at each time  only a fraction  of depositors consider
running. Here the idea is that not all depositors are suﬃciently alert to
market conditions to contemplate running. This scenario is consistent with
evidence that during a run only a fraction of depositors actually try to quickly
withdraw.
    In this modified situation, a run is possible if any individual depositor who
is considering a run perceives the bank cannot meet the obligations of the
group that could potentially withdraw. Thus, assuming individual depositors
who might run know , a run equilibrium exists if
                                      
                          ( + ∗ )−1   −1 

This can be expressed as
                                                1
                             ∗   (1 −          )                     (23)
                                               −1

Thus, in the condition for the possibility of a bank run equilibrium, the
deposit rate is adjusted by the fraction  of depositors who could potentially
run.



                                        14
2.5.2      The Liquidation Price
To determine ∗ we proceed as follows. A depositor run at  induces all banks
that carried assets from  − 1 to fully liquidate their asset positions and go
out of business.9 New banks do not enter. Given our earlier assumption
that new bankers can operate only by taking over functioning franchises of
existing bankers, the collapse of existing banks eliminates the possibility of
transferring the necessary skill and apparatus to new bankers. Note, however,
that this assumption is for purely technical reasons: It makes the liquidation
price easy to calculate. If we allowed new banks to enter, the banking system
would eventually recover, but under any reasonable calibration, it would be
a very long and slow process. Under either approach, the near term behavior
of liquidation prices would be similar.
    Accordingly, when banks liquidate, they sell all their assets to households.
In the wake of the run at date  and for each period after, accordingly:
                                      
                                 1 = +  for all  ≥ 0                             (24)

where, again, unity is the total supply of capital. Further, since banks no
longer are operating, entering bankers simply consume their respective en-
dowments:
                                  =   
The consumption of households is then the sum of their endowment and the
returns on their capital net of management costs:

                                 =    +  −  (1)                              (25)
where the last term on the right is household portfolio management costs,
which are at a maximum in this instance given that the household is directly
holding the entire capital stock. We assume each household consists of a
continuum of members and that when a run occurs, the household can share
the risk of failing to withdraw early.
          ∗
    Let +1   be the household’s marginal return on capital from  to  + 1
when banks have collapsed at . Then the first order condition for household
direct capital holding is given by
                                               ∗
                                    {Λ+1 +1 }=1
  9
      See Uhlig (2010) for an alternative bank run model with endogenous liquidation prices.


                                             15
with
                              ∗      +1 + ∗+1
                             +1 =               
                                       ∗ + 
          
where  is the marginal portfolio management cost when households are
absorbing all the capital (see equation (4)). Rearranging yields the following
expression for the liquidation price in terms of discounted dividends net the
marginal management cost.
                           "∞                      #
                             X                           
                    ∗
                   =        Λ+ (+ −  ) −                  (26)
                             =1
Everything else equal, the higher the marginal management cost the lower
the liquidation price. Note ∗ as well as  will vary with cyclical conditions.
Thus, even if a bank run equilibrium does not exist in the neighborhood of
the no-run steady state, it is possible that a suﬃciently negative disturbance
to the economy could open up this possibility. We illustrate this point in
Section 3 below.
    Finally, we observe that within our framework the distinction between a
liquidity shortage and insolvency is more subtle than is often portrayed in
popular literature. If a bank run equilibrium exists, banks become insolvent,
i.e. their liabilities exceed their assets if assets are valued at the fire-sale
price ∗ . But if assets are valued at the price in the no-run equilibrium  
the banks are all solvent. Thus whether banks are insolvent or not depends
upon equilibrium asset prices which in turn depend on the liquidity in the
banking system; and this liquidity can change abruptly in the event of a
run. As a real world example of this phenomenon consider the collapse of
the banking system during the Great Depression. As Friedman and Schwartz
(1963) point out that, what was initially a liquidity problem in the banking
system (due in part by inaction of the Fed), turned into a solvency problem
as runs on banks led to a collapse in long-term security prices and in the
banking system along with it.

2.6    Household liquidity risks
Up to this point we have simply assumed that banks engage in maturity
mismatch by issuing non-contingent one period deposits despite holding risky
long maturity assets. We now motivate why banks might issue liquid short
term deposits. In the spirit of Diamond and Dybvig (1983), we do so by

                                       16
introducing idiosyncratic household liquidity risks, which creates a desire by
households for demandable debt. We do not derive these types of deposits
from an explicit contracting exercise. However, we think that a scenario with
liquidity moves us one step closer to understanding why banks issue liquid
deposits despite having partially illiquid assets.
    As before, we assume that there is a continuum of measure unity of house-
holds. To keep the heterogeneity introduced by having independent liquidity
risks manageable, we further assume that each household consists of a con-
tinuum of unit measure individual members.
    Each member of the representative household has a need for emergency
expenditures within the period with probability . At the same time, be-
cause the household has a continuum of members, exactly the fraction  has
a need for emergency consumption. An individual family member can only
acquire emergency consumption from another family, not from his or her own
family. Conversely, drawing from its endowment, the family sells emergency
consumption to individuals from other families.
    In particular, let 
                         be emergency consumption by an individual member,
with   =  
                
                  being   the total emergency consumption by the family. For
an individual with emergency consumption needs, period utility is given by

                              log  +  log 
                                                

where  is regular consumption. For family members that do not need to
make emergency expenditures, period utility is given simply by

                                    log  

Because they are sudden, we assume that demand deposits at banks are
necessary to make emergency expenditures above a certain threshold.
    The timing of events is as follows: At the beginning of period  before
the realization of the liquidity risk during period , the household chooses
 and the allocation of its portfolio between bank deposits  and directly
held capital  subject to the flow-of fund constraint:
                                                                       
    +  +   + ( ) =  −1 + ( +  )−1
                                                      
                                                          +    −   
                       
where the last term   is the sales of household endowment to the other
families needing emergency consumption (which is not realized yet at the
beginning of period). The household plans the date-t regular consumption

                                      17
¡ ¢
  to be the same for every member since all members of the household
are identical ex ante and utility is separable in  and 
                                                            . After choosing
the total level of deposits, the household divides them evenly amongst its
members. During period , an individual member has access only to his or
her own deposits at the time the liquidity risk is realized. Those having to
make emergency expenditures above some threshold  must finance them
from their deposits accounts at the beginning of 10

                                               
                                             −  ≤                                 (27)

Think of  as the amount of emergency expenditure that can be arranged
through credit as opposed to deposits.11 After the realization of the liquidity
shock, individuals with excess deposits simply return them to the house-
hold. Under the symmetric equilibrium, the expected sales of household
                                                                              
endowment to meet the emergency expenditure of the other households  
is equal to the emergency expenditure of the representative household      
and deposits at the end of period 0 are
                                                                 
                    0 = ( − 
                                   ) + (1 − ) +   =  

and equal to the deposit at the beginning of period. Thus the budget con-
straint of the household is given simply by

  +                                                      
          +  +   + ( ) =  −1 + ( +  )−1 +    (28)

The next sequence of optimization then begins at the beginning of period
 + 1.
    We can express the formal decision problem of the household with liquid-
ity risks as follows:

               
    (−1  −1 )=        max           {(log  +  log                     
                                                                +  [+1 (   )]}
                                 
                                 


subject to the budget constraint (28) and the liquidity constraint (27).
  10
     One can think each member carrying a deposit certificate of the amount  . Each
further is unable to make use of the deposit certificates of the other members of the family
for his or her emergency consumption because they are spacially separated.
  11
     We allow for  so that households can make some emergency expenditures in a bank
run equilibrium, which prevents the marginal utility of  from going to infinity.

                                                 18
    Let  be the Lagrangian multiplier on the liquidity constraint. Then the
first order conditions for deposits  and emergency expenditures are given
by:
                                                 
                         {Λ+1 +1 } +          = 1                (29)
                                                1
                                    1
                                 
                                   −  =                               (30)
                                  
The multiplier on the liquidity constraint  is equal to the gap between the
marginal utility of emergency consumption and regular consumption for a
household member who experiences a liquidity shock. Observe that if the
liquidity constraint binds, there is a relative shortage of the liquid asset,
which pushes down the deposit rate, everything else equal, as equation (29)
suggests.
    The first order condition for the households choice of direct capital hold-
ing is the same as in the case without liquidity risks (see equation (7)). The
decision problem for banks is also the same, as are the conditions for aggre-
gate bank behavior.
    In the aggregate (and after using the bank funding condition to eliminate
deposits), the liquidity constraint becomes:

                         −  ≤ (  −  )
Given that households are now making emergency expenditures, the relation
for uses of output becomes

                         =  +  +  +  ( )                  (31)
Otherwise, the remaining equations that determine the equilibrium without
liquidity risks (absent bank runs) also applies in this case.
    Importantly the condition for a bank run (equation 22) also remains un-
changed. The determination of the liquidation price is also eﬀectively the
same (see equation 26). There is one minor change, however: The calcula-
tion of ∗ is slightly diﬀerent since households are now making emergency
expenditures                                 
                  in addition to consuming  




                                       19
3      Numerical Examples
Our goal here is to provide some suggestive numerical examples to illustrate
the workings of the model. Specifically we construct an example where a
recession tightens bank balance sheet constraints, which leads to an "exces-
sive" drop in asset prices and opens up the possibility of a bank run. We
then illustrate the eﬀects of an unanticipated run. We first present results
for our baseline model and then do the same for the model with liquidity
risks.

3.1     Parameter Choices
Table 1 lists the choice of parameter values for our baseline model, while
Table 2 gives the steady state values of the endogenous variables. We take
the period length to be one quarter. Overall there are ten key parameters in
the baseline model and an additional three in the model with liquidity risks.
Two parameters in the baseline are conventional: the quarterly discount
factor  which we set at 099 and the serial correlation of the productivity
                                                                  
shock  which we set at 095. Eight parameters (            )
are specific to our model. Our choice of these parameters is meant to be
suggestive. We set the banker’s survival probability  equal to 093 which
implies an expected horizon of three and half years. We choose values for the
fraction of assets the bank can divert  and the banker’s initial endowment
  to hit the following targets in the steady state absent bank runs: a bank
leverage ratio  of six and an annual spread between the the expected return
on capital and the riskless rate of 240 basis points.12 We set the parameters
                                                                             
of the "managerial cost"  and  to ensure that (i)  is strictly below 
in the no bank run case (so we can use loglinear numerical methods in this
case) and (ii) in the bank run equilibrium managerial costs are low enough
to ensure that households find it profitable to directly hold capital in the
bank run equilibrium. Finally, we set the fraction of depositors who may
run at any moment to 075, which makes it feasible to have a steady state
without a bank run equilibrium with the possibility of a run equilibrium in
the recession. We set the household steady state endowment   (which
  12
    In practice the leverage ratio ranges in the vicinity of 8 to 12 for commercial banks
and 20 to 30 for investment banks. Because the market values of bank assets in our model
are more cyclical than practice (since banks are eﬀectively holding equity claims on firms),
we choose a smaller leverage ratio so as not to exaggerate the volatility of bank net worth.

                                            20
roughly corresponds to labor income) to three times steady state capital
income  We also normalize the steady state price of a unit of capital 
at unity, which restricts the steady value of  (which determined output
stream from capital).
    Finally, for the model with liquidity risks we use the same parametrization
as in our baseline case. There are, however, three additional parameters
(   ) We choose these parameters to ensure that (i) the steady spread
between the households net return on capital  and the deposit  rate is
twenty basis points at an annual level, and (ii) households can still makes
some emergency expenditures in an bank run equilibrium. For all other
parameters, we use the same values as in the baseline case.

3.2    Recessions, Banking Distress and Bank Runs: Some
       Simulations
We have parametrized the model so that a bank run equilibrium does not
exist in the steady state but could arise if the economy enters a recession.
We begin by analyzing the response of the economy to a negative shock to
 assuming the economy stays in the "no bank run" equilibrium. We then
examine the eﬀects of an unanticipated bank run, once the economy enters
a region where runs are possible. For each case we first examine the baseline
model and then turn to the model with liquidity risks.
    Figure 1 shows the response of the baseline model to an unanticipated
negative five percent shock to productivity,   This leads to a drop in output
of roughly five percent, a magnitude which is characteristic of a major reces-
sion. Though a bank run does not arise in this case, the recession induces
financial distress that amplifies the contraction in assets prices and raises
the cost of bank credit. The unanticipated drop in  reduces net worth 
which tightens bank balance sheets, leading to a contraction of bank deposits
and a firesale of bank assets, which in turn magnifies the asset price decline.
Households absorb some of the asset, but because this is costly for them, the
amount they acquire is limited. The net eﬀect is a substantial increase in
the cost of bank credit: the spread between the expected return to bank as-
sets and the riskless rate increases slightly on impact. Overall, the recession
induces the kind of financial accelerator mechanism prevalent in Bernanke
and Gertler (1989) and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) and other macroeconomic
models of financial distress.


                                      21
    Figure 2 repeats the same experiment as in Figure 1, this time examining
the model with liquidity risks. The overall impact on the asset price and the
cost of bank credit is similar to the baseline case. One interesting diﬀerence,
however, is that unlike the baseline, there is a substantial drop in the deposit
interest rates. The contraction in bank deposits raises the liquidity premium
for deposits, which increases the spread between the expected rate of return
                                   
on the household’s capital  (+1   ) and the deposit rate, forcing the later
down.
    We now allow for the possibility of bank runs. To determine whether
a bank equilibrium exists, we first define  as the threshold value of the
liquidation price below which a bank run equilibrium exists. It follows from
equation (23) that  is given by
                                         1
                         =  (1 −          )−1 −                  (32)
                                        −1

Note that  is increasing in −1 , which implies that everything else equal a
bank run equilibrium is more likely the higher is bank leverage at  − 1. We
next construct a variable called "run" that is the diﬀerence between  and
the liquidation price ∗ :
                                =  − ∗                            (33)
   A bank run equilibrium exists iﬀ
                                     0
In the steady of our model   0, implying a bank run equilibrium does
not exist in this situation. However, the recession opens up the possibility of
  0, by simultaneously raising  and lowering ∗ .
    Figure 3 revisits the recession experiment for the baseline model, this
time allowing for a bank run ex post. The first panel of the middle row shows
that the run variable becomes positive upon impact and remains positive for
roughly ten quarters. An unanticipated bank run is thus possible at any
point in this interval. The reason the bank run equilibrium exists is that the
negative productivity shock reduces the liquidation price ∗ and leads to an
increase in the bank’s leverage ratio  (as bank net worth declines relative
to assets). Both these factors work to make the banking system vulnerable
to a run, as equations (32) and (33) indicate.
    In Figure 3 we suppose an unanticipated run occurs in the second period
after the shock. The solid line portrays the bank run while the dotted line

                                        22
tracks the no-bank run equilibrium for reference. The run produces a com-
plete liquidation of bank assets as  drops to zero. The asset price falls
to it liquidation price which is roughly forty percent below the steady state.
Output net of household capital management costs drops roughly fifteen per-
cent. The high management costs arise because in the absence of the banking
system, households are directly holding the entire capital stock. The reduc-
tion of net output implies that household consumption drops roughly seven
percent on impact. Bankers consumption drops nearly to zero as existing
bankers are completely wiped out and new bankers are only able to consume
their endowment.
    Finally, Figure 4 repeats the experiment for the model with liquidity risks.
The behavior of the economy in the wake of a bank run is very similar to
the baseline case. One diﬀerence is that the time interval over which a bank
run equilibrium exits is shorter. This occurs because the drop in the deposit
rate following the recessionary shock is greater than in the baseline case (see
Figure 2) which reduces the likelihood that the conditions for a bank run
equilibrium will be met.


4    Anticipated Bank Runs
So far, we have analyzed the existence and properties of an equilibrium with
a bank run when the run is not anticipated. We now consider what happens
if people expect a bank run will occur with a positive probability in future.
    Define the recovery rate in the event of a bank run next period, +1  as
the ratio of the realized return on the bank assets to the promised deposit
return in the event of bank-run, as follows:
                                    (∗+1 + +1 )
                           +1 =
                                         +1 
where as before ∗+1 is the liquidation price of capital during the run. The
recovery rate can be rewritten as a function of the rate of return on bank
assets during the run and the leverage ratio of the previous period:
                                    ∗
                                   +1           
                          +1   =          ·
                                   +1         − 
                                    ∗
                                   +1         
                                 =          ·                             (34)
                                   +1        − 1

                                       23
The realized rate of return on deposit depends upon whether the run occurs
as well as the depositor’s position in during the run, as

                      ⎧
                      ⎨           +1 if no bank run
             +1 =     +1 with probability +1 if run occurs
                      ⎩
                        0 with probability 1 − +1 if run occurs
Because we assumed that depositors will not run if they always receive the
same return, the equilibrium with run exists if and only if the recovery rate
is less than one.
    Continue to assume that each household consists of a continuum of mem-
bers and that when a run occurs, exactly the fraction +1 of the members
receives the promised return on deposits. Then, the first order conditions for
the household’s consumption and portfolio choices implies
                              £                                        ¤
                 1 = +1  (1 − +1 )Λ+1 + +1 +1 Λ∗+1                   (35)
             ∙                                                                ¸
                               +1 + +1              ∗      +1 + ∗+1
      1 =  (1 − +1 )Λ+1                 + +1 Λ+1                        (36)
                                +  0 ( )                 +  0 ( )
where +1 is the indicator function which is equal to 1 if the run occurs and
equal to 0 otherwise. Λ+1 and Λ∗+1 are the marginal rates of substitution
between consumption of dates  + 1 and  in the equilibrium without and
with a run: Λ+1 =  +1
                                  and Λ∗+1 =  +1  ∗
                                                                . From (34) and (35) 
we get                                ¡                   ¢ 
                                                     ∗
                               1 −  +1 Λ∗+1 +1      −1
                      +1 =                                                        (37)
                                    [(1 − +1 )Λ+1 ]
Observe that the promised rate of return on deposits is a decreasing function
of the leverage rate  as the recovery rate¡  is decreasing
                                                        ¢           in the leverage rate.
    The bank chooses its balance sheet      to maximize the objective
 subject to the existing constraints (9 10 11 12) and the constraint on
the promised rate of return on deposits (37)  Because the objective and
constraints of the bank are constant returns to scale, we can rewrite the
bank’s problem to choose the leverage ratio  to maximize the value per
unit of net worth as
                             ½                          ¾
                                                +1
      =       = max  (1 −  + +1 )
                                               
                                                          
         = max  {(1 −  +  +1 )(1 − +1 )[(+1         − +1 ) + +1 ]}
               


                                           24
subject to the incentive constraint  ≥  
    Using (37) to eliminate +1 from the objective, we have
                 (                Ã                                              !)
                                                                     ∗      ∗
                                     
                                                − 1 −    (    Λ      
                                                            +1 +1 +1    )
  = max  Ω+1 (1 − +1 ) +1      −
                                                   [(1 − +1 )Λ+1 ]
     = max (  +   ) 
           

where
                              [(1 − +1 )Ω+1 ]
                           =                          and                  (38)
                               [(1 − +1 )Λ+1 ]
                "                Ã                                       !#
                                                             ∗      ∗
                                     
                                             1 −    (+1 Λ     
                                                             +1 +1 )
         =  Ω+1 (1 − +1 ) +1   −                                    (39)
                                                [(1 − +1 )Λ+1 ]
with Ω+1 = 1−+ +1 . Note that we need to check whether the discounted
excess return on assets  remains positive, in order to show the incentive
constraint binds. In this case

                                  =   +   =  
or
                                       
                                       =                             (40)
                                      − 
In the Appendix, we analyze the optimization problem in detail.
    Summing across banks yields the aggregate condition for bank asset hold-
ings
                                =   
where the evolution of the net worth is
                          © £           
                                                     ¤     ª
             = (1 −  )  ( +  )+1 −  −1 +                    (41)

    To analyze anticipated bank runs, we begin with a situation the economy
is functioning "normally," where a bank run equilibrium also exists in the
neighborhood of the steady state, i.e., condition (23) is satisfied. We then
assume that the probability depositors assign to a bank run happening in
subsequent periods follows an exogenous AR(1) process

                                (+1 = 1 | +1 ) =                   (42)

                         =  −1 +   where  is i.i.d.

                                             25
   Under assumption (42)  the household condition for deposits (35) be-
comes
             1 = +1 [(1 −  ) (Λ+1 ) +   (Λ∗+1 +1 )] (43)
Given +1  1, as long as the marginal rate of substitution in the bank run
equilibrium satisfies
                           ¡           ¢
                         Λ∗+1 +1   (Λ+1 )

+1 is an increasing function of  . Also the discounted excess value of bank
assets per unit becomes
                                                                    ∗
                       
     =  {Ω0+1 [(+1                 
                           − +1 ) −  (+1                     
                                               − +1  (Λ∗+1 +1 )]}   (44)

where Ω0+1 is the value of Ω+1 in the equilibrium without a bank run, and
where as before +1 is the risk-free rate. Thus  is a decreasing function of
 .
     An increase in the perceived likelihood of a bank run has harmful eﬀects
on the economy even if a bank run does not materialize. Because the de-
posit rate increases to compensate the possible loss to depositors, bank net
worth shrinks over time (see equation (41)), contracting bank credit flows.
In addition, an increase in  reduces the bank franchise value and the excess
value of bank assets (everything else equal) as in equation (44)  In turn, the
decline in  places in downward pressure on the bank leverage ratio  (see
equation (40)) further contracting the economy.
     We now present several numerical simulations to illustrate the impact an
rise in the probability of a run. We stick with the same calibration as in our
baseline case (see Table 1), with one exception. We now suppose that all
depositors can run (i.e.,  = 1). This opens up the possibility of a run in
the steady state, given our overall calibration (see equation (32)). We also
impose that the serial correlation coeﬃcient governing the exogenous process
for the run probability,  , equals 095 Finally, we assume further that in
steady state the perceived probability of a run is zero.
     Figure 5 shows the impact of an anticipated one percent increase in the
probability  of a run in the subsequent period. The increased riskiness of
bank deposits leads to an outflow of bank assets ( declines by 14 percent)
and an increase in the spread between the deposit rate and the risk free
rate. Both the price of capital and bank net worth decline. Output also
declines 1 percent because the household is less eﬃcient at managing assets

                                       26
than banks. Accordingly, even if a run does not occur, the mere anticipation
of a run induces harmful eﬀects to the economy.
    While the spread between the deposit rate and the risk free rate increases,
the deposit rate actually declines. This occurs because there is a sharp drop in
the risk free rate that arises because households face increasing (managerial)
costs at the margin of absorbing the outflow of bank assets. Missing from the
model are a variety of forces that could moderate movements in the risk free
rate. Accordingly, we consider a variant of the model which keeps the risk
free rate constant. We do this by allowing households the additional option of
saving in the form of a storage technology (or net foreign asset) that pays the
constant gross return  =  −1  Figure 6 then repeats the experiment as in
Figure 5. In this case the increase in the perceived probability of a run raises
the deposit more than one hundred basis points. The spread increases more
and output shrinks by 15 percent with one percent increase of likelihood of
bank run as the risk free rate remains constant.
    Note that for these exercises we parametrized the model so that a bank
run equilibrium is feasible in the steady state. Though we do not report
the results here, it is possible that the economy could start in a steady state
where a bank run equilibrium is not feasible, but the anticipation of a bank
run could move the economy to a situation where a run is indeed possible.
The increase in the deposit rate stemming from an anticipated possibility of
a run could leave the bank unable to satisfy all its deposit obligations in the
event of a mass withdrawal.
    Of course, it would be desirable to endogenize the probability of a run,
which is a nontrivial undertaking. An intermediate step might be to make
the probability of a run an inverse function of the recovery rate  +1 (see
equation (34)) in the region where the recovery rate is expected to be less
than unity. Doing so would enhance the financial propagation mechanism
in the no-bank run equilibrium (see Figure 1), as the downturn would be
magnified by a rise in the expected probability of a run.


5    Conclusion
We end with some remarks about government financial policy. As in Diamond
and Dybvig (1983) the existence of the bank run equilibrium introduces a
role for deposit insurance. The belief that deposits will be insured eliminates
the incentive to run in our framework just as it does in the original Diamond

                                      27
and Dybvig setup. If all goes well, further, the deposit insurance need never
be used in practice. By being available, it serves its purpose simply by ruling
out beliefs that could lead to a bank run.
    Usually, however, deposit insurance is considered in the context of com-
mercial banking. However, our model of bank runs pertains to any financial
institutions that rely heavily on short term that hold assets that are imper-
fectly liquid, including investment banks, money market mutual funds and so
on. Clearly, extending deposit insurance to these kinds of institutions would
be problematic. In addition, as is well understood, moral hazard consider-
ations (not present in our current framework) could produce negative side
eﬀects from deposit insurance.
    The solution used in practice is to combine capital requirements with de-
posit insurance. As many authors have pointed out, capital requirements help
oﬀset the incentives for risk-taking that deposit insurance induces. Within
our framework, capital requirements have an added benefit: they reduce the
size of the region where bank run equilibria are feasible. This occurs because
the possibility of a bank run equilibrium is increasing in the leverage ratio.
If equity capital is costly for banks to raise, as appears to be the case in
practice, then capital requirements may also have negative side eﬀects. A
number of authors have recently pointed that the "stabilizing" eﬀects of cap-
ital requirements may be countered to some degree by the increased cost of
intermediation (to the extent raising equity capital is costly).
    Our model suggests that a commitment by the central bank to lender of
last resort policies may also be useful. Within our framework the endoge-
nously determined liquidation price of bank assets is a key determinant of
whether a bank run equilibrium exists. In this regard, a commitment to
use lender of last resort policies to support liquidation prices could be use-
ful. For example, central bank asset purchases that support the secondary
market prices of bank assets might be eﬀective in keeping liquidation prices
suﬃciently high to rule out the possibility of runs. (Consider the recent pur-
chases by the Federal Reserve of agency mortgaged-backed securities, in the
wake of the collapse of the shadow banking system.) An issue to investigate
is whether by signalling the availability of such a tool in advance of the crisis,
the central bank might have been able to reduce the likelihood of runs on the
shadow banks ex post. Gertler and Karadi (2011) and Gertler and Kiyotaki
(2011) explore the use of this kind of policy tool in a macroeconomic model



                                       28
of banking distress but without bank runs.13 It would be useful to extend
the analysis of this policy tool and related lender of last resort policies to a
setting with bank runs.
  13
    See also Gertler, Kiyotaki and Queralto (2012) which takes into account the moral
hazard eﬀects of lender of last resort policies by endogenizing the risk of bank liability
structure.




                                           29
6     Appendix
This appendix describes the bank’s optimization under anticipated bank runs
as analyzed in Section 4.
¡ From¢Section 4, we can write the bank’s decision problem as choosing
   +1 to maximize
                            ½                      ¾
                                            +1
      =      = max  (1 −  + +1 )
               +1                       
                                                       
         =        max (1 −  ) {(1 −  + +1 )[(+1 − +1 ) + +1 ]}(45)
                +1


subject to
                                         ≥                                   (46)
and                                         ¡             ¢ 
                                                      ∗
                                   1 −   Λ∗+1 +1   −1
                          +1 =                                                 (47)
                                       (1 −  ) (Λ+1 )
    Using (47) to eliminate +1 from the objective, we have
                          (     Ã                                           !)
                                                                ∗      ∗
                                             − 1 −    
                                                          (Λ      
                                                                +1 +1 )
   = max (1 −  ) Ω0+1 +1  
                                       −                                   (48)
                                               (1 −  ) (Λ+1 )
      = max (  +   ) 
             


where
                                            (Ω0+1 )
                                     =
                                            (Λ+1 )
                                                                        ∗
                           
         =  {Ω0+1 [(+1                 
                               − +1 ) −  (+1                     
                                                   − +1  (Λ∗+1 +1 )]}
with Ω0+1 = 1−++1 is Ω+1 conditional on no run. Clearly the incentive
constraint is binding if  is positive. Given that we verify  to be positive
numerically, we have characterized the local optimum for the bank’s decision
problem.
   Next, we need to check the local optimum is the global optimum. In
particular, we need to take into account whether an individual bank might
want to avoid leverage in order to survive a run on the banking system. The
benefit is that the bank will be able to earn large profits if the other banks
have failed. The cost is that it will earn a very low return on its net worth in

                                            30
absence of a run. We show under our parametrization that this strategy is
not optimal, implying that our local optimum is in fact a global result. The
argument goes as follows.
    Suppose that an individual bank does not issue deposits. It just invests
out of its net worth and thus is able to function in the event of a bank run.
It’s objective then becomes

   = {(1 −  ) [(1 −  +  +1 )+1
                                          
                                              ] +   [(1 −  +  ∗∗    ∗
                                                                     +1 )+1 ]} (49)

where 0+1 and ∗∗ +1 is value conditional on no run and a bank run. We
suppose that the bank is "small", so that conditional on a bank run, it is
still the case that  = ∗ . Accordingly,
                       n                          ∗∗         ∗∗
                                                                o
              ∗∗                     ∗∗     ∗∗
              =  (1 −  +  )[(+1 − +1 )+1 + +1        (50)
with

                                 ∗∗       + ∗+1
                                +1    =
                                             ∗
                                 ∗∗
                                +1 = 1 (Λ∗∗
                                              +1 )

                                                ∗∗
                                  Λ∗∗
                                   +1 =      ∗∗
                                                +1
                            ∗∗ =  (  + 1) −  (1)
                                (∞                        )
                                 X
                 ∗ =              Λ∗∗             0
                                       + [+ −  (1)]   −  0 (1)
                                =1
                            ∗
                      =  ( )

as  follows a Markov process with bounded support. Note that because 
is at its liquidation value ∗ in this case, after the initial run another run
will not occur. Hence the surviving ban can attach a probability zero to this
event.
                ∗∗
    Because +1    will be large in expectation relative to its "pre-run" value
  
+1  the surviving bank has extra incentive to borrow to earn excess returns.
However, in this case the requirement the deposits be riskless will limit the
amount the bank can borrows. In particular, one can show numerically that

                                           31
in this case that the requirement that deposits be riskless imposes a binding
upper bound  on the leverage ratio for the bank surviving the run: :
                                          ∗∗
                                      +1
                          =    ∗∗       ¡ ∗∗ ¢                       (51)
                                +1 −  +1
                                       +1


Note that in the pre-crisis non-bank run equilibrium we restricted the size
of the shock to ensure that the constraint that deposits be riskless does not
bind. Given the extra-normal excess returns available after a bank run, how-
ever, this constraint is binding under our parametrization (and for reasonable
variations of this parametrization.)
    Though we do not report the results here, we verify numerically that is
never pays for a bank to avoid leverage in normal times in order to survive
a bank run. Intuitively, though the bank can earn high returns in the wake
of the bank run, the low probability of this event makes it not worthwhile
to reduce its earning in normal times. We can also verify that this result
is robust to permitting the bank to issue some debt in normal times (below
the amount that would lead to it being wiped out in a bank run.). While
the bank earns more in normal times, it winds up with lower net worth in
the wake of the run due to the debt exposure. Finally, the result is robust
to allowing the bank to hold deposits in other banks as opposed to the risky
security.




                                     32
References
 [1] Adrian, T., Colla, P., and Shin, H., 2012. Which Financial Frictions?
     Paring the Evidence from Financial Crisis of 2007-9. Forthcoming in
     NBER Macroeconomic Annual.

 [2] Allen, F., and Gale, D., 2007. Understanding Financial Crises. Oxford
     University Press.

 [3] Angeloni, I., and E. Faia, 2013, Capital Regulation and Monetary Policy
     with Fragile Banks, Journal of Monetary Policy 60, 3111-382.

 [4] Bernanke, B., 2010. Causes of the Recent Financial and Economic Crisis.
     Statement before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington,
     September 2.

 [5] Bernanke, B., and Gertler, M., 1989. Agency Costs, Net Worth and
     Business Fluctuations. American Economic Review 79, 14-31.

 [6] Boissay F., F. Collard, and F. Smets, 2013, Booms and Systemic Bank-
     ing Crises, mimeo.

 [7] Brunnermeier, M. K., and Sannikov, Y., 2011. A Macroeconomic Model
     with a Financial Sector. Mimeo, Princeton University.

 [8] Cole, H. and T. Kehoe, 2000, Self-fulfilling Debt Crises, Review of Eco-
     nomic Studies 67, 91-161/

 [9] Cooper, R. and T. Ross, 1998, Bank Runs: Liquidity Costs and Invest-
     ment Distortions, Journal of Monetary Economics 41, 27-38.

[10] Diamond, D., and Dybvig, P., 1983. Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
     Liquidity. Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

[11] Ennis, H. and T. Keister, 2003, Economic Growth, Liquidity and Bank
     Runs, Journal of Economic Theory 109, 220-245.

[12] Friedman, M., and Schwartz, A., 1963. A Monetary History of the
     United States, 1867-1960. Princeton University Press.

[13] Gertler, M., and Karadi, P., 2011. A Model of Unconventional Monetary
     Policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, January.

                                     33
[14] Gertler, M., and Kiyotaki, N., 2010. Financial Intermediation and Credit
     Policy in Business Cycle Analysis. In Friedman, B., and Woodford,
     M. (Eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics. Elsevier, Amsterdam,
     Netherlands.

[15] Gertler, M., Kiyotaki, N., and Queralto, A., 2012. Financial Crises, Bank
     Risk Exposure and Government Financial Policy, Journal of Monetary
     Economics 59, S17-S34.

[16] Gorton, G., 2010. Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007.
     Oxford University Press.

[17] He, Z. and A. Krishnamurthy, 2013, Intermediary Asset Pricing, Amer-
     ican Economic Review.

[18] Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, 2011. Inside and Outside Liquidity. MIT
     Press.

[19] Kiyotaki, N., and Moore, J., 1997. Credit Cycles. Journal of Political
     Economy 105, 211-248.

[20] Martin, A., D. Skeie and E.L. Von Thadden. Repo Runs. Mimeo, Federal
     Reserve Bank of New York.

[21] Robatto, R. 2013, Financial Crises and Systematic Bank Runs in a Dy-
     namic Model of Banking, mimeo, University of Chicago.

[22] Uhlig, Harald, 2010, A Model of a Systemic Bank Run, Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics 57, 78-96.




                                     34
                Table 1: Parameters

                Baseline Model
     0.99    Discount rate
     0.93    Bankers survival probability
     0.35    Seizure rate
     0.02    Household managerial cost
   0.48    Threshold capital for managerial cost
     0.75    Fraction of depositors that can run
     0.95    Serial correlation of productivity shock
   0.0161 Steady state productivity
  0.0032 Bankers endowment
  0.045 Household endowment
  Additional Parameters for Liquidity Model
     38.65 Preference weight on 
c   0.01    Threshold for 
¯
   0.0033 Bankers endowment
     0.03    Probability of a liquidity shock
     0.7    Fraction of depositors that can run




                         1
     Table 2: Steady State Values

     No Bank-Run Equilibrium
     Baseline            Liquidity
K        1                   1
Q        1                   1
    0.0548              0.0261
       0                0.0282
    0.0086              0.0089
    0.2970              0.2723
    0.7030              0.7277
         6                   6
    1.0644              1.0624
    1.0404              1.0404
     1.0404              1.0384
      Bank-Run Equilibrium
     Baseline            Liquidity
K        1                   1
     0.6340              0.5845
    0.0538              0.0533
       0                 0.01
    0.0032              0.0033
       1                   1
       0                   0

    1.1016                   1.1068
    1.0404                   1.0404





                  2
Figure 1: A Recession in the Baseline Model: No Bank Run Case




                             1
Figure 2: A Recession in the Liquidity Risk Model: No Bank Run Case




                                2
Figure 3: Ex Post Bank Run in the Baseline Model




                       3
Figure 4: Ex Post Bank Run in the Liquidity Risk Model




                          4
Figure 5: Increase in the Probability of a Run




                      5
Figure 6: Increase in the Probability of a Run, Fixed Riskless Rate




                                6
