                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DIFFERENTIAL FERTILITY, HUMAN CAPITAL, AND DEVELOPMENT

                                                Tom Vogl

                                         Working Paper 19128
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19128


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




For helpful comments, I am grateful to Janet Currie, Partha Deb, Oded Galor, Thomas Fujiwara, Zoë
McLaren, Kyle Meng, Omer Moav, Ben Olken, Shing-Yi Wang; seminar participants at Brown, Harvard,
Hunter, MIT, Princeton, the World Bank, the Population Association of America, and NBER Summer
Institute; and especially Anne Case and Angus Deaton. Thanks also to Claudia Olivetti for sharing
her data on female labor force participation. The views expressed herein are those of the author and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Tom Vogl. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Differential Fertility, Human Capital, and Development
Tom Vogl
NBER Working Paper No. 19128
June 2013
JEL No. E24,I25,J1,O1

                                             ABSTRACT

Using micro-data from 48 developing countries, I document a recent reversal in the income-fertility
relationship and its aggregate implications. Before 1960, children from larger families had richer parents
and obtained more education. By century’s end, both patterns had reversed. Consequently, income
differentials in fertility historically raised average education but now reduce it. While the reversal
is unrelated to changes in GDP, women’s work, sectoral composition, or health, half is attributable
to rising aggregate education in the parents’ generation. The results support a model in which rising
skill returns lowered the minimum income at which parents invest in education.


Tom Vogl
Department of Economics
Princeton University
363 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
tvogl@princeton.edu
1     Introduction
Statisticians of the 19th and early-20th centuries expressed much concern about the
negative correlations between fertility and a range of desirable attributes. Francis
Galton, Karl Pearson, and Ronald Fisher, not to mention their many peers in the
field of eugenics, all argued that the higher fertility rates of the poor implied the
genetic deterioration of humankind (Kevles 1985). Over the next century, the pattern
of ’differential fertility’ between the rich and poor, the literate and illiterate, and the
more and less intelligent caused alarm over the evolution of the distribution of traits.
     Although eugenic arguments have gone out of vogue, social scientists have con-
tinued to study how differential fertility affects aggregate outcomes. Among modern
economists, this interest dates back to Kuznets (1973), who suggested that differen-
tial fertility adversely affects both the distribution and the growth rate of income. A
long line of research since then has formalized and further developed these theories.1
At this literature’s core is the observation that, in most present-day settings, wealthy
parents have fewer children than poor parents, and they educate their children more.
Compared to a population without heterogeneity in fertility rates, a population with
greater fertility among the poor has a higher share of children from poor families,
which lowers the average skill level. Some models also demonstrate how these fertil-
ity gaps can give rise to poverty traps, thus widening inequality.2 Much of this work
posits that the higher fertility of the poor can help explain the growth and income
distribution experiences of developing countries over the 20th century. This paper
provides broad evidence that this claim cannot be true because, until quite recently,
fertility increased with income throughout much of the developing world. Children
from larger families therefore obtained more education.
     At least since Becker (1960), economists have recognized that fertility may have
once been positively correlated with income. But systematic evidence on the reversal
of this cross-sectional relationship has emerged only recently, primarily for Western
Europe several centuries ago (Hadeishi 2003; Clark 2007). What little evidence exists
    1 Referencesinclude Althaus (1980), Dahan and Tsiddon (1998), Morand (1999), Galor and Moav
(2002), Kremer and Chen (2002), de la Croix and Doepke (2003), Moav (2005), and Clark (2007).
   2 Empirically, Lam (1986) shows that the effect of differential fertility on inequality depends on the

inequality metric. His finding does not overturn the general equilibrium reasoning of recent theories.


                                                   1
on currently poor countries is scattered, relying on small datasets from select parts of
the world, mostly in Africa (Schultz 1986; Skirrbekk 2008). Similarly, despite bits
of evidence that the relationship between sibship size and education may not have
always been negative (Buchmann and Hannum 2001; Maralani 2008), this work has
not identified generalizable patterns.
     In the literature on the theory of fertility and its interaction with the macro-
economy, the focus on the present regime with a negative income-fertility gradient
is thus unsurprising. As its standard framework for the study of differential fertility,
this literature uses a model that assigns a time cost to children and a goods cost to
education: a setup that yields the negative gradient that is prevalent today. In Sec-
tion 2 of the paper, I demonstrate that with the addition of a subsistence constraint
or a goods cost of children, the same framework predicts that fertility increases with
income among the poor. As such, in the early stages of development, children with
more siblings come from richer families and obtain more education.
     Drawing on extensive micro-data from 48 developing countries, I confirm these
predictions by studying the evolution of two closely-related cross-sectional associ-
ations: (1) that between parental economic status (proxied by durable goods own-
ership) and fertility and (2) that between sibship size and education. In the not-
too-distant past, richer families had more children, and children with more siblings
obtained more education. Today, the opposite is true for both relationships. These
findings have implications for theories of fertility and the demographic transition, as
well as for understanding the role of differential fertility in the process of growth. In
particular, until recently, differences in fertility decisions across families promoted
the growth of the per capita human capital stock instead of slowing it.
     To illustrate these findings, I construct two datasets from the Demographic and
Health Surveys (DHS). For the first, I treat the survey respondents (who are women
of childbearing age) as mothers, using fertility history data to construct two cross-
sections of families from 20 countries in the 1986-1994 and 2006-2011 periods. In
these data, respondents enumerate all of their children ever born, with information on
survival status. Between the early and late periods, the relationship between parental
durable goods ownership and the number of surviving children flipped from positive
to negative in Africa and rural Asia; it was negative throughout in Latin America.

                                           2
     For the second dataset, I treat the DHS respondents as siblings, using sibling his-
tory data to retrospectively construct a longer panel of families from 42 countries.
In these data, respondents report all children ever born to their mothers, again with
information on survival status. Among earlier birth cohorts (mostly of the 1940s and
1950s), most countries show negative associations between the number of ever-born
or surviving siblings and educational attainment. Among later birth cohorts (mostly
of the 1980s), most countries show the opposite. The dates of the transition vary
by setting, with Latin America roughly in the 1960s, Asia roughly in the 1970s, and
Africa roughly in the 1980s. Taken together, the data suggest that in nearly all sample
countries, both the income-fertility relationship and the sibsize-education relation-
ship flipped from positive to negative. Indeed, although the DHS offers little data on
childhood economic circumstance, three supplementary datasets (from Bangladesh,
Indonesia, and Mexico) suggest that one can attribute much of the reversal in the
sibsize-education relationship to the reversal of the income-fertility relationship.
     I then quantify the changing effect of differential fertility on average educational
attainment, relative to a thought experiment in which all families are forced to have
the same family size. The theoretical framework shows that one can separate this
effect into two components. The first reflects how the forced fertility policy would
affect the composition of the population, while the second reflects how it would af-
fect the distribution of education investment per child across families. I focus on
the first component, which plays a larger role in theories of the aggregate effects of
differential fertility, and which one can estimate by means of a simple reweighting
procedure. The procedure compares actual average educational attainment with the
(reweighted) average that would arise if all families had the same number of children,
with no change to their educational attainment.
     The results of the reweighting procedure are at odds with claims that differen-
tial fertility between rich and poor generally depresses average skill. Only in South
Africa did differential fertility lower average education throughout the sample period.
The remaining countries are split fairly evenly in two groups. In one, differential fer-
tility elevated average education throughout the sample period, due to a consistently
positive relationship between surviving sibship size and education. In the other, the
influence of differential fertility changed over the sample period, typically starting

                                           3
positive and ending negative. The magnitudes are usually less than half a year of
education: moderate in comparison to the nearly four-year increase in average edu-
cational attainment over the sample period. But they are meaningfully large relative
to the level of average education in early cohorts. For women born during 1950-54,
the reweighted average differs from the actual average by 15 percent.
    Because these findings constitute the first systematic evidence of a reversal of
differential fertility across the developing world, they are of interest independently
of the mechanism mediating them. Nevertheless, to test alternative theories of the
reversal, I assemble a country-by-birth cohort panel of sibsize-education coefficients.
Net of country and cohort fixed effects, neither women’s labor force participation, nor
sectoral composition, nor GDP per capita, nor child mortality predicts the sibsize-
education association. Rather, one variable can account for over half of the reversal of
the sibsize-education association: the average educational attainment of the parents’
generation.3 These findings are broadly consistent with the theoretical framework in
Section 2. However, because the reversal is uncorrelated with economic growth, its
most likely cause is not a shift of the income distribution over the peak of a stable,
hump-shaped income-fertility profile. Instead, a rising return to education may have
lowered the income threshold at which families begin to invest in education, moving
the peak of the income-fertility profile to the left. Indeed, although the fertility history
data show a hump-shaped relationship between durable goods ownership and fertility
in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the relationship is everywhere negatively sloped by
the 2000s. The return-to-education theory is also consistent with the role of aggregate
education; in many endogenous growth models (e.g., Becker et al. 1990; Galor and
Weil 2000), aggregate human capital raises the individual return to education.
    By documenting that patterns of differential fertility recently reversed, this paper
makes contributions to several literatures. Most apparent is the connection with two
empirical literatures: one on parental income and fertility, the other on sibship size
and education. In both these literatures, existing evidence on positive income-fertility
and sibsize-education associations is scattered, lacking a unifying framework.4 This
   3 Male   and female education have indistinguishable effects, suggesting that female empowerment
does not explain the reversal.
    4 In a meta-analysis of 129 studies, Skirbekk (2008) finds a reversal in the income-fertility link. But

the studies use varied methods on data from disparate settings, making the results difficult to interpret.

                                                    4
paper uncovers a common time path in which both associations flip from positive
to negative. Building on a standard model of the growth literature, it provides a
theoretical framework that explains the reversal and gives insight into its aggregate
implications. Along these lines, the paper shows how cross-family heterogeneity in
fertility historically increased average eduction but now largely decreases it. That
finding adds to our understanding of how demography interacts with the macroecon-
omy and calls attention to how cross-sectional patterns can inform models of fertility
decline. The basic time-series facts about fertility decline are overdetermined, so
a more thorough treatment of changing heterogeneity within populations will help
narrow the field of candidate theories of the demographic transition.


2     A Quality-Quantity Framework
This section demonstrates how a subsistence constraint or a goods cost of children
influences the growth literature’s standard theoretical framework for studying differ-
ential fertility. Given the paper’s focus, I derive the model’s main cross-sectional
implications, rather than its intergenerational dynamics.


2.1   Setup
Parents maximize a utility function over their own consumption (c), the number of
children (n), and human capital per child (h):

                 U(c, n, h) = α log(c) + (1 − α) (log(n) + β log(h))               (1)

This utility function is standard in the literature on the demographic transition. α ∈
(0, 1) indexes the weight the parents place on their own consumption relative to the
combined quantity and quality of children, while β ∈ (0, 1) reflects the importance
of quality relative to quantity. Child quality, or human capital, is determined by:

                                  h(e) = θ0 + θ1 e                                 (2)



                                          5
where e denotes education spending per child, and θ0 and θ1 are positive.5 θ0 is a
human capital endowment (e.g., public school), while θ1 is the return to education
spending. One can view h(e) as a child’s earnings in adulthood or as some broader
measure of human capital. Irrespective of human capital, each child costs τ ∈ (0, 1)
units of time and κ ≥ 0 goods. These costs represent the minimum activities (e.g.,
pregnancy, child care) and goods (e.g., food, clothing) required for each child.
    Parents work at wage w with a time endowment of 1, so the budget constraint is:

                                      c + κn + ne ≤ w (1 − τn)                                         (3)

They also face a subsistence constraint: c must exceed c̃ ≥ 0. The framework allows
the child goods cost and the subsistence level to be zero, in which case it reduces to
the models of De la Croix and Doepke (2003) and Moav (2005). It focuses on wages
rather than income, but qualitative predictions for the two variables are the same.


2.2      Optimal Fertility and Education Spending
This setup yields closed-form solutions  for optimalfertility and education spending.
                                        1 θ0 /θ1
If the wage is below the threshold w̃ = τ    β − κ , parents are content with the hu-
man capital endowment θ0 and choose a corner solution with no education spending.
If w ≥ w̃, education spending per child rises linearly in the wage:
                                      
                                  ∗
                                      0                            if w < w̃
                                 ew =                                                                  (4)
                                       β (κ+τw)−θ0 /θ1             if w ≥ w̃
                                                1−β

The subsistence level c̃ plays no role in determining education spending per child.
   The subsistence constraint does influence fertility choice, however:
                                   
                                      w−c̃                                 c̃
                                                                                    
                                   
                                   
                                    κ+τw                if w < min        α , w̃
                                   
                                    (1−α)w
                                   
                                                              c̃
                                                                   ≤ w < w̃
                                   
                                                         if
                           n∗w       κ+τw
                                 = (1−β   )(w−c̃)
                                                              α
                                                                                                       (5)
                                                                          c̃
                                  
                                          /θ             if w̃ ≤ w <
                                             1 +τw
                                   κ−θ                                   α
                                  
                                       0
                                   (1−α)(1−β )w
                                  
                                                                           c̃
                                                                                    
                                                         if w ≥ max
                                  
                                    κ−θ0 /θ1 +τw                           α , w̃
  5 To   add concavity, one can set h(e) = (θ0 + θ1 e)σ , σ ∈ (0, 1), without affecting the results.
                                                     6
The first line of Equation (5) corresponds to the case in which the parents are both
subsistence constrained and at an education corner solution. After consuming c̃, they
spend all of their remaining full income w on child quantity, so fertility increases
with the wage. The next two lines deal with the cases in which αc̃ < w̃ and w̃ <
 c̃
α , respectively. In the second line, the subsistence constraint no longer binds, but
the parents remain at an education corner solution. They devote αw to their own
consumption and the remainder to child quantity, so fertility is increasing in the wage
if κ > 0 and constant if κ = 0. In the third line, the subsistence constraint binds, but
the parents now choose an education interior solution, making the comparative static
               dn∗
ambiguous: dww R 0 if and only if κ R θθ10 − τ c̃. It is also ambiguous in the final
line, in which the parents are constrained by neither the subsistence constraint nor
                                            dn∗
the lower bound on education spending: dww R 0 if and only if κ R θθ01 .
    To summarize, either a subsistence constraint or a goods cost of children guar-
antees a hump-shaped relationship between wages and fertility, so long as the goods
cost is not too large.6 At low wage levels, fertility increases with the wage if κ > 0
or c̃ > 0; at high wage levels, it decreases in the wage if κ < θ0 /θ1 . For illustra-
tion, Figure 1 graphs n∗w and e∗w against w for the case in which 0 < αc̃ < w̃ and
0 < κ < θ0 /θ1 . The n∗w profile follows a hump-shape, with fertility low among the
poor, high among parents with intermediate wages, and somewhat lower among the
rich, converging toward the asymptote (1 − α) (1 − β ) /τ. These results suggest that
the wage-fertility association is positive in the early stages of economic development,
but that broad-based gains in living standards tend to make it negative.
    The parameters of the model may also change over the course of development,
with implications for the shape of the wage-fertility relationship. Two changes are
relevant for the empirical work below. First, as Malthus (1826) once argued, the rise
of anti-poverty programs may alleviate the subsistence constraint, thus decreasing
the amount c̃ that parents need to devote to their own consumption. Second, as em-
phasized by Unified Growth Theory (Galor 2011), the return to education spending
θ1 may increase, thus decreasing w̃. These forces shift the maximum of the n∗w profile
to the left, so they also tend to make the wage-fertility association negative.
   6 Absent a subsistence constraint or a goods cost of children, fertility is invariant to the wage when
w < w̃ and decesasing in the wage when w ≥ w̃. Because children bear only a time cost and education
bears only a goods cost, the price of child quantity is relatively high for higher-wage families.
                                                   7
2.3        Implications for Average Human Capital
To characterize the effect of differential fertility on average human capital, assume a
wage distribution F(w) on [w, w], and consider a policy forcing all couples to have ñ
children.7 The effect of differential fertility is the difference between average human
capital under free fertility and average human capital under forced fertility. Under
forced fertility level ñ, parents with wage w choose education spending as follows:
                                  
                                   w−c̃ − κ − τw                                   c̃/α+κ ñ
                                                                           if w <     1−τ ñ
                         eñw   = (βñ−αβ )( w −κ−τw)−αθ /θ                                               (6)
                                             ñ         0 1                         c̃/α+κ ñ
                                 
                                             α+β −αβ                       if w ≥     1−τ ñ

Consistent with a quality-quantity tradeoff, education spending decreases in ñ. Note
       n∗
that eww equals e∗w , optimal education spending under free fertility.
    For wage distribution F and forced fertility level ñ, the total effect of differential
fertility on average human capital is thus:
                                            ´                          ´
                                                h (e∗w ) n∗w dF(w)         h eñw ñdF(w)
                                                                                 
                      ∆tot (F, ñ) =             ´                 −                                      (7)
                                                    n∗w dF(w)                    ñ

On the right-hand side of the equation, the first and second expressions equal av-
erage human capital under free and forced fertility, respectively. To average across
children rather than families, both expressions reweight the wage distribution by the
          n
factor E[n] . In the second expression, all families have the same fertility level, so this
factor equals 1. Although ∆tot (F, ñ) is relevant to interventions like China’s one child
policy, coercive fertility polices are rare, so it has few real-world applications.
    One can decompose ∆tot (F, ñ) into two quantities, one of which does not de-
pend on a counterfactual policy. To obtain this decomposition, add and subtract
´
  h (e∗w ) dF(w), average human capital across families, to the right-hand side of
Equation (7):
                     ˆ                                         ˆ
                                     ∗
                                                
                                ´ ∗ nw              ∗
                                                                   ∗
                                                                   h (ew ) − h eñw dF(w)
                                                                                   
    ∆tot (F, ñ) =               nυ dF(υ)
                                            − 1 h (ew ) dF(w) +                                           (8)
                     |                       {z             } |              {z         }
                                        ∆comp (F)                                    ∆ad j (F,ñ)

   7 For                          w−c̃
         simplicity, assume ñ < wτ−κ  , so that the forced level of fertility is not so high that it prevents
parents from meeting the subsistence constraint.
                                                          8
where υ is a dummy of integration. ∆comp (F) is the composition effect of differen-
tial fertility, measuring how average human capital across children differs between
the free fertility optimum and the counterfactual in which all families have an equal
number of children but maintain the per child educational investments that were opti-
mal under free fertility. Because this counterfactual involves no re-optimization, the
composition effect is invariant to ñ. ∆ad j (F, ñ) is the adjustment effect of differential
fertility, measuring how average human capital across families changes in response
to a policy shift from free fertility to forced fertility level ñ. This component depends
crucially on ñ. Under a policy forcing the lowest observed fertility rate on all par-
ents, the adjustment effect would be positive; if the policy instead forced the highest
observed fertility rate, the adjustment effect would be negative.
     The empirical work focuses on the composition effect because it solely reflects
the joint distribution of quantity and quality investments, rather than arbitrarily-
defined counterfactual policies. Assuming a positive subsistence level and a small
goods cost of children, several properties of the composition effect are apparent. If
w < w̃, so that all parents make no educational investments, then ∆comp (F) = 0. As w
rises above w̃, ∆comp (F) turns positive because fertility rates are highest in the small
share of parents with positive education spending. Further rightward shifts in F (or
                                                                         dn∗
leftward shifts in w̃) lead to more mass in the domain in which dww < 0, eventually
turning ∆comp (F) negative. Indeed, if w > max αc̃ , w̃ , so that fertility decreases
                                                              

in the wage across the entire support of F, then ∆comp (F) is unambiguously nega-
tive. These results suggest that in the early stages of economic development—when
most are subsistence constrained or at an education spending corner solution, but
the wealthy few educate their children—the composition effect is positive. But with
broad-based gains in living standards, increases in the return to education spending,
or expansions in anti-poverty programs, the composition effect turns negative.


3    Data on Two Generations of Sibships
Using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), I construct two gener-
ations of sibships by viewing respondents as both mothers and daughters. Carried out
in over 90 countries over the past three decades, these surveys interview nationally-

                                             9
representative samples of women of childbearing age (generally 15-49). All include
questions about the respondent’s educational attainment and children; some also ask
about household durable goods ownership or the respondent’s siblings.


3.1       DHS Fertility Histories
The first set of analyses draws on the fertility histories, in which respondents list all of
their children ever born, with information on survival. To avoid the complicated task
of disentangling cohort effects from changes in the timing of childbearing, I focus
on women at least 45 years old and interpret their numbers of children as completed
fertility. The focus on older women also has the advantage of capturing cohorts
of mothers more likely to be in the early regime in which fertility is increasing in
income. I compare results from two time periods, pre-1995 and post-2005, and only
include countries with survey data from both periods, leaving me with 62,146 women
from 46 surveys in 20 countries.
    The DHS does not collect data on wages or income, so a direct test of the theoret-
ical framework is not possible. However, the surveys do include questions on house-
hold ownership of several durable goods, which are useful from two perspectives.
First, durables ownership can serve as a proxy for broader measures of consumption
or income. In the presence of transitory shocks, consumption and income are not
a priori superior to durable goods indices as measures of long-term income, which
is probably the more relevant determinant of childbearing decisions. Alternatively,
one can more explicitly view durable goods ownership as an outcome of optimiza-
tion. If one added log(d) to the utility function in the theoretical framework, with d
representing durables, then optimal durables ownership would bear a hump-shaped
relationship with fertility and a weakly increasing relationship with education.8
    Existing work on the DHS has drawn extensively on durable goods ownership
to measure economic status, much of it using the method proposed by Filmer and
Pritchett (2001), which takes the first principal component of a vector of variables
measuring housing conditions and ownership of several durable goods. I modify this
approach in two ways. First, I only use data on ownership of five durable goods:
   8 Inhis original work on fertility, Becker (1960) drew a close link between the demand for children
and the demand for (other) durable goods.
                                                 10
radio, television, refrigerator, motorcycle, and car.9 By not incorporating measures
of housing conditions, I avoid the tasks of determining whether certain conditions
(e.g., access to piped water) are communally determined and whether they directly
influence fertility. Second, rather than using principal components analysis, I take the
sum of the ownership indicators. The resulting index of durables ownership is both
transparent and comparable across time and space, notwithstanding concerns about
changes in relative prices. One DHS, the 1994 survey from Indonesia, included an
expenditure module; in that survey, a regression of the durables index on log per
capita expenditure yields a coefficient of 1.01 (S.E. = 0.04).


3.2    DHS Sibling Histories
The DHS began administering a sibling history module in the late 1980s for the
purpose of estimating maternal mortality rates in settings with poor or absent vital
registration systems. The module asks respondents to list all children ever born to
their biological mothers, with information on sex, year of birth, and year of death if
no longer alive. Analyses of maternal mortality and all-cause adult mortality have
since then drawn extensively on DHS data (e.g., Obermeyer et al. 2010). However,
the sibling history data also offer a window into the sibling structure that adult women
experienced as children.
    As of December 2012, data from 89 DHS’s with full sibling histories were in
the public domain. Of these, seven (from Bangladesh, Indonesia, Jordan, and Nepal)
included only ever-married women, introducing concerns about selection bias. From
these surveys, I only include age groups in which the rate of ever marriage is at
least 95 percent. Therefore, I include women over 30 from the relevant surveys in
Bangladesh and Nepal, but I discard the 5 surveys from Indonesia and Jordan, where
female marriage rates are lower. Nepal has two surveys with sibling histories, one of
ever-married women in 1996 and one of all women in 2006. I restrict the 1996 sample
to women over 30, but I include all respondents to the 2006 survey. I also discard
data from the 1989 Bolivia DHS and the 1999 Nigeria DHS due to irregularities in
the sibling history data, leaving 82 surveys for analysis. Africa is overrepresented, a
   9 Many  surveys ask about bicycle ownership, but I omit it because it may be endogenous to the
presence of children.
                                               11
consequence of the near absence of systematic data on adult mortality in the continent
prior to the entrance of the DHS. To exclude respondents who have not finished
schooling or whose mothers have not completed childbearing, I drop data on women
less than 20 years old, leaving 803,527 women born between 1942 and 1989.


3.3      Supplementary Surveys
The DHS data are useful in their breadth but suffer from two major shortcomings.
The most obvious is their omission of men, for whom the relationship of interest may
be different. Additionally, they offer little information on aspects of the respondent’s
childhood environment, such as the income or education of her parents. To supple-
ment the DHS on these two fronts, I draw on three supplementary surveys in the
Appendix: the Indonesia Family Life Survey, the Matlab Health and Socioeconomic
Survey, and the Mexico Family Life Survey. All three surveys include questions
about surviving siblings and parental characteristics.


4       Changing Cross-Sectional Fertility Patterns
This section documents the evolution of differential fertility in developing countries
over the second half of the twentieth century. In all of the analyses, I first separate
the sample into country-by-period cells and then estimate a mean or regression coef-
ficient within each cell.10 For any cross-country results, I then perform unweighted
analyses of the cell-level statistics.


4.1      Durable Goods Ownership and Fertility
To assess the changing association of durable goods ownership and fertility, I use
fertility history data to estimate separate country-level regressions for survey respon-
dents aged 45-49 in the early (1986-1994) and late (2006-2011) DHS periods. For
woman i in county c and period t, I run:

                                                                   0
                            f ertilityict = δct + γct indexict + Xict λct + εict        (9)
    10 The   analyses use sampling weights, but the results are similar without them.
                                                     12
where f ertilityict denotes the woman’s number of children (ever born or surviving),
indexict denotes the durable goods ownership index (which varies between 0 and 5),
and the vector Xict contains age indicators and survey year indicators.
    The main results for both ever-born fertility and surviving fertility appear in Ta-
ble 1, which shows averages of the country-specific coefficients at the continent level.
Panel A pools urban and rural areas, showing results both with and without control-
ling for an urban residence indicator. Panels B and C report results for solely urban
and solely rural areas, respectively. A cross signifies that the late-period coefficient
differs significantly from the early-period average coefficient. To aid in the interpreta-
tion of the results, Appendix Table 1 shows continent-by-period means and standard
deviations of the relevant variables.
    Table 1 reveals a reversal in the relationship of durable goods ownership and
surviving fertility: certainly for Africa and to some extent for Asia, but not for Latin
America.11 In Africa, controlling for urban residence (Panel A2), each additional
durable good is associated with one-fifth more surviving children in the early period
but one-fifth fewer children in the late period. This flip is especially pronounced
in rural areas (Panel C). Indeed, the same patterns hold in rural areas of the Asian
countries in the sample, although not in urban areas of these countries. In the full
Asian sample, controlling for urban residence, the durables index is uncorrelated
with surviving fertility during the early period, but the association turns negative
by the late period. All of these inter-period changes in coefficients are statistically
significant at the 5 percent level. The same patterns do not generally hold in Latin
America, where the durable goods index negatively predicts surviving fertility in
both the early and late periods. Nevertheless, in rural areas within Latin America,
the relationship becomes significantly more negative over time. These results may
suggest a shared process that operates at different times across and within countries:
visiting urban areas before rural, and visiting Latin America before Asia and Africa.
    When one counts all children ever born instead of only those that survived, the
results change in predictable ways. Survival rates are positively related to parental
income and education throughout the sample period, which makes the ever-born co-
efficients more negative than the surviving coefficients. Indeed, the durables index is
  11 Appendix Table 2 shows that these results are robust to the inclusion of paternal and maternal

education as covariates.
                                                13
negatively correlated with ever-born fertility in all regions and time periods, although
the relationship is small and statistically insignificant for rural Africa in the early pe-
riod. Throughout Africa and Asia, the relationship becomes more negative between
the early and late periods. Again, the sibling history results will shed light on whether
ever-born fertility was positively associated with income in an earlier time.
    Non-parametric estimation can shed light on whether the linear regression coeffi-
cients mask the hump shape predicted by the theory. For a first look at this issue using
varied measures of household consumption, Figure 2 takes advantage of Indonesia’s
1994 survey, which included both durable goods questions and an expenditure mod-
ule. Consistent with the theoretical framework, durable goods ownership, log total
household expenditures, and log household expenditures per adult all display hump-
shaped relationships with both ever-born and surviving fertility.
    Figure 3 replicates the durable goods graph for the full fertility history sample.
The plots show clear evidence of a hump shape in the 1986-94 period, especially for
counts of surviving children. However, outside Africa, the hump dissipates by the
2006-11 period. This finding is inconsistent with a stable, hump-shaped relationship
between income and fertility. Relative to many other goods, the prices of the durable
goods included in the index most likely decreased over the relevant period, so that
durable goods ownership diffused down the income distribution. In that case, one
would expect the peak of the relationship to shift to the right rather than the left.
However, as discussed in the theoretical framework, expansions in public assistance
and increases in the return to schooling move the peak to the left. These forces may
explain the disappearance of the hump.


4.2    Sibship Size and Educational Attainment
The fertility history results provide evidence of a reversal in the relationship between
durable goods ownership and surviving fertility in Africa and rural Asia, but they
leave several questions unanswered. Did the same reversal occur for counts of ever-
born children at some earlier date? Did it occur in Latin America? The sibling
histories offer a window onto the answers to these questions for birth cohorts going
back to the 1940s. Unfortunately, the DHS collects very little data on economic con-
ditions in childhood. However, the theoretical framework suggests that we can infer
                                           14
the evolution of the income-fertility association from changes in the relationship be-
tween sibship size and education. The sibsize-education link is also directly relevant
for assessing the effect of differential fertility on the skill distribution. I estimate sep-
arate country-level regressions for women in 5-year birth cohorts from 1945-1949 to
1985-1989.12 For woman i born in county c and time period t, I run:

                            highest gradeict = δct + γct sibsizeict + εict                           (10)

where highest gradeict denotes her schooling and sibsizeict denotes her sibship size.13
    Figure 4, which displays estimates of γct over time within each country, makes
clear that attempts to characterize the sibsize-education relationship as generally neg-
ative miss a pervasive feature of recent demographic history. Both the ever-born sib-
ling and the surviving sibling coefficients tend to decrease across successive birth
cohorts. For earlier birth cohorts, most coefficients are significantly positive, while
for the latest birth cohorts, few coefficients are significantly positive, and many are
significantly negative. Consistent with the fertility history results, this reversal in the
sibsize-education relationship occurs earliest in Latin America, followed soon there-
after by several countries in Asia. In Africa, the reversal has been quite recent, and
several countries remain in the pre-reversal regime. To put these estimates in context,
Appendix Figure 1 plots trends in average education, showing several-year increases
in average education in most countries. In absolute value, γct is small when average
education is low.
    These results leave two issues unaddressed: birth order effects and gender het-
erogeneity. Birth order is a concern because children of high birth orders necessarily
come from large families. Given evidence that birth order affects educational attain-
ment (Steelman et al. 2002; Black et al. 2005), researchers often control for birth
order in estimating the effect of family size on educational attainment. However, the
present paper is concerned not with causal effects but with equilibrium differences
between large and small families, making regression adjustment unnecessary. Birth
order effects are but one reason for the different outcomes of children from large
and small families. On gender heterogeneity, although the DHS only gathers sibling
  12 For   precision, I omit cells with fewer than 200 observations, representing 2.5 percent of all cells.
  13 The   results are robust to the inclusion of birth year fixed effects.
                                                     15
history data from women, the supplementary surveys from Bangladesh, Indonesia,
and Mexico interview both genders. In Appendix Table 3, all three supplementary
surveys show declining sibsize-education relationships for both genders.


4.3      Connecting the Results
The fertility history results seem to contain the last phases of the global transition to
a negative relationship between income and fertility, while the sibling history results
point to a widespread shift of the sibsize-education link from positive to negative.
While the two phenomena seem connected, the absence of childhood background
characteristics in the DHS prevents examination of this issue. The supplementary
surveys include data on paternal education, which can shed some light on the role
of economic resources in childhood. Using these data, Appendix Table 4 compares
sibsize-education coefficients from regressions that do and do not control for paternal
education.14 In the specification that controls for paternal education, decreases in the
coefficients across successive birth cohorts are muted by at least one half. The evolu-
tion of the sibsize-education relationship has much to do with a changing relationship
between paternal education and sibship size.


5       Differential Fertility and Average Human Capital
The results so far suggest that differential fertility once promoted human capital ac-
cumulation rather than hindering it. This section estimates the changing composition
effect of differential fertility on average education.
    Recall from the theory section that the composition effect is:
                                            ˆ 
                                                         n∗w
                                                                    
                            ∆comp (F) =           ´    ∗
                                                      nυ dF(υ)
                                                                 − 1 h (e∗w ) dF(w)                   (11)

This expression integrates over the parental wage distribution, but I only observe
siblings, with little information about their parents. Applying the law of iterated
expectations, I thus rewrite the composition effect over the distribution of surviving
    14 The   results are similar in unreported analyses that also include maternal education as a covariate.

                                                        16
sibship sizes:
                                             K
                                                                    
                                                          ηk /k
                            ∆comp (F) =     ∑ ηk −      ∑K
                                                         l=1 ηl /l
                                                                         µk                   (12)
                                            k=1

where K is the maximum possible sibship size, ηk is the share of the individuals from
surviving sibships of size k, and µk is the mean human capital of individuals from
sibships of size k. Inside the parentheses, the term ηk weights the sample to give
mean human capital across individuals, while the term Kηk /k           reweights the sample
                                                            ∑l=1 ηl /l
to give mean human capital across families. Importantly, this expression captures
any composition effect of heterogeneity in fertility and skill investment, not just the
income heterogeneity specific to the model in Section 2.
    I use the empirical analogues of αk and µk to estimate ∆ˆ comp and then use the
delta method to estimate the variance of ∆ˆ comp . In the interest of simplicity, I measure
human capital as highest grade completed. For successive 5-year birth cohorts within
each country, Figure 5 displays estimates of the composition effect of differential
fertility on average educational attainment.15
    The results overturn the conventional wisdom that variation in fertility over the
income distribution tends to lower average education. In some countries, predomi-
nantly African, differential fertility increased average educational attainment through-
out the sample period. These countries have not transitioned to the regime in which
surviving sibship size and education are negatively correlated. Opposite these coun-
tries is South Africa, where the effect of differential fertility was negative throughout
almost the entire sample period. The remaining countries have undergone a transition
from a regime in which differential fertility promoted the growth of human capital
to a regime in which differential fertility depressed it. For two compelling examples,
consider the Andean nations of Bolivia and Peru. For the 1945-9 cohort, differential
fertility increased average education by 0.3 to 0.5 years in both countries. In contrast,
for the 1985-9 cohort, differential fertility reduced average education by 0.5 years.
    Are these magnitudes large or small? The answer depends on whether one evalu-
ates them relative to the increase in education over the sample period or relative to the
historical level of education. On average, the 1985-9 cohorts have 3.7 more years of
  15 To examine whether a single education level drives the results in Figure 5, Appendix Figure 2
estimates composition effects on shares of each cohort with 0, 1-5, 6-8, and 9+ years of education.
The shifting composition effects are visible at all levels, from 0 years through 9+ years.
                                                  17
education than the 1945-9 cohorts.16 The largest estimated composition effects are
±0.6, and the average within-country change in these effects between 1945-9 and
1985-9 is −0.17. Therefore, the shift from a positive to a negative sibsize-education
relationship did not have a large effect on the evolution of average educational at-
tainment. But relative to the level of average educational attainment, the composition
effect is reasonably large for early cohorts. For the 1950-4 cohort, the composition
effect was on average 15 percent of mean education. As mean education rose, the
relative magnitude of the differential fertility effect shrank: for the 1985-9 cohort,
the effect of differential fertility on mean education was on average 4 percent of the
cohort’s mean education.


6       Explaining the Reversal
The reversal of differential fertility in the developing world occurred during a half-
century that included much economic and demographic change. Although Section
2 suggests a compelling theory for the change, the existing literature suggests some
alternatives. This section lists forces often associated with the demographic tran-
sition and explores their possible roles in the reversal. Although the discussion is
theoretical, it aims to make predictions regarding the aggregate determinants of γct .

Income Growth Section 2’s theoretical framework suggests that broad-based in-
come gains pushed families over the hump of the non-monotonic relationship be-
tween income and fertility. Under this hypothesis, the reversal of γct should be as-
sociated with rising GDP per capita and with rising average adult education. The
relative predictive power of these two variables depends on their association with
incomes throughout the income distribution. The hypothesis also predicts that the
reversal of γct will be associated with rising average educational investment.

Human Capital The rise in the demand for and supply of schooling plays a key
role in many models of the transition from Malthusian stagnation to growth. In Sec-
    16 This
          claim is based on a regression of cohort average education on country and cohort indicators.
The coefficient on the 1985-9 cohort indicator is 3.7, indicating that the 1985-9 cohorts have 3.7 more
years of education than the omitted category, the 1945-9 cohorts.
                                                 18
tion 2’s theoretical framework, an increase in the return to education spending θ1
can move the peak of the wage-fertility profile to the left, which is consistent with
the reversal and with the disappearance of the hump in Figure 3. Unlike the income
growth hypothesis, the return-to-schooling hypothesis does not predict a role for GDP
per capita. However, if increases in aggregate human capital push up the return to
schooling, as in the models of Becker et al. (1990) and Galor and Weil (2000), then
the hypothesis predicts the decline of γct to be associated with rising average adult
education. It will also be associated with rising average educational investment and
declining average family size.
    The human capital endowment θ0 can also factor into the explanation; an increase
in that parameter, perhaps from an expansion in compulsory public schooling, makes
the wage-fertility relationship more negative. But optimal fertility weakly increases
in θ0 . As a result, we can reject one of the two human capital explanations based on
whether the reversal of γct is associated with rising or falling average family size.

Children’s Work A related issue is the falling prevalence of child labor, which in
the theoretical framework has similar consequences to a rising return to education
spending. Some of the decline in child labor may actually be the result of increases
in skill returns. Some might also be due to new sanctions against child labor, which
one could characterize as an increase in the goods cost of children κ. Just as with
an increase in the return to education spending, an increase in the goods cost of
children decreases the wage threshold at which families start to spend on education,
which can shift the peak of the wage-fertility profile to the left. This mechanism is
complementary to the return-to-schooling hypothesis.17

Women’s Work At least as likely an explanation as children’s work is women’s
work. The reasoning is similar to that of Galor and Weil (1996), who argue that
skill-biased technological progress increased women’s labor productivity over the
long run, eventually inducing greater women’s labor force participation and lowering
  17 Inanother version of the child labor theory, family labor is cheaper than outside labor, so that
landed agricultural households have increased demand for children as laborers. If landed agricultural
households are drawn from the center of the income distribution, their demand for child labor can
generate a hump-shaped income-fertility relationship.

                                                 19
fertility due to the increased opportunity cost of childbearing. They consider neither
quality investments nor cross-sectional heterogeneity, but such extensions are natural.
In Section 2’s framework, one cannot generate a negative wage-fertility association
without assuming a positive opportunity cost of childcare time.
    This explanation runs up against the empirical reality, originally documented by
Goldin (1995), that women’s labor force participation follows a u-shape over the
course of economic development.18 Rates of women’s labor force participation were
high in Africa throughout the sample period, despite a positive relationship between
income and fertility. But a closer reading of Goldin (1995) suggests that in the early
stages of development, when labor is mostly agricultural, women’s work is com-
patible with child rearing. Women’s labor force participation then decreases when
manufacturing predominates and increases with the emergence of the service sector.
Unlike agricultural work, service jobs compete with childbearing. If women’s op-
portunity cost of time explains the reversal, then the emergence of the service sector
must also play a key role.

Child Mortality The decline of child mortality is also central to many theories of
fertility decline, but it is unlikely to explain the change in fertility regimes observed
in this paper. Because the bulk of mortality decline has occurred for children younger
than school-starting age, one can think of a it as a reduction in the quantity costs of
surviving children. In Section 2, a decline in the goods costs of children can make the
slope of the wage-fertility relationship more negative at high wages, although it also
moves the peak of the relationship to the right. In any case, as in the Barro-Becker
model (1989), reductions either the costs of child quantity lead to higher optimal
fertility and lower optimal schooling investment, which appears counterfactual. If
child mortality is behind the reversal, then the theoretical framework predicts that the
decline of γct will be associated with rising average family size, declining education
spending, and declining child mortality.

Preference Change In interpreting the changing cross-sectional patterns, many
non-economists would think first of preferences. Several theories fertility decline
  18 Also   see Mammen and Paxson (1998), and Olivetti (2012).

                                                20
(Caldwell 1980, 1982; Casterline 2001) posit changes in beliefs and norms regard-
ing child-rearing. Some versions of these theories could explain the observed regime
change. Consider the introduction of new ’Western’ norms that increase the relative
importance of child quality in the utility function (β ), raising optimal education and
lowering optimal fertility. If these new norms affect the richest (or most educated)
families most strongly, then the income-fertility relationship could flip from positive
to negative, starting at the right tail of the income distribution. Caldwell (1980, 1982)
assigns much importance to mass education in altering childbearing norms, thus pre-
dicting a relationship between γct and average adult education. However, without
further structure, the theory is otherwise difficult to test.
     A more testable version associates the diffusion of new norms with the empower-
ment of women (Duflo 2012). If women have lower β ’s than men, and if women of
higher income or education make the earliest gains in household bargaining power,
then richer households will be the first to transition to low fertility. This reasoning
predicts that fermale empowerment measures will be negatively associated with γct .
     Other versions of preference-change theory are also consistent with the data. Ga-
lor and Moav (2002, see also Clark 2007) develop one such version by combining
β -heterogeneity with a subsistence constraint. Their model’s evolutionary dynamics
generate a reversal of the wage-fertility elasticity from positive to negative, just as
observed in this paper. Family dynasties with high β ’s accumulate more human cap-
ital and therefore become richer than their low-β counterparts. Early in the process
of development, the subsistence constraint binds for the poorer, low-β types, so that
the high-β types choose higher fertility in addition to higher investment per child.
This differential fertility pushes up the average skill level in the population, generat-
ing technological progress that gradually pushes low-β families over the subsistence
constraint. At that point, the poorer, low-β types transition to high fertility, leading
to a negative wage-fertility relationship. Here too, rising aggregate human capital
will be associated with a reversal in γct . Because Galor and Moav’s model depends
crucially on a subsistence constraint, it is complementary to Section 2’s framework.

Intergenerational Wealth Transfers A separate class of theories, which does not
fit into the framework above, emphasizes upward intergenerational transfers from

                                           21
children to parents, in the form of child labor or old-age support.19 Caldwell (1982)
emphasizes how the expansion of schools alters child-rearing norms, so that parents
come to view children as net recipients of, rather than net contributors to, household
resources. This model bears similarities with other theories of changing preferences.
Following a different thread in Caldwell’s work, Boldrin and Jones (2002) study
parental behavior when old-age security is the primary motive for childbearing. In
their framework, financial deepening could flip the income-fertility relationship if
wealthy families substituted other savings vehicles for children. But this reasoning
gives no account for why the decreases in quantity investment would be accompa-
nied by increases in quality investment. Additionally, as stressed by Galor (2011),
wealthier couples typically have access to a wider variety of savings vehicles before
the fertility transition. Finally, Lee (2000) argues that data from no society suggest
a net upward flow of resources across generations, unless one counts the pension
systems of rich countries.

Contraception Advocates of family planning might instead emphasize the uneven
adoption of effective contraceptive technology (Potts 1997). From this perspective,
the currently negative relationship between income and fertility is due to an unmet
need for contraception among the poor. But a theory of this type fails to account for
the early regime during which fertility increases in income. One possibility is that
women from richer households have a higher biological capacity to bear children due
to their better health. In this case, broad-based health improvements would decrease
the relationship between income and fertility.


7       Aggregate Determinants of the Reversal
With an eye to the explanations described in Sections 2 and 6, this section estimates
how several economic and demographic aggregates relate to the sibsize-education
link. I focus on the sibsize-education link rather than the income-fertility link because
the former offers a longer time horizon and is more precisely estimated at the country
level. Additionally, I only show results for the surviving sibship size coefficients
    19 See   Cain (1983), Nugent (1985), Ehrlich and Lui (1991), and Morand (1999).

                                                   22
because they bear a closer link to theoretical framework and because they are directly
relevant to the composition effect. Unreported results for the ever-born sibship size
coefficients are qualitatively similar but somewhat smaller in magnitude.
    The economic and demographic aggregates come from a variety of sources. I use
cohort average outcomes from the DHS; GDP per capita and the sectoral composi-
tion of value added from the Penn World Table (Heston et al. 2012); average adult
(ages 25+) educational attainment from Barro and Lee (2010) and Cohen and Soto
(2007);20 urbanization from UNPD (2011); and women’s (ages 20-59) labor force
participation from ILO (2012). For variables that are not available annually, I first
linearly interpolate between observations within each country.


7.1      Cross-Sectional Patterns
Although the main analysis of economic and demographic aggregates takes advan-
tage of the panel structure of the data by controlling for country and birth period fixed
effects, cross-sectional analyses serve as a useful starting point. Figure 6 documents
the evolution of cross-sectional relationships between several aggregate variables and
γct . Three of the four panels—for GDP per capita, average education, and urbaniza-
tion—display a series of local linear regressions, one per period of birth. Data on
women’s labor force participation are too sparse to estimate cohort-level local linear
regressions, so the fourth panel shows a scatter plot.
      Throughout the sample period, more educated and more urban places have more
negative sibsize-education associations. Although the intercepts shift downward over
time, the slopes on these two curves are stable. These patterns suggest that structural
transformation or mass education may be linked to the reversal of γct . Meanwhile, γct
shows no consistent relationship with GDP per capita or women’s labor force partic-
ipation. The relationship between and log GDP per capita goes from flat to signifi-
cantly negative, at least if one ignores the extreme outlier of Gabon.21 No discernible
pattern emerges in the scatter plot of γct and women’s labor force participation.
  20 I use the Barro-Lee estimates when available. For countries that only have Cohen-Soto estimates,
I use the Cohen-Soto estimates to generate predicted Barro-Lee estimates, based on a regression of
Barro-Lee on Cohen-Soto in the sample of countries with both measures.
   21 Gabon’s oil production per capita is more than twice that of any other country in the sample, so

its GDP per capita provides a poor measure of living standards.
                                                 23
    Another noteworthy cross-sectional result, not reported in Figure 6, is that γct
in polygamous countries exceeds that in monogamous countries by 0.1 to 0.2, both
within Africa and across the world. This finding supports Tertilt’s (2005) claim that
men in polygamous societies have an incentive to invest their wealth in a large num-
ber of children. In such societies, a groom typically ’buys’ a bride from her father, so
men benefit from having many daughters but do not lose from having many sons.22


7.2     Panel Analysis
The patterns in Figure 6 lead one to ask whether changes in socioeconomic and demo-
graphic aggregate can account for the reversal of the sibsize-education relationship.
One can address this question by including cohort and country fixed effects:

                                   γ̂ct = Zct0 λ + τt + µc + εct                                (13)

where Zct is a vector of independent variables, and τt and µc are cohort and country
fixed effects, respectively. This specification nets out global trends and time-invariant
country characteristics. If one leaves Zct out of Equation (13), the resulting cohort
effect estimates are flat through the early 1960s, at which point they begin a down-
ward trend, becoming significantly negative in the 1970s. The estimates imply that
net of country fixed effects, the sibsize-education association is 0.28 lower in 1985-9
than in 1945-9.

7.2.1   Using Cohort Average Outcomes as Covariates

Table 3 presents estimations of Equation (13) in which the covariates Zct are cohort
average outcomes from the DHS: average completed education, average surviving
sibship size, and the average fraction of siblings dying before they reach age 5. Be-
cause these average outcomes are co-determined with the sibsize-education relation-
ship, one should think of the estimates equilibrium associations rather than causal
effects. For this reason, I include only one covariate in each regression (in addition
to the cohort and country fixed effects). Also, because the estimates of γct and the
  22 Note that the patterns here must be driven by the number of children per wife, not the number of

wives per husband. The DHS sibling history asks for siblings with the same biological mother.
                                                 24
cohort average outcomes are based on the same data, the table supplements the or-
dinary least squares results with estimations that correct for correlated measurement
errors using Fuller’s (1987) method-of-moments technique.
     The results in Table 3 give three conclusions: (1) as the sibsize-education associ-
ation declines, average educational investment increases, (2) as the sibsize-education
association declines, average family size declines, and (3) the sibsize-education as-
sociation has no relation to child mortality rates. These findings are consistent with
explanations based on rising incomes, rising skill returns, and declining child labor,
but not with those based on rising human capital endowments, declining child mor-
tality, or an unmet need for contraception.

7.2.2      Using Socioeconomic Aggregates in Early Life as Covariates

Table 4 estimates regressions of γ̂ct on three socioeconomic aggregates in the period
of birth: log GDP per capita, average adult educational attainment, and urbanization.
The education measure comes from two datasets that do not completely overlap, so
the table presents one regression for the combined sample and one regression for
each of the source samples. All three regressions lead to the same conclusion: while
aggregate income growth and urbanization do not play a role, the rising educational
attainment of the parent generation is intimately connected with the reversal of the
sibsize-education relationship among offspring.23 In fact, the coefficient of -0.1 on
average education implies that rising education can account for roughly 60% of the
of 1985-9 cohort effect effect for γct , as reported at the start of this section. These
results best match explanations based on rising skill returns or changing preferences,
but if average education is better than GDP as a proxy for long-term parental income,
then the results also support the income-gains hypothesis.
    Several alternative theories deal with the position of women; these theories are the
focus of Table 5.24 One prominent theory involves the expansion of women’s labor
market opportunities outside the home. Recall that this explanation predicts a role for
  23 One  could argue that average adult education violates the strict exogeneity assumption of fixed
effects estimation because it is a function of the lagged sibsize-education relationship. First difference
estimation, which does not assume strict exogeneity, yields a similar coefficient on adult education.
   24 To maximize sample size, each regression in Table 5 uses a different sample. In unreported results,

average adult education has at least a marginally significant effect on γct in each of these samples.

                                                   25
both rising women’s labor force participation and the emergence of the service sector
(which relocates women’s work from near the home to far away). Columns (1) and
(2) show that neither trend plays a role in the reversal of the sibsize-education associ-
ation. Another gender-specific theory emphasizes female education over male. Col-
umn (3) thus uses gender-disaggregated data from the Barro-Lee education dataset
to ask whether the role of average education is due to women or men.25 While the
coefficients on average female education and average male education are jointly sig-
nificantly different from zero, they are not significantly different from each other;
in fact, the coefficient on average male education is larger and individually more
significant. Table 5 suggests that the causes of the reversal are not specific to the
empowerment of women.


8       Conclusion
Prior to the results of this paper, limited evidence existed on positive associations be-
tween income and fertility or between sibship size and education in the 20th century.
The lack of extensive evidence led many researchers to focus instead on the negative
associations widely observed today. A wide range of data from 48 developing coun-
tries reveals that both associations were indeed positive well into the 20th century.
They became negative only recently: first in Latin America, then in Asia, and finally
in Africa. Increases in the aggregate education levels of the parents’ generation were
by far the most important predictor of the reversal; the data show little role for child
mortality rates, GDP per capita, sectoral composition, urbanization, and women’s
labor force participation. Given the unique role of rising aggregate education and
the leftward shift of the peak of the fertility-durable goods relationship, the data are
most consistent with a theory in which a rising return to schooling leads families
further and further down the income distribution to invest in education. As poorer
families begin to invest in education, the relationship between income and fertility
(and between durable goods ownership and fertility) turns negative for them.
    Because the reversal has gone largely unrecognized in the literature on the aggre-
gate effects of differential fertility, that literature has missed an important aspect of
    25 The   Cohen-Soto education dataset does not provide gender-specific averages.

                                                    26
the interaction between demography and economic growth. In the mid-20th century,
fertility differences by parental income increased average education in most of the
countries under study. These fertility differences eventually flipped in many coun-
tries, so the effects of differential fertility on the per capita stock of human capital
also reversed later in the century. A fruitful direction for future research would in-
vestigate the general equilibrium implications of these changes for the evolution of
income inequality.



References
Althaus, Paul G. (1980). “Differential Fertility and Economic Growth.” Zeitschrift
Für Die Gesamte Staatswissenschaft 136: 309-326.
Barro, Robert J., and Gary S. Becker (1989). “Fertility Choice in a Model of Eco-
nomic Growth.” Econometrica 57: 481-501.
Barro, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee. (2010). “A New Data Set of Educational At-
tainment in the World, 1950-2010.” NBER Working Paper 15902.
Becker, Gary S. (1960). “An Economic Analysis of Fertility.” In Demographic and
Economic Change in Developed Countries, no. 11 in Universities-National Bureau
Conference Series. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Becker, G.S., Murphy, K., and R. Tamura. (1990). “Human Capital, Fertility, and
Economic Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 98: S12-S37.
Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux, Kjell G. Salvanes. (2005). “The More the Merrier?
The Effect of Family Composition on Children’s Education.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 120: 669-700.
Boldrin, Michele and Larry E. Jones. (2002). “Mortality, Fertility and Saving in
Malthusian Economy.” Review of Economic Dynamics 5(4): 775-814.
Buchmann, C., and E. Hannum. (2001). “Education and Stratification in Developing
Countries: A Review of Theories and Research.” Annual Review of Sociology 27:
77-102.
Cohen, D., and M. Soto. (2007). “Growth and Human Capital: Good Data, Good
Results.” Journal of Economic Growth 12: 51-76.
Cain, M. (1983). “Fertility as an Adjustment to Risk.” Population and Development
Review 9: 688-702.
                                        27
Caldwell, John C. (1980). “Mass Education as a Determinant of the Timing of Fer-
tility Decline.” Population and Development Review 6: 225-55.
Caldwell, John C. (1982). Theory of Fertility Decline. New York: Academic Press.
Casterline, John B. (2001). “Diffusion Processes and Fertility Transition: Introduc-
tion.” In John B. Casterline, ed., Diffusion Processes and Fertility Transition. Wash-
ington, DC: National Academy Press, pp. 1-38.
Clark, Gregory. (2007). A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the World.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dahan, M., and D. Tsiddon. (1998). “Demographic Transition, Income Distribution,
and Economic Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth 3(1): 29-52.
De la Croix, David and Matthias Doepke. (2003). “Inequality and Growth: Why
Differential Fertility Matters.” American Economic Review 93: 1091-1113.
Duflo, Esther. (2012). “Women’s Empowerment and Economic Development. Jour-
nal of Economic Literature 50(4): 1051-1079.
Ehrlich, I., and F.T. Lui. (1991). “Intergenerational Trade, Longevity, and Economic
Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 99: 1029-1059.
Galor, Oded. (2011). Unified Growth Theory. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. (2002). “Natural Selection and the Origin of Eco-
nomic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1133-1192.
Galor, Oded, and David Weil. (1996). “The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth.”
American Economic Review 86(3): 374-387.
Galor, Oded, and David Weil. (2000). “Population, Technology, and Growth: From
the Malthusian Regime to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Eco-
nomic Review 90(4): 806-828.
Goldin, Claudia. (1995). “The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Econornic
Development and Economic History.” In T. Paul Schultz, ed., Investment in Women’s
Human Capital. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hadeishi, Hajimi. (2003). “Economic Well-Being and Fertility in France: Nuits
1744-1792.” Journal of Economic History 62(2): 489-505.
Filmer, D., and L.H. Pritchett. (2001). “Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expen-
diture Data—Or Tears: An Application To Educational Enrollments In States Of
India.” Demography 38(1): 115-132.
Fuller, Wayne A. (1987). Measurement Error Models. New York: Wiley.
                                         28
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten. (2012). Penn World Table Version
7.1. Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the
University of Pennsylvania.
International Labour Office. (2012). Economically Active Population Estimates and
Projections, 1950- 2025: Volume 6.
Kevles, Daniel J. (1985). In the Name of Eugenics. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Kremer, Michael, and Daniel L. Chen. (2002). “Income Distribution Dynamics with
Endogenous Fertility.” Journal of Economic Growth 7: 227-258.
Kuznets, Simon. (1973). Population, Capital and Growth. New York: Norton.
Lam, David. (1986). “The Dynamics of Population Growth, Differential Fertility,
and Inequality.” American Economic Review 76(5): 1103-1116.
Lee, Ronald. (2000). “A Cross-Cultural Perspective on Intergenerational Transfers
and the Economic Life Cycle.” In Andrew Mason and Georges Tapinos, eds., Sharing
the Wealth: Demographic Change and Economic Transfers Between Generations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 17-56.
Malthus, Thomas R. (1826). An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: John
Murray.
Mammen, Kristin, and Christina Paxson. (2000). “Women’s Work and Economic
Development.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4): 141-164.
Maralani, Vida. (2008). “The Changing Relationship Between Family Size and Edu-
cational Attainment over the Course of Socioeconomic Development: Evidence from
Indonesia.” Demography 45(3): 693-717.
Moav, Omer. (2005). “Cheap Children and the Persistence of Poverty” Economic
Journal 115(500): 88-110.
Nugent, J.B. (1985). “The Old-Age Security Motive for Fertility.” Population and
Development Review 11: 75-97.
Obermeyer, Ziad, Julie Knoll Rajaratnam, and Chang H. Park, et al. (2010). “Mea-
suring Adult Mortality Using Sibling Survival: A New Analytical Method and New
Results for 44 Countries, 1974-2006.” PLoS Medicine 7(4): e1000260.
Olivetti, Claudia. (Forthcoming). “The Female Labor Force and Long-run Develop-
ment: The American Experience in Comparative Perspective.” In Leah Platt Bous-
tan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo, eds., Human Capital and History: The
American Record. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                                       29
Potts, Malcolm. (1997). “Sex and the Birth Rate: Human Biology, Demographic
Change, and Access to Fertility-Regulation Methods.” Population and Development
Review 23(1): 1-39.
Schultz, T.P. (1986). “The Value and Allocation of Time in High-Income Countries:
Implications for Fertility.” Population and Development Review 12: 87-108.
Skirbekk, Vegard. (2008). “Fertility Trends by Social Status.” Demographic Re-
search 18(5): 145-180.
Steelman, Lala Carr, Brian Powell, Regina Werum, and Scott Carter. (2002). “Re-
considering the Effects of Sibling Configuration: Recent Advances and Challenges.”
Annual Review of Sociology 28: 243-269.
Tertilt, Michèle. (2005). “Polygyny, Fertility, and Savings.” Journal of Political
Economy 113(6): 1341-1371.
United Nations Population Division (UNPD). 2011. World Urbanization Prospects:
The 2011 Revision. New York: United Nations.




                                       30
                           Figure 1: Optimal Fertility and Education Spending




            *




                                                        *
            n




                                                        e
     ~     ~
(1-α)w/(κ+τw)




  (1-α)(1-β)/τ


            0                                           0
                 ~
                 c ~   ~
                   c/α w                       w            ~
                                                            c ~   ~
                                                              c/α w             w




                                                   31
                              Figure 2: Completed Fertility and Three Measures of Household Consumption, Indonesia

           6




                                                       6




                                                                                                 6
                   5




                                                       5




                                                                                                 5
  Number of children
             4




                                                       4




                                                                                                 4
      3




                                                       3




                                                                                                 3
  2




                                                       2




                                                                                                 2
           1




                                                       1




                                                                                                 1
                       0     1    2     3      4   5        10   11 12 13 14                15        9     10   11     12    13     14
                           Number of durable goods                Ln(expenditures)                        Ln(expenditures per adult)

                                                            Ever born                      Surviving

Note: The durables index is the sum of ownership dummies for radio, television, refrigerator, motorcycle, and car. Expenditures are measured in
1994 Rupiahs per month; adults are defined as household members over age 25. Data source: women age 45-49 in the Indonesia 1994 DHS
Fertility History.




                                                                        32
                                                              Figure 3: Completed Fertility by Number of Durable Goods Owned
                                                                                                    Ever-born children
                                                      Africa                                                     Asia/Pacific                                                  Latin America
       Number of durable goods
                                 8




                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                       8
                                 6




                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                       6
                                 4




                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                       4
                                 2




                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                       2
                                 0




                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                     86-94

                                             06-11


                                                     86-94

                                                             06-11


                                                                         86-94

                                                                                 06-11




                                                                                                 86-94

                                                                                                         06-11


                                                                                                                   86-94

                                                                                                                           06-11


                                                                                                                                       86-94

                                                                                                                                               06-11




                                                                                                                                                               86-94

                                                                                                                                                                       06-11


                                                                                                                                                                                  86-94

                                                                                                                                                                                          06-11


                                                                                                                                                                                                    86-94

                                                                                                                                                                                                            06-11
                                        Nat'l         Rural              Urban                      Nat'l           Rural              Urban                      Nat'l             Rural           Urban


                                                                                                     Surviving children
                                                      Africa                                                     Asia/Pacific                                                  Latin America
       Number of durable goods
                                 8




                                                                                         8




                                                                                                                                                       8
                                 6




                                                                                         6




                                                                                                                                                       6
                                 4




                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                                       4
                                 2




                                                                                         2




                                                                                                                                                       2
                                 0




                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                     86-94

                                             06-11


                                                     86-94

                                                             06-11


                                                                         86-94

                                                                                 06-11




                                                                                                 86-94

                                                                                                         06-11


                                                                                                                   86-94

                                                                                                                           06-11


                                                                                                                                       86-94

                                                                                                                                               06-11




                                                                                                                                                               86-94

                                                                                                                                                                       06-11


                                                                                                                                                                                  86-94

                                                                                                                                                                                          06-11


                                                                                                                                                                                                    86-94

                                                                                                                                                                                                            06-11
                                        Nat'l         Rural              Urban                      Nat'l           Rural              Urban                      Nat'l             Rural           Urban



                                                                     0                       1                                     2                       3                                  4-5

Note: Continental averages of country-specific averages. The durables index is the sum of ownership dummies for radio, television, refrigerator,
motorcycle, and car. Data source: women age 45-49 in the DHS Fertility Histories.

                                                                                                                   33
                                                              Figure 4: Education-Sibship Size Coefficients by Period of Birth
                      Afghanistan                        Bangladesh                             Benin                            Bolivia                      Burkina Faso                       Burundi                         Cambodia
       1
       .5
       0
       -.5




                      Cameroon                    Central African Republic                      Chad                             DRC                         Rep. of Congo                     Cote D'Ivore                      Dom. Rep.
       1
       .5
       0
       -.5




                       Ethiopia                               Gabon                             Ghana                            Guinea                             Haiti                            Kenya                        Lesotho
       1
       .5
       0
       -.5




                     Madagascar                               Malawi                            Mali                         Morocco                          Mozambique                         Namibia                              Nepal
       1
       .5
       0
       -.5




                           Nigeria                            Peru                         Philippines                       Rwanda                      Sao Tome & Principe                     Senegal                        Sierra Leone
       1
       .5
       0
       -.5




                     South Africa                             Sudan                        Swaziland                         Tanzania                               Togo                         Zambia                          Zimbabwe
       1
       .5
       0
       -.5




             1950   1960     1970    1980   19901950   1960    1970    1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960     1970    1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   1990



                                                                                     Ever-born coef.                                                           Ever-born 95% CI
                                                                                     Surviving coef.                                                           Surviving 95% CI
Note: From regressions of years of education on sibship size. Data source: DHS Sibling Histories.

                                                                                                                             34
                                                   Figure 5: Composition Effects of Differential Fertility by Period of Birth
                    Afghanistan                     Bangladesh                             Benin                             Bolivia                      Burkina Faso                       Burundi                         Cambodia
      1
      .5
      0
      -.5
      -1




                     Cameroon                 Central African Republic                     Chad                              DRC                         Rep. of Congo                     Cote D'Ivore                      Dom. Rep.
      1
      .5
      0
      -.5
      -1




                      Ethiopia                            Gabon                            Ghana                         Guinea                                 Haiti                            Kenya                        Lesotho
      1
      .5
      0
      -.5
      -1




                    Madagascar                        Malawi                               Mali                          Morocco                          Mozambique                         Namibia                              Nepal
      1
      .5
      0
      -.5
      -1




                      Nigeria                             Peru                        Philippines                        Rwanda                      Sao Tome & Principe                     Senegal                        Sierra Leone
      1
      .5
      0
      -.5
      -1




                    South Africa                          Sudan                       Swaziland                          Tanzania                               Togo                         Zambia                          Zimbabwe
      1
      .5
      0
      -.5
      -1




            1950   1960   1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970    1980   19901950   1960     1970    1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   1990




                                                                                                  Comp. Effect                                                          95% CI
Note: The composition effect is the difference between actual average education and the counterfactual that would arise if all families had the
same number of siblings, with no change to their education. CIs are calculated with the delta method. Data source: DHS Sibling Histories.

                                                                                                                         35
                                     Figure 6: Cross-Sectional Determinants of the Education-Sibship Size Relationship




                   -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                                                           -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
                                                                         Gabon


                          Coefficient




                                                                                                  Coefficient
                                    5      6         7        8        9       10                                0            2              4              6
                                 Ln(GDP per capita in birth period, cons. 2005 USD)                                  Avg. adult education in birth period
                   -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                                                           -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
                          Coefficient




                                                                                                  Coefficient
                                         0     .2         .4          .6         .8                              0      .2     .4      .6        .8         1
                                             Fraction urban in birth period                                             Women's LFP in birth period


                                               1950-54                    1955-59                                    1960-64                    1965-69
                                               1970-74                    1975-79                                    1990-84                    1985-89

Note: 307 observations from 42 countries. The dependent variable is the coefficient from a regression of education on surviving sibship size. Data
source: DHS Sibling Histories.




                                                                                      36
                                 Table 1: Household Durable Goods Ownership and Completed Fertility
                                     Africa
                     (Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Ghana,      Asia/Pacific                   Latin America/Caribbean
                    Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Namibia, Niger,                    (India, Indonesia)                 (Colombia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Peru)
                   Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe)
                   Ever-born             Surviving                    Ever-born                  Surviving            Ever-born                  Surviving
                ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11     ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11                ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11            ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11      ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11           ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11
                  (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)                 (5)     (6)                (7)      (8)         (9)     (10)              (11)     (12)
A. Urban and rural areas
A1. Without urban residence indicator
Durables index -0.316* -0.565*†       0.095 -0.314*†               -0.236* -0.368*†           -0.023 -0.212*†      -0.883* -0.780*           -0.582* -0.599*
                [0.066] [0.037]     [0.056] [0.031]                [0.033] [0.022]            [0.028] [0.019]      [0.058] [0.030]           [0.048] [0.028]
N                6,269 13,860         6,269 13,860                 11,721 14,007              11,721 14,007         3,929 12,313              3,929 12,313

A2. With urban residence indicator
Durables index -0.176* -0.353*†             0.158*     -0.165*†    -0.188*   -0.332*†         -0.002    -0.196*†   -0.637*    -0.611*        -0.403*     -0.466*
                [0.071] [0.040]             [0.059]     [0.034]    [0.037]    [0.024]         [0.031]    [0.020]   [0.061]    [0.035]        [0.052]     [0.031]
Urban           -0.852* -1.253*†            -0.433*    -0.878*†    -0.270*    -0.238*         -0.115     -0.092    -1.356*    -1.037*        -1.004*     -0.843*
                [0.140] [0.093]             [0.114]     [0.080]    [0.109]    [0.084]         [0.092]    [0.071]   [0.181]    [0.087]        [0.152]     [0.079]
N                6,269 13,860                6,269      13,860     11,721     14,007          11,721     14,007     3,929     12,313          3,929      12,313
B. Urban Areas
Durables index -0.218* -0.507*†              0.081 -0.278*†        -0.328* -0.342*           -0.124* -0.223*       -0.703* -0.609*           -0.477* -0.480*
               [0.084] [0.047]              [0.073] [0.040]        [0.045] [0.035]           [0.042] [0.029]       [0.068] [0.042]           [0.060] [0.037]
N               1,704   4,212                1,704   4,212          3,654   6,242             3,654   6,242         2,513   8,123             2,513   8,123
C. Rural Areas
Durables index -0.069 -0.229*               0.280* -0.078†         -0.057 -0.324*†            0.112* -0.175*†      -0.454* -0.620*           -0.212* -0.452*†
               [0.108] [0.058]              [0.089] [0.051]        [0.056] [0.033]            [0.044] [0.028]      [0.124] [0.058]           [0.105] [0.053]
N               4,565   9,648                4,565   9,648          8,067   7,765              8,067   7,765        1,416   4,190             1,416   4,190
Note: Each entry is an average of country-specific coefficients; standard errors are in brackets. The durables index is the sum of ownership
dummies for radio, television, refrigerator, motorcycle, and car. Each regression controls for age and survey year indicators, and clusters standard
errors at the PSU level. Sample sizes are the sum of the country-specific sample sizes. The sample includes a country if and only if it had at least
                                                                                                                                †
one standard DHS survey with a full durable goods module in both the early and late periods. * sig. diff. from zero at 5% level; sig. diff. from the
early-period coefficient at 5% level. Data source: women age 45-49 in the DHS Fertility Histories.


                                                                             37
                            Table 2: Demographic Correlates of the Education-Sibship Size Relationship
                                        Mean (SD)          OLS            Fuller          OLS            Fuller           OLS            Fuller
                                           (1)              (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)             (7)
 Cohort average education                  4.2            -0.045         -0.051
                                          (2.8)          [0.021]**      [0.024]**
 Cohort average surviving                  4.4                                            0.090           0.096
   sibship size                           (0.7)                                         [0.036]**       [0.047]**
 Cohort average fraction of               0.10                                                                            0.42           0.63
   siblings dying under 5                (0.04)                                                                          [0.82]         [1.52]

 Number of observations                     307             307              307           307            307             307             307
 Number of countries                        42              42               42            42             42              42              42

 Birth Cohort and Country FE                                 X               X              X               X              X               X
Note: The dependent variable is the coefficient from a regression of education on surviving sibship size. Brackets contain standard errors
clustered at the country level. The Fuller GMM estimates are block-bootstrapped. * sig. at the 10% level; ** sig. at the 5% level. Data source: DHS
Sibling Histories.




                                                                        38
                                 Table 3: Development and the Education-Sibship Size Relationship
                                                            OLS                      OLS                             OLS
                                                             (1)                      (2)                             (3)
Ln(GDP per capita in birth period)                          0.038                    0.022                           0.012
                                                           [0.091]                  [0.094]                         [0.094]
Avg. adult yrs. ed. in birth period                        -0.093                   -0.106                          -0.110
                                                          [0.025]**                [0.029]**                       [0.032]**
Fraction urban in birth period                             -0.633                   -0.556                          -0.284
                                                           [0.441]                  [0.468]                         [0.393[

Number of observations                                       217                         193                         142
Number of countries                                           38                          34                         27
Education dataset                                          Combined                    Barro-Lee                  Cohen-Soto

Birth Cohort and Country FE                                         X                       X                           X
Note: The dependent variable is the coefficient from a regression of education on surviving sibship size. Brackets contain standard
errors clustered at the country level. * sig. at the 10% level; * sig. at the 5% level.




                                                                 39
                       Table 4: Female Empowerment and the Education-Sibship Size Relationship
                                                         OLS                    OLS                                     OLS
                                                          (1)                    (2)                                    (3)
Women’s labor force participation rate in birth period   0.113
                                                        [0.111]

Manufacturing fraction of value added in birth period                                        -0.001
                                                                                             [0.002]
Services fraction of value added in birth period                                              0.001
                                                                                             [0.002]

Avg. adult male yrs. ed. in birth period                                                                               -0.065
                                                                                                                      [0.022]**
Avg. adult female yrs. ed. in birth period                                                                             -0.056
                                                                                                                       [0.037]

 p-value: joint test of education coefficients                                                                          0.002
 p-value: difference of education coefficients                                                                          0.851

Number of observations                                              112                       137                        234
Number of countries                                                 34                        41                         34

 Birth Cohort FE                                                       X                       X                          X
 Country FE                                                            X                       X                          X
Note: The dependent variable is the coefficient from a regression of education on surviving sibship size. Brackets contain standard
errors clustered at the country level. The education averages in column (3) are from the Barro-Lee dataset. * sig. at the 10% level; *
sig. at the 1% level.  
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      
                                                                      

                                                                  40
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
                          
Appendix Tables and Figures — Not for Publication




                       41
                                                                  Appendix Figure 1: Mean Education by Period of Birth
                  Afghanistan                     Bangladesh                             Benin                             Bolivia                      Burkina Faso                       Burundi                         Cambodia
     10
     5
     0




                   Cameroon                 Central African Republic                     Chad                              DRC                         Rep. of Congo                     Cote D’Ivore                      Dom. Rep.
     10
     5
     0




                    Ethiopia                            Gabon                            Ghana                         Guinea                                 Haiti                            Kenya                        Lesotho
     10
     5
     0




                  Madagascar                        Malawi                               Mali                          Morocco                          Mozambique                         Namibia                              Nepal
     10
     5
     0




                    Nigeria                             Peru                        Philippines                        Rwanda                      Sao Tome & Principe                     Senegal                        Sierra Leone
     10
     5
     0




                  South Africa                          Sudan                       Swaziland                         Tanzania                                Togo                         Zambia                          Zimbabwe
     10
     5
     0




          1950   1960   1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970    1980   19901950   1960     1970    1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   1990




                                                            Average Educational Attainment                                                                                                       95% CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      	  	  
Data source: DHS Sibling Histories.

                                                                                                                       42
                                              Appendix Figure 2: Composition Effects on Education Shares	  by Period of Birth
                         Afghanistan                     Bangladesh                             Benin                             Bolivia                      Burkina Faso                       Burundi                         Cambodia
      .05
      0
      −.1 −.05




                          Cameroon                 Central African Republic                     Chad                              DRC                         Rep. of Congo                     Cote D’Ivore                      Dom. Rep.
      .05
      0
      −.1 −.05




                           Ethiopia                            Gabon                            Ghana                         Guinea                                 Haiti                            Kenya                        Lesotho
      .05
      0
      −.1 −.05




                         Madagascar                        Malawi                               Mali                          Morocco                          Mozambique                         Namibia                              Nepal
      .05
      0
      −.1 −.05




                           Nigeria                             Peru                        Philippines                        Rwanda                      Sao Tome & Principe                     Senegal                        Sierra Leone
      .05
      0
      −.1 −.05




                         South Africa                          Sudan                       Swaziland                         Tanzania                                Togo                         Zambia                          Zimbabwe
      .05
      0
      −.1 −.05




                 1950   1960   1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970    1980   19901950   1960     1970    1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   19901950   1960    1970   1980   1990




                                                                                                                   0                                                 1−5
                                                                                                                   6−8                                               9+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             	  
Note: The composition effect is the difference between actual average education and the counterfactual that would arise if all families had the
same number of siblings, with no change to their education. Data source: DHS Sibling Histories.

                                                                                                                              43
              Appendix Table 1: Avgs. of Country-Specific Means and Standard Deviations in the Fertility Histories
                                    Africa
                    (Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Ghana,      Asia/Pacific                   Latin America/Caribbean
                       Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Namibia, Niger,               (India, Indonesia)              (Colombia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Peru)
                      Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe)
                           ‘86-'94                   ‘06-'11          ‘86-'94                        ‘06-'11       ‘86-'94                    ‘06-'11
                              (1)                       (2)              (3)                            (4)           (5)                        (6)
Ever-born fertility          7.14                      6.32             5.12                           4.02          5.79                       4.04
                            [3.22]                    [2.88]           [2.67]                         [2.29]        [3.43]                     [2.44]

Surviving fertility         5.39                      5.12             4.19                           3.45           4.89                       3.59
                           [2.69]                    [2.49]           [2.22]                         [1.90]         [2.89]                     [2.16]

Durables index              0.68                      1.26             1.12                           1.77           1.79                       2.24
                           [0.86]                    [1.10]           [1.22]                         [1.38]         [1.22]                     [1.02]

Woman’s years               1.39                      3.60             2.88                           4.21           3.63                       6.31
 of education              [2.27]                    [3.76]           [3.75]                         [4.41]         [3.64]                     [4.59]

Husband’s years             2.52                      4.57             4.88                           6.26           4.65                       7.31
 of education              [3.03]                    [4.21]           [4.68]                         [4.78]         [4.25]                     [4.88]

Urban                       0.21                      0.30             0.28                           0.38           0.57                       0.65
                           [0.39]                    [0.43]           [0.45]                         [0.48]         [0.47]                     [0.44]

N                          6,269                     13,860           11,721                         14,007         3,929                     12,313
Note: Average means, with average standard deviations in brackets. Each entry represents a simple average of country-specific statistics. The
mean for husband’s years of education is for the subsample with non-missing values on that variable (roughly 94% of the overall sample). Sample
sizes refer to the sum of the country-specific sample sizes. The sample includes a country if and only if it was the site of at least one standard
DHS survey with a full durable goods module in both the early and late periods. The durables index is the sum of ownership dummies for the
following durable goods: radio, television, refrigerator, motorcycle, and car. Data source: women age 45-49 in the DHS Fertility Histories.




                                                                        44
                               Appendix Table 2: Socioeconomic Characteristics and Completed Fertility
                                       Africa
                       (Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Ghana,     Asia/Pacific                    Latin America/Caribbean
                      Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Namibia, Niger,                  (India, Indonesia)               (Colombia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Peru)
                     Nigeria, Senegal, Tanzania, Zambia, Zimbabwe)
                       Ever-born                  Surviving             Ever-born                 Surviving         Ever-born                  Surviving
                    ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11           ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11        ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11          ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11    ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11           ‘86-'94 ‘06-'11
                      (1)     (2)               (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)              (7)       (8)      (9)     (10)              (11)     (12)
Durables index      -0.120* -0.070            0.152* -.0002†          0.007 -0.145*†          0.079* -0.078*†    -0.391* -0.293*           -0.234* -0.212*
                    [0.075] [0.041]           [0.064] [0.036]        [0.044] [0.025]          [0.037] [0.022]    [0.064] [0.038]           [0.057] [0.035]

Woman’s years       -0.067 -0.156*†           -0.044 -0.102*         -0.098* -0.109*         -0.063* -0.079*     -0.140* -0.147*           -0.100* -0.118*
 of education       [0.038] [0.013]           [0.036] [0.012]        [0.015] [0.010]         [0.013] [0.008]     [0.021] [0.010]           [0.018] [0.009]

Husband’s years 0.026 -0.061*†                0.059* -0.025*†        -0.025 -0.017             0.008 -0.002      -0.102* -0.059*           -0.075* -0.047*
 of education   [0.029] [0.011]               [0.025] [0.010]        [0.014] [0.010]          [0.012] [0.008]    [0.020] [0.011]           [0.018] [0.010]

Urban               -0.795* -0.815*           -0.431* -0.603*        -0.064     -0.012        -0.029 0.063       -0.852* -0.489*           -0.621* -0.392
                    [0.143] [0.090]           [0.118] [0.079]        [0.111]     [0.08]       [0.096] [0.071]    [0.178] [0.079]           [0.147] [0.072]

N                    6,269     13,860          6,269     13,860      11,721 14,007            11,721 14,007      3,929      12,313          3,929      12,313
Note: Each entry represents a simple average of country-specific coefficients, with the associated standard error in brackets. The durables index is
the sum of ownership dummies for the following durable goods: radio, television, refrigerator, motorcycle, and car. Each country-specific
regression controls for single-year age indicators and survey year indicators, and clusters standard errors at the PSU level. Sample sizes refer to
the sum of the country-specific sample sizes. The sample includes a country if and only if it was the site of at least one standard DHS survey with
                                                                                                       †
a full durable goods module in both the early and late periods. * sig. diff. from zero at the 5% level; sig. diff. from the early-period coefficient at
the 5% level. Data source: women age 45-49 in the DHS Fertility Histories.




                                                                           45
                       Appendix Table 3: Education-Sibship Size Coefficients by Gender and Period of Birth
                                                 1940-1949           1950-1959           1960-1969                                1970-1982
                                                    (1)                  (2)                (3)                                      (4)
 Indonesia
 Men                                                       0.399                    0.427                   0.303                    0.179
                                                         [0.074]**                [0.063]**               [0.070]**                 [0.156]
 N                                                          949                     1,450                   1,133                     132

 Women                                                     0.418                    0.383                   0.295                    0.085
                                                         [0.065]**                [0.046]**               [0.056]**                 [0.098]
 N                                                         1,076                    1,614                   1,762                     479

 Matlab, Bangladesh
 Men                                                       0.309                    0.274                   0.172                    0.143
                                                         [0.086]**                [0.070]**                [0.076]*                 [0.077]
 N                                                          751                      920                     894                      780

 Women                                                     0.123                    0.249                   0.141                    0.062
                                                         [0.028]**                [0.039]**               [0.039]**                 [0.067]
 N                                                          968                     1,130                   1,481                     967

 Mexico
 Men                                                       0.05                    -0.023                  -0.186                    -0.29
                                                          [0.088]                  [0.086]                [0.067]**                [0.045]**
 N                                                          845                     1,256                   1,644                    2,154

 Women                                                     0.017                   -0.038                   -0.127                   -0.29
                                                          [0.066]                  [0.068]                 [0.052]*                [0.044]**
 N                                                          966                     1,574                   2,222                    3,053
Note: OLS coefficients. Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the PSU level. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. * different from
zero at 5% level; ** different from zero at 1% level. Data source: adults born between 1940 and 1982 in the Indonesia Family Life Survey (1993,
1997 waves), Matlab Health and Socioeconomic Survey (1996), and Mexico Family Life Survey (2002 wave).


                                                                         46
        Appendix Table 4: Education-Sibship Size Coefficients with and without Controlling for Father’s Education
                                          1940-1949             1950-1959           1960-1969             1970-1982
                                              (1)                   (2)                  (3)                  (4)
 Indonesia
 Unadjusted for dad’s ed.                    0.344                 0.415                0.328                0.074
                                           [0.061]**             [0.051]**           [0.058]**              [0.103]
 Adjusted for dad’s ed.                      0.189                 0.225                0.119               -0.012
                                           [0.056]**             [0.040]**           [0.043]**              [0.088]
 N                                           1,430                 2,049                2,009                 460

 Matlab, Bangladesh
 Unadjusted for dad’s ed.                                0.191                     0.264                     0.160                    0.093
                                                       [0.040]**                 [0.038]**                 [0.037]**                 [0.052]
 Adjusted for dad’s ed.                                  0.102                     0.138                     0.071                    0.119
                                                       [0.037]**                 [0.036]**                  [0.034]*                [0.046]**
 N                                                       1,678                     2,007                     2,317                    1,705

 Mexico
 Unadjusted for dad’s ed.                                0.032                    -0.037                    -0.162                   -0.301
                                                        [0.080]                   [0.067]                  [0.057]**                [0.037]**
 Adjusted for dad’s ed.                                  0.071                    0.0002                    -0.045                   -0.154
                                                        [0.070]                   [0.057]                   [0.048]                 [0.034]**
 N                                                       1,376                     2,261                     3,166                    4,393
Note: OLS coefficients. Brackets contain standard errors clustered at the PSU level. Each coefficient is from a separate regression. The samples
include both men and women, and all regressions control for a gender indicator. * different from zero at 5% level; ** different from zero at 1% level.
Data source: adults born between 1940 and 1982 in the Indonesia Family Life Survey (1993, 1997 waves), Matlab Health and Socioeconomic
Survey (1996), and Mexico Family Life Survey (2002 wave). The Mexico Family Life Survey only contains data on broad education categories, but
for ease of comparison across settings, I convert them to a measure of years of education. Using data from the 2000 Mexico census, I determine
the mean years of education among adults in each education level, and I then assign that mean to the corresponding parents in the Mexico Family
Life Survey.




                                                                         47
