                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THE WAGE EFFECTS OF NOT-FOR-PROFIT AND FOR-PROFIT CERTIFICATIONS:
              BETTER DATA, SOMEWHAT DIFFERENT RESULTS

                                             Kevin Lang
                                           Russell Weinstein

                                         Working Paper 19135
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19135


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2013




This topic was brought to our attention by Jesse Felix whose excellent undergraduate research opportunities
project was, to the best of our knowledge, the earliest use of the Beginning Post-Secondary Students
survey to examine differences in financial and labor market outcomes of students at for-profit and
other institutions. We regret that data access restrictions prevented him from working with us on this
new project. We are grateful to Steve Erlebacher and participants in the Boston University empirical
microeconomics workshop for helpful comments and suggestions. The usual caveat applies. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
The Wage Effects of Not-for-Profit and For-Profit Certifications: Better Data, Somewhat Different
Results
Kevin Lang and Russell Weinstein
NBER Working Paper No. 19135
June 2013
JEL No. I23,J3

                                                 ABSTRACT

Using the Beginning Postsecondary Student Survey and Transcript Data, we find no statistically significant
differential return to certificate or Associate’s degrees between for-profits and not-for-profits. Point
estimates suggest a slightly lower return to a for-profit certificate and a slightly higher return to a for-profit
Associate’s degree, largely because more students at not-for-profits earn a BA, making them less likely
to have only an Associate’s degree. There is considerable variation in the return to certificates/degrees
across majors, including many with negligible or negative returns. Differences across fields are large
relative to differences across institution types.


Kevin Lang
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
lang@bu.edu

Russell Weinstein
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Rd
Boston, MA 02215
weinst@bu.edu
1         Introduction

Critics of for-profit universities charge that these institutions recruit unqualified students in

order to obtain their federal student aid and provide these students with little benefit. Indeed,

in 2009, students at for-profit institutions accounted for nearly half of student loan defaults

(US Department of Education, 2012a), but only about 11 percent of post-secondary students

(US Department of Education, 2011a). Total funding received by for-profit post-secondary

institutions under Title IV in 2010-2011 was more than 32 billion dollars, about 20% of total

Title IV funds (US Department of Education, 2012b, US Department of Education, 2011b).

Proponents, in contrast, argue that for-profit institutions educate non-traditional students

who would not otherwise attend college and who therefore benefit from their existence.

They maintain that the large quantity of loans and defaults reflects the eﬀorts of for-profit

institutions to serve this under-served group.1

        Using a rich data set, we investigate whether there is a diﬀerential labor market return

to certification from for-profit institutions.2 Estimating diﬀerential returns is challenging.

Since students who enter for-profit institutions tend to be disadvantaged, their poorer labor

    1
      The principal diﬀerence between for-profit and not-for-profit organizations is that not-for-profit firms
cannot distribute profits to those who exercise control over the firm (Hansmann, 1996) but must distribute
them in other ways, such as improving buildings and classrooms or by avoiding profits through lower prices.
In the United States, not-for-profit educational institutions are generally exempt from corporate and property
taxation, donations are tax deductible for the donor, and they have access to tax-exempt bond financing.
However, for-profit institutions can use equity financing. Glaeser and Shleifer (2001) develop a model of
why firms choose non-profit status that does not focus on the tax benefits, but rather on the firm’s desire
to constrain their ability to maximize profits. This improves their competitive standing in markets where
firms are able to take advantage of their customers. A related literature on for-profit and not-for-profit
hospitals finds no clear diﬀerence in quality (McClellan and Staiger, 2000). In theory, for-profit institutions
have greater incentives to provide lower quality care in the absence of perfect information which could lead
consumers to pay a premium to stay in a not-for-profit hospital, but this prediction is not confirmed in the
data (Philipson, 2000).
    2
      In this paper, not-for-profit institutions include both public institutions and private, not-for-profit
institutions.




                                                      1
market performance after completing their education may reflect our inability to control

adequately for pre-entry diﬀerences. Therefore we compare the diﬀerence in earnings between

certification completers and non-completers across institution types. If the diﬀerence in

earnings between certification completers and non-completers is similar across institution

type, lower wages of for-profit certification completers are more likely to be explained by

pre-entry diﬀerences than by institution type. If the wages of certification completers relative

to non-completers are lower at for-profit institutions, this suggests lower returns to for-profit

certifications. This conclusion requires that any ability (or other) bias aﬀecting the measured

return to certification be similar across institution type. To further account for pre-entry

diﬀerences in background, we present propensity-score-weighted regressions.

   We find no statistically significant diﬀerential return to certification from for-profit in-

stitutions. However, the point estimate of the diﬀerential return is non-trivially negative

for a for-profit certificate and non-trivially positive for a for-profit Associate’s degree. Much

of the latter diﬀerence reflects the greater tendency of strong students at not-for-profits to

continue to a BA, leading to diﬀerential selection into the Associate’s-degree-only group.

   Controlling for major does not eliminate these diﬀerences. Nonetheless, the variation

across major in the return to certifications is large relative to the for-profit/not-for-profit

diﬀerential. The return to certificates in business and health fields (except Licensed Practical

Nursing) is small or negative, while the return to a certificate in vocational fields is positive.

In contrast, the return to an Associate’s degree in business and health fields is very large,

while small or negative in vocational fields and liberal arts and sciences.

   The for-profit diﬀerential is identified mainly through majors with many students at both

institution types. The possibly higher return to an Associate’s degree from a for-profit than

                                                2
from a not-for-profit, therefore applies only to majors served by both sectors. Many not-

for-profit majors are concentrated in Registered Nursing, a very high pay-oﬀ major that is

nearly absent from for-profit colleges in our data.

   Further, students starting Associate’s degrees at not-for-profits are more likely to pursue

a Bachelor’s degree. If the best students go on to Bachelor’s programs, the top of the

skill distribution will be missing from the not-for-profit Associate’s degree estimates. These

students will either be classified as having a BA or missing from the data if they are still

enrolled.

   There is a small literature analyzing the for-profit post-secondary education sector. This

paper is an updated version of Lang and Weinstein (2012), which utilized the survey but

not the transcript data from the Beginning Post-Secondary Student Survey. The transcript

data diﬀer considerably from the survey responses and provide more detail about majors.

   Using the NLSY97, Cellini and Chaudhary (2012) find some evidence that the returns to

an Associate’s degree from a for-profit are higher than those from a public institution. They

do not consider certificates, an important educational oﬀering at for-profit post-secondary

institutions. In our sample, more than 60% of students enrolled at for-profit institutions

are in certificate programs. Chung (2008) uses NELS88 which has a sample of only 157

respondents enrolled in either certificate or Associate’s degree programs at for-profit colleges.

She finds that, after controlling for selection, obtaining a for-profit certificate results in 141

to 158% higher earnings compared to those who have selected into the for-profit sector but

do not complete any certification. Using administrative data, Turner (2011) finds a larger

earnings increase after enrollment in two or four year not-for-profit institutions compared

to for-profit institutions. However, the data are limited to enrollment and do not contain

                                                3
information on certification.

    Deming, Goldin and Katz (2012) find that comparable students who enroll at for-profits

are more indebted but more likely to obtain some qualification, most notably certificates

and, more modestly, Associate’s degrees, although less likely to obtain a Bachelor’s degree.

They have lower average earnings in part due to lower employment rates. Their paper

is deliberately exploratory and does not attempt to address in-depth how diﬀerences in

unemployment and school enrollment rates influence the estimated earnings diﬀerentials.

Further, they consider returns to enrollment, and not to certification.

    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the methods. Section 3 describes the

data. Section 4 contains the results. Section 5 presents robustness checks, and Section 6

concludes.




2     Methods

Our data, discussed in detail below, consist of students who first enter post-secondary edu-

cation in 2003-04. We generate separate estimates for those starting in certificate and As-

sociate’s degree programs since these groups are likely to be very diﬀerent. We do not

distinguish among individuals based on the types of programs the institution oﬀers. Thus

we pool individuals enrolled in, for example, certificate programs at two-year and four-year

institutions. We do not examine students starting in non-certification or BA programs. For

ease of presentation, in this section we drop notation distinguishing whether the sample is

those entering certificate or Associate’s degree programs. We use the term certification to

refer to certificates, Associate’s degrees, or Bachelor’s degrees.


                                               4
2.1     Basic Regression Analysis

2.1.1   Regressions without Controls for Major



Our starting point is a fairly standard log-earnings equation, in which we do not control for

the individual’s major:




                  =  +  1   +  2  +  3  +  4  +  5   +  6   +           (1)

                    +  7   + 1  8 + 



where  denotes log annual income in 2009. We have dropped the i subscript for simplicity.

The variable C is an indicator for whether the highest certification obtained was a certificate,

and similarly for A(ssociate’s) and BA(chelor’s). The variable   is an indicator for whether

the student started at a for-profit, and the subscript FP denotes that the certificate or degree

was obtained from a for-profit. Note that an individual who enters, for example, a certificate

program in fall 2003 may have no certification, a certificate (but no higher certification), an

Associate’s degree or, very rarely, a BA in 2009.

    2 through  4 capture the “return” to earning certification at a not-for-profit while

 5 through  7 capture the diﬀerence between this return and the return at a for-profit

institution. We use the term“return” loosely to refer to the percentage diﬀerence in earnings

between an individual who obtains a certification and one who started but did not obtain a

certification. Thus, this use of return does not account for costs.

   Because we are focused on the return to certifications, we do not additionally control


                                                5
for the highest certification program in which the respondent is ever enrolled. Individuals

who enroll in a certification program sometimes enroll in a higher certification program after

completing or, more rarely, without completing their original certification. To avoid cutting

the data too finely, we control only for higher certifications that are completed and not those

merely attempted.

   Ability bias is a concern when estimating returns to education. Usually ability bias

reflects the diﬀerence between those who do and do not obtain a certification or an extra year

of education. In our case, ability bias reflects the unobserved diﬀerence in ability between

those finishing and those starting but not finishing at a particular type of institution. If those

who attempt post-secondary education but do not complete it are more favorably selected

than those who never attempt it, ability bias is less problematic for our analysis.

   Moreover,  5 through  7 can be interpreted as diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences estimates. There-

fore, we require only that any ability bias be similar across institution types. More formally,

write

                               = Γ +  2  +  5   +  +                                (2)


where we have combined the remaining variables into  and  and  represent the unob-

served factors that are correlated and uncorrelated with the included explanatory variables.

Our key parameter,  5  will be unbiased if



                          ( 0  |   = 1) =  ( 0  |   = 0)                       (3)



If ability bias is the same at for-profit and not-for-profit institutions, it will be removed when



                                                6
we compare the return at for-profit institutions to not-for-profit institutions. We discuss the

plausibility of this assumption when we describe the data and also in the robustness section.

    1 represents the return to starting a certificate or degree at a for-profit relative to a not-

for-profit, for those who do not receive any certification. This coeﬃcient can diﬀer from zero

either because human capital acquisition diﬀers across institution types even among those

who do not complete a certification, or because the types of students who do not complete

any certification diﬀer across institution types. To address the former explanation, in some

specifications we control for time spent in post-secondary education and its interaction with

.

   1 denotes the explanatory variables that are determined before or just after enrollment,

and therefore unlikely to be caused by the starting-institution type. These include age,

household size (parental household size for dependent students, and respondent household

size for independent students), income in 2002 (parental income for dependent students

and respondent income for independent students), number of dependent children in 2003,

and indicators for black, Hispanic, male, English is the primary language, married in 2003,

and born in the United States. The explanatory variables also include family background

characteristics: expected family contribution to college finances in 2003, and indicators for

parents having at most 12 years of education, respondent claimed as a dependent in 2003,

and both parents born in the United States. We also include academic variables: number of

years the individual delayed enrollment in college after high school, whether attained a high

school diploma, and whether obtained a GED. For those who began their post-secondary

schooling before age 24, we also have indicators for high school GPA above 3.0, took the

SAT or ACT, and SAT/ACT score. We refer to this last set as the under-24 variables.

                                                7
   There are a number of potentially endogenous variables. These include the total amount

of grants and veterans benefits for college the individual received in 2003, whether the in-

dividual was always a full-time student during his/her postsecondary schooling, GPA in

2003/2004, number of dependent children in 2006 and 2009, married in 2009, the number of

times the student transferred, the number of months since the individual was last enrolled in

college, and total months enrolled. The last two variables are measures of education quantity

and post-education experience but may also be influenced by institution choice. Our prelim-

inary investigations showed only minor diﬀerences from our main results when we included

the post-2003 characteristics. We therefore present results only with the clearly exogenous

explanatory variables except for some robustness checks.

   As noted above, some potentially important variables are available only for those starting

post-secondary education before age 24. We therefore choose four diﬀerent combinations of

sample and explanatory variables: a “young” sample with all variables, a young sample with

only variables available for the entire sample, an “old” sample, and the full sample. For

the young sample, a specification test never rejects that our baseline estimates of the eﬀects

of certification are unaﬀected by including the under-24 variables. Moreover, we cannot

reject the hypothesis that the coeﬃcients are the same for the young and old samples for

those starting in Associate’s degree programs. While we do reject this null for those starting

in certificate programs, the coeﬃcients of interest do not diﬀer between the two samples.

We thus estimate a regression interacting every variable with an indicator for being in the

older sample, except for these coeﬃcients of interest. Including these interactions does not

noticeably change the interpretation of the results.

   For ease of presentation, we focus on the results from the regressions without these

                                              8
interactions. We present the main specification estimates for the young sample with the

under-24 variables, the old sample, and for the full sample. For all remaining specifications,

we present only the results for the full sample, which are also generally the most precise.

However, in the text we point out any notable diﬀerences among samples and specifications.


2.1.2      Regressions Controlling for Major


Returns may diﬀer among institutions because the fields they cover have diﬀerent returns.

Therefore, we augment equation (1) with indicators for major of highest certification or

highest certification program for non-completers. These are business, manual and tech-

nological vocational training, liberal arts and sciences, human services, registered nursing,

licensed practical/vocational nursing, health administration, allied health-assisting, allied

health-treatment, somatic bodywork and related therapeutic services, health preparatory

programs, other health majors, health (survey),3 and undeclared. These comprise the full

set of majors in the data.

       To allow major to aﬀect labor market returns, we then further augment this equation by

interacting major with highest certification. However, due to limited data we combine some

of the majors:4



   3
     As will be explained in the data section, this refers to the broad field of health, and is used only for
those without transcript data on major.
   4
     Some individuals have more than one highest degree. If the majors for these highest degrees diﬀer,
there will be more than one major. To not impose the restriction that having two highest degrees is twice as
valuable as one, we control for (TotalHighestCertificate-1), and this variable interacted with the degrees being
from a for-profit. We create analagous variables for Associate’s degrees and Bachelor’s degrees. However,
these variables are not jointly significant and have little eﬀect on the variables of interest, and so we do not
include them in the specifications shown here.




                                                       9
   =  +  1  +
      X
            [   +    +    ] +  2   +  3   +  4  
  ∈


  + 1  5 +  6  +  7  +  8  +  9 

       +     10     +      11        +      12       +      (4)



      The variable  is an indicator for majoring in one of the eight health fields

defined from the transcript data (registered nursing; licensed practical/vocational nursing;

health administration; allied health-assisting; allied health-treatment; somatic bodywork

and related therapeutic services; health preparatory programs; other health majors). The

variable  is an indicator for the highest certification being a certificate, and the major

associated with that certificate being ; similarly for   and  

      We interpret the coeﬃcients on  as the return to a not-for-profit certificate in major

 relative to starting, but not completing a certificate with this major at a not-for-profit.5

However, if  is one of the eight health majors from the transcript,  is the return to

certification with major  relative to someone who started, but did not complete certification

and majored in any of the health fields. This can be seen in specification (4) in that we

control only for  as described above and do not include eight separate health field

intercepts because the number of individuals who start, but do not complete a program in

each individual health field is too small. The coeﬃcients on  have the same interpretation

  5
    If the major is missing in the transcript data, we instead use the most recent major as given in the
survey response.


                                                  10
mutatis mutandis.

   The coeﬃcient on   denotes the diﬀerential return to a certificate from a for-profit,

relative to a certificate from a not-for-profit, holding major constant.   and   have

similar interpretations.



2.2    Propensity Score Weighting

Since we will see that students beginning at diﬀerent institution types have quite diﬀerent

background characteristics, and since the linearity assumptions underlying the regression

model may be problematic, as a robustness check we use propensity-score weighting. We use

standard logit to calculate the propensity to start at a for-profit institution separately for the

under-24 sample with the under-24 only variables; the under-24 sample without the under-24

only variables, and the 24 and above sample. In the regressions using the full sample, the

propensity score weights for individuals less than 24 are those that were calculated for the

under-24 sample with the under-24 only variables, and the weights for individuals 24 and

older are those that were calculated for that sample. Once we have calculated the probability

that an individual started in a certificate (Associate’s degree) program at a for-profit college,

these probabilities are used to generate weights in the usual way. In the following sections, we

present results obtained from estimating regressions with the observations weighted by the

sample weights multiplied by these propensity score weights. The details of the propensity

score methods are included in the appendix.




                                               11
3         Data

We use the Beginning Post-Secondary Student Survey and Transcript Data, 2004 (hereafter

BPS) sponsored by the US Department of Education. The BPS is a sample of approximately

16,6806 students who began post-secondary education for the first time in the 2003-2004

academic year. Students were surveyed in their 1st, 3rd, and 6th year after entering college.

Since the BPS sample is first-time college students, it contains individuals who are enrolled

both continuously and non-continuously. This is beneficial for our study since students in

certificate and Associate’s degree programs are often non-traditional college students, and

may have non-continuous enrollment patterns. However, the BPS will be unrepresentative

if many certifications are awarded to students who take more than six years to complete the

program.

        For each individual in the BPS, transcripts were collected from each institution attended

from July 2003 to June 2009. The transcript data contain detailed information on degree

program, major, degrees obtained, and grades. Because many students who enter four-year

programs do not complete within six years, we focus on a sample of close to 1370 students

who entered certificate programs and 1900 who entered Associate’s degree programs. All

institutions in the data have signed Title IV agreements with the Department of Education.

This means they are accredited by at least one Department of Education approved accrediting

agency and thus are eligible for Title IV aid.

        Many of the variables of interest are available through both the survey and transcript

data. For example, respondents are asked about the degree program in which they start, their

    6
    For confidentiality reasons, the Department of Education requires that reports of observations be rounded
to the nearest ten.


                                                     12
highest degree, and the sector of the institutions they attended. However, this information is

also on the transcripts provided directly by the educational institutions. There are significant

diﬀerences between the survey responses and the transcript data. We treat the transcripts as

more accurate, and so define the variables using the transcript data when both are available.

Only for the small percentage of individuals without transcripts or with missing data on the

transcripts, do we use survey responses for variables also covered in the transcript data.

   As described in the methods section, we control for major of highest certification earned,

or highest program for non-completers. If an individual has two certifications at the same

level and none higher, she will have two majors if they are from the same type of institution.

For this reason there is no omitted major category. We drop the few individuals with one

certification from a for-profit and one from a not-for-profit because it is impossible to discern

which certification is more responsible for labor market outcomes.

   The survey response does not distinguish among health fields. The variable “healthsur-

vey” equals one if the individual does not have transcript data on major and reports his

major as health.

   Unfortunately, labor market data for 2009 were collected only for those whose last date

of enrollment was before February 2009. Our baseline results thus drop students who were

still enrolled five and a half years after entering a certificate or Associate’s degree program.

However, we perform a number of robustness checks to address these missing data.

   Table 1 summarizes the data. The first two columns are the certificate program sample,

separated by those starting at a for-profit (680 observations) and not-for-profit (690 obser-

vations). The last two columns describe the Associate’s degree sample which is dominated

by those starting at not-for-profit programs (1520 observations) relative to those starting

                                               13
at for-profit programs (380 observations). The means are calculated using the sampling

weights.



3.1    Certificate programs

Table 1 shows that income in 2009 is approximately $6500 lower for students starting cer-

tificate programs at for-profit institutions than for those starting certificate programs at

not-for-profit institutions, statistically significant at the .01 level. It is by no means evident,

however, that this diﬀerence is causal. Compared to those who start at not-for-profit institu-

tions, students starting in certificate programs at for-profit institutions are much more likely

to be black, Hispanic, female, younger, single, and listed as a dependent at the time they

enter college. Furthermore, income in 2002 (parental for dependent students and respond-

ent for independent students) and expected family contribution to college are much lower.

They are also less likely to have taken the SAT. Somewhat more of those entering not-for-

profits (44%) than of those entering for-profits (34%) have not gained any certification. This

diﬀerence is statistically significant at the .05 level.



3.2    Associate’s degree programs

Table 1 shows that income in 2009 for students starting Associate’s degree programs at

for-profit institutions is approximately $3000 less than for those starting at not-for-profit

programs, statistically significant at the .05 level. Again, it is not clear that this diﬀerence

is causal. Compared to those who start at not-for-profit institutions, students starting in

Associate’s degree programs at for-profit institutions are much more likely to be Hispanic and



                                                14
single, and less likely to be listed as a dependent at the time they enter college. Furthermore,

income in 2002 (parental for dependent students and respondent for independent students) is

much lower among for-profit students, their parents are less likely to have more than 12 years

of schooling and are less likely to be born in the US, and their expected family contribution

to college is much lower. Students starting at for-profits are less likely to have obtained their

high school diploma, and more likely to have obtained their GED. They are also less likely

to have taken the SAT.

   Unfortunately, the pattern of certification diﬀers between those entering Associate’s de-

gree programs in for-profits and not-for-profits. In both cases there are small, not signi-

ficantly diﬀerent, numbers of students reporting leaving with a certificate as their highest

degree (between 2 and 3% at both institution types) and also who have acquired no certifica-

tion (51% at both institution types). However, those starting in Associate’s degree programs

at not-for-profit institutions are much more likely to have obtained a Bachelor’s degree (and

less likely to have obtained only an Associate’s degree) than are those who started at a

for-profit institution. Therefore, those with only an Associate’s degree are likely to be more

favorably selected if they began at a for-profit. This diﬀerential ability bias could bias the

diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences estimates of the diﬀerential return to certification. We present some

evidence on the extent of diﬀerential ability bias across institution type in the robustness

section.




                                               15
3.3     Diﬀerences in major across institution type

Table 2 shows sample size by major for those obtaining and those starting but not complet-

ing certifications. Panel A shows striking diﬀerences between the two types of institutions.

Those obtaining not-for-profit certificates are much more likely to major in business, voca-

tional fields, and licensed practical/vocational nursing than are those obtaining for-profit

certificates.   They are less likely to major in human services, allied health-assisting, and

health administration.

    Panel B shows this information for those starting Associate’s degree programs. We see

similar diﬀerences between institution types. Compared with individuals obtaining for-profit

Associate’s degrees, those obtaining not-for-profit Associate’s degrees are much more likely

to major in liberal arts and sciences and registered nursing and much less likely to major

in vocational fields and allied health-assisting. Similar proportions of students major in

business, human services, and allied health-treatment at the two types of institution.

    Requirements for employment vary considerably across health fields. Medical assisting

and health administration, representing 37 and 17 percent of certificates and Associate’s

degrees from for-profits but only 11 and 9 percent from not-for-profits, do not require licensing

or degree completion (BLS, 2012). Licensed practical/vocational nursing (10 percent of not-

for-profit and 1 percent of for-profit certificates) and registered nursing (10 percent of not-

for-profit and almost no for-profit certificates), do require licensing and degree completion.

Although simple theory suggests returns should be equalized, we would not be surprised if

required certifications yield higher returns

.



                                               16
4     Results

4.1    Return to Certificates for those Starting in Certificate Pro-

       grams

Panel A of table 3 shows the return to certificates, not controlling for major, for students

who begin in a certificate program. Columns (1) and (4) show the results for the full sample

using OLS and propensity score matching. The coeﬃcient on   is small, positive,

and statistically insignificant in both specifications, suggesting no return to a certificate from

a not-for-profit although the confidence interval includes nontrivial eﬀects. The coeﬃcient

on   in row (3) is non-trivial and negative in both specifications, suggesting a

smaller return to a certificate from a for-profit than a not-for-profit, but the coeﬃcient again

falls short of statistical significance. Row (4) gives the sum of the coeﬃcients on 

and   , which is about -5 log points in both specifications.

    The coeﬃcient on the indicator for starting at a for-profit is negative and non-trivial in

both specifications and thus suggests that non-completers have lower incomes at for-profits

than at not-for-profits. Unless dropouts diﬀer in time spent enrolled or post-enrollment

experience (both explored briefly below), we would expect dropouts from diﬀerent institution

types to have similar earnings if we control adequately for other diﬀerences.          While the

diﬀerences here are not statistically significant, they may suggest failure to control for some

unobservables.

    Thus, these estimates suggest a small return to a not-for-profit certificate, a negative

diﬀerential to a for-profit certificate, and perhaps some evidence that even with our controls,



                                               17
those starting at for-profits are negatively selected. The results for the young and old samples

are not dramatically diﬀerent, although the coeﬃcient on starting at a for-profit is more

negative and the return to a certificate is larger for the younger sample.

   Table 4 gives the results for the specifications controlling for major, using the sample of all

ages. We focus on the full sample because the sample sizes by major get small when restricted

to the young or old sample. Columns (1) and (4) are the same as Columns (1) and (4) in

panel A of table 3, repeated to facilitate comparing results controlling and not controlling

for major. Columns (2) and (5) control for major. The coeﬃcient on  falls in

both specifications when majors are included. Further, the OLS coeﬃcient on   

falls slightly in magnitude while it is unchanged in the propensity score estimates. The total

return to a certificate at a for-profit is more negative. Finally, the coeﬃcient on starting at

a for-profit decreases in magnitude when we control for major.

   Finally, in columns (3) and (6) we show the results with interactions between major

and certification. The coeﬃcient on   falls even more in magnitude using OLS

but rises slightly using propensity score matching, so that the two methods generate similar

results.

   Rows (5) through (11) of the third and sixth columns reveal that there is considerable

variation across majors in the return to certificates. While the interaction between each

major and certification is included in the regression, we only present the returns to certific-

ates for majors where at least 30 students obtained a certificate in the OLS sample. None

of the returns is statistically significant, with the exception of a large, positive return to a

certificate in vocational fields, and a large, negative return to a certificate in business (stat-

istically significant in the propensity score specification). However, the return to certificates

                                               18
in Licensed Practical Nursing is large and positive. From table 2 we see LPNs are much

more common at not-for-profit institutions and that non-completion is particularly high for

business certificates. The F-statistic testing the joint significance of the major*certification

interaction terms implies these terms are significant at the .01 level in both specifications,

and similarly when we test the joint significance of these terms and the major intercepts. Fi-

nally, the F-test in both specifications rejects that the major*certification interaction terms

are jointly equal, significant at the .01 level.



4.2    Return to Degrees for those Starting in Associate’s Degree

       Programs

Panel B of table 3 shows the eﬀect, not controlling for major, of certificates/degrees on stu-

dents who begin in an Associate’s degree program. Columns (1) and (4) show the results for

the full sample using OLS and propensity score matching. The coeﬃcient on 0 in

row 3, which denotes the return to an Associate’s degree from a not-for-profit, is large, posit-

ive, and statistically significant and about 10 log points using both methods. The diﬀerential

return to a for-profit Associate’s degree, among those starting such degrees, is approximately

7 log points using both estimates, though statistically significant in neither. The total return

to an Associate’s degree from a for-profit (the sum of the coeﬃcients on 0 and

0  ) is large, positive, and statistically significant, with magnitude approximately

17 to 18 log points in both specifications. Finally, the coeﬃcient on the indicator for starting

at a for-profit is negative and non-trivial in both specifications, and statistically significant

in the propensity score specification. As suggested in the previous section, this may suggest



                                                   19
failure to control for some unobservables.

   We see large diﬀerences between the young and old samples among those starting in

Associate’s degree programs. The coeﬃcient on 0  is approximately 21 log points

larger for the old than the young sample, although not statistically significant. The coeﬃcient

on starting at a for-profit is also much more negative for the older sample, and statistically

significant at the .1 level. This may suggest that the older sample is more negatively selected

at for-profits than the younger sample is.

   Table 5 presents the results for the specifications including controls for major. Columns

(1) and (4) are the same as columns (1) and (4) in panel B of table 3 for reference. The return

to a not-for-profit Associate’s degree decreases in magnitude and statistical significance with

the inclusion of controls for major in both columns (2) and (4). Further, the diﬀerential

return to a for-profit Associate’s degree decreases slightly and the return to an Associate’s

degree at a for-profit falls modestly.

   Finally, in columns (3) and (6) we show the results from specification (2) which includes

interactions between major and certification. The coeﬃcient on 0  increases

slightly in both cases, implying that those obtaining Associate’s degrees from for-profits are

in majors with slightly lower returns. After controlling for major, and major interacted

with certification, we continue to see a non-trivial, although not statistically significant,

positive diﬀerential eﬀect of obtaining an Associate’s degree from a for-profit relative to a

not-for-profit.

   Rows (9) through (15) in these columns give the returns to Associate’s degrees in vari-

ous fields. While the interaction between each major and certification is included in the

regression, we only present the returns to Associate’s degrees for majors where at least 30

                                              20
students obtained an Associate’s degree in the OLS sample. It is clear that there is a lot of

variation in the return to Associate’s degrees across majors. We see large, positive returns,

often statistically significant, to Associate’s degrees in business, registered nursing, allied

health-assisting, and allied health-treatment. The returns to an Associate’s degree in liberal

arts and sciences and vocational fields are very small and imprecise. We note that liberal

arts and sciences is much more prevalent at not-for-profit institutions, while vocational ma-

jors are much more prevalent at for-profit institutions, as shown in table 2. The F-statistic

testing the joint significance of the major*certification interaction terms implies these terms

are significant at the .01 level in both specifications, and similarly when we test the joint

significance of these terms and the major intercepts. Finally, the F-test in both specifications

rejects that the major*certification interaction terms are jointly equal, significant at the .01

level.

    Since students starting Associate’s degrees at not-for-profits are more likely to advance to

a Bachelor’s degree, we now allow the “treatment” of starting at a not-for-profit to be holding

at least an Associate’s degree. This treats obtaining a Bachelor’s degree as a causal eﬀect

of entering an Associate’s degree program rather than as a nuisance variable for which we

must control. We estimate specification (2) using this combined variable. The coeﬃcient on

  is less than half the size of 0  in column (3) of table 5, with point

estimate .032 and standard error .102 (not shown). This suggests that the “premium” for

an Associate’s degree from a for-profit is in part due to excluding the role of an Associate’s

degree at a not-for-profit as a pathway to a four-year degree.       In assessing the near-zero

coeﬃcient when we combine two-year and four-year degrees, we should recognize that the

latter take longer, but we should also recognize that students at not-for-profits are more likely

                                               21
to still be enrolled in a Bachelor’s degree program and such students tend to be positively

selected as measured by their GPA while in college (not shown). Our inability to include

these students biases the coeﬃcient on 0  upward.7




5       Robustness Checks


In this section, we report the results of a series of robustness checks on the full sample.



5.1      Diﬀerential Ability Bias

Unbiased estimates of the diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences coeﬃcients require that ability bias be

similar across institution types. We addressed this in the Data section by comparing the

distributions of certifications across institution types. In this section, we test for diﬀerential

ability bias in two ways. First, we test for diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences in observables. If the

observable diﬀerences between completers and non-completers are similar across institution

type, this makes it more plausible that they are also similar in unobservables. Second,

we estimate our main specifications without controls to see if the diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences

coeﬃcient changes, which is a way of summarizing the importance of observable diﬀerences-

in-diﬀerences.

    7
     Careful readers may note diﬀerences between the results in this paper and Lang and Weinstein (2012)
attributable only to the use of the transcript data. They may wonder how using these data would aﬀect
the results in Deming, Goldin, and Katz (2011), hereafter DGK, who also use the Beginning Post-Secondary
Student Survey. We have not explored this question in detail. Using the transcript data, we have reestimated
the DGK specification, which gives the diﬀerence in earnings for those enrolling in a for-profit relative to
a not-for-profit, controlling for observable background factors. For certificate programs, the coeﬃcient on
enrolling at a for-profit is -3211, significant at the .05 level which contrasts with a statistically insignificant
coeﬃcient of -1576 in DGK. For those starting in Associate’s degree programs, the coeﬃcient on enrolling
at a for-profit is -2382 and is not statistically significant, in contrast with a marginally significant coeﬃcient
of -2794 in DGK. Given the nature of that paper, these diﬀerences appear modest to us.


                                                        22
   We regress



            =  +  1   +  2  +  3  +  4  +  5   +  6   +  7   +         (5)



   The dependent variables are the variables in 1 . Since we have multiple tests, we use

the Bonferroni correction adjusted for correlation. None of the diﬀerences-in-diﬀerences is

statistically significant at the .05 level either for those starting in certificate or those starting

in Associate’s degree programs. This implies that the comparison of completers to non-

completers, in terms of observables, is similar across institution type.

   When we estimate the principal specification without the explanatory variables, the dif-

ferential return to a for-profit certificate, among those starting in certificate programs, is

-.12 (standard error .1) without controls, relative to -.07 with controls (table 4, column (3)).

Controlling for observable characteristics implies a somewhat smaller diﬀerence between for-

profit and not-for-profit certificates, suggesting that the diﬀerence might be even smaller

after accounting for diﬀerences in unobservables across institution types. The diﬀerential re-

turn to a for-profit Associate’s degree, among those starting in Associate’s degree programs,

is .06 (standard error .1) without controls relative to .07 with controls (table 5, column (3)),

suggesting little diﬀerence in observables.

   Taken together these tests do not suggest large violations of the requirement that ability

bias be similar for not-for-profit and for-profit institutions.

   Wage is not observed for those who are either not employed or still enrolled in school.

Diﬀerences across institutions in who is employed represent another possible source of bias.

We showed earlier that those starting Associate’s degree programs at for-profits are less likely


                                                 23
to still be studying for a Bachelor’s degree. The diﬀerential eﬀect of certification from a for-

profit, relative to a not-for-profit, on employment (conditional on no longer being enrolled) is

statistically insignificant for both those starting certificates and Associate’s degree programs

(not shown). However, the magnitudes of the eﬀects are nontrivial, suggesting that our

estimates should be treated with caution.


5.1.1   Time in program and time in labor market


Certificate and Associate’s degree programs may diﬀer in length, and students might per-

severe longer in one type of institution than another. Because length of program, or length

of time in program, may be correlated with human capital acquisition and thus earnings, we

control for months enrolled (results not shown). For both those starting in Associate’s degree

and certificate programs, the coeﬃcients on months enrolled are small and insignificant, and

the remaining coeﬃcients are unaﬀected.

   Recall that the coeﬃcient on Start at For-Profit is large and negative in table 4. To

address further this somewhat troubling result, we include not only total months enrolled,

but also its interaction with starting at a for-profit in specification (2). The coeﬃcient on

starting at a for-profit is therefore the eﬀect of starting at a for-profit and not spending

any time enrolled. Since we would not expect any diﬀerential for people spending no time

enrolled, a negative coeﬃcient would suggest failure to control for pre-entry diﬀerences. The

coeﬃcient on starting at a for-profit falls from -.108 in column (3) of table 5 to -.027 (not

shown). The coeﬃcient using propensity score weighting also falls but remains non-trivially

negative. However, it falls further when we restrict the sample to those who were enrolled

for at most 6 months (not shown). These results suggest that the large, negative coeﬃcient

                                              24
on starting at a for-profit can be attributed to diﬀerences in time enrolled before dropping

out and the diﬀerential benefit of incomplete programs across institution type, and not our

failure to control for diﬀerences in entrants’ characteristics.

    Finally, we control for potential experience since leaving the program (measured by

months since last enrolled). To allow for the possibility that wage growth after leaving

school is higher or lower for those starting at for-profits, we include both a linear term for

months since last enrolled and its interaction with starting at a for-profit. The results for

our key coeﬃcients are again very similar to those in the original specification (not shown).


5.1.2    Labor Market Conditions


The estimated returns might reflect diﬀerences in labor market strength in areas where

for-profit and not-for-profit institutions are located. The median distance between the re-

spondent’s permanent home and starting-institution is 20 miles for individuals starting in

for-profit and 14 miles for those starting in not-for-profit Associate’s degree programs. The

corresponding numbers are 15 and 10 miles for those starting in certificate programs. These

distances suggest that for most students, the labor market where the post-secondary insti-

tution is located is a good proxy for the local labor market.

    To investigate whether labor market strength is correlated with institution type, we

include the unemployment rate for the county in which the institution is located, and this

rate interacted with all of the certification*major interactions in specification (2).8

   8
     We use the IPEDS data from 2003 because we are interested in the institutions at which the students
started college, which is the 2003-2004 academic year. Some colleges that exist in 2003 do not exist in 2011.
Since the IPEDS data from 2003 include the zip code of the institution but not the county code, we use the
HUD crosswalk between zip code and county. We merge this with average county unemployment data for
2009 and assigned each institution its county unemployment rate. When one zip code maps to two or more
counties, we calculate a weighted unemployment rate for the zip code. We use the institution where the


                                                     25
    The regressions including unemployment rate, and unemployment rate interacted with

certification*major yield nearly identical results to those obtained with the same sample but

without unemployment controls. While the coeﬃcients on    in table 4 and on

0  in table 5 are larger in magnitude than those we obtain when we control for

unemployment, this is largely due to the change in sample. Thus, our estimated returns do

not appear to be biased by institutions of one type being located in particularly weak labor

markets.




6     Discussion and Conclusion

The growth of the for-profit education sector in recent years has been dramatic, and its

value has been widely debated. Much of this debate has involved claims that for-profit

colleges leave students with very high debt levels and poor employment outcomes. Summary

statistics presented in this paper indeed show that post-college income is significantly lower

for students starting at for-profit institutions. However, it is also very clear that those who

start at for-profit institutions are less well prepared for college, had lower levels of pre-college

academic performance, and face other significant obstacles to college and post-college success.

This paper controls for these characteristics using both traditional OLS and propensity score

weighting.

individual was first surveyed, as defined in the transcript data. If this is unavailable, we use the institution
where the individual obtained the highest degree, or the highest program for non-completers, as defined
by the transcript data. If the transcript data are not available, we use the first institution at which the
individual was surveyed, as defined in the survey data in 2006. Finally, if this information is unavailable, we
use the first institution where the individual was surveyed, as defined in the survey data in 2009. Students
are missing the unemployment rate either because the IPEDS identifier for their institution was missing, the
zip code of the IPEDS identifier was not in the HUD crosswalk, or the IPEDS identifier was not found in
the IPEDS data system (very few).



                                                      26
   We find large returns to Associate’s degrees from both for-profit and not-for-profit in-

stitutions and some evidence of larger returns at for-profit institutions. However, we argue

that much of the estimated diﬀerence across institution type in the return to an Associate’s

degree reflects the greater role of the Associate’s degree as a pathway to a four-year degree

at not-for-profit institutions. This leads individuals with only an Associate’s degree and not

enrolled in a Bachelor’s degree program to be more adversely selected at not-for-profits.

   In addition, we find only weak evidence overall that acquiring certificates raises wages.

The evidence for certificates earned at for-profits is even weaker and the point estimate of

this return is non-trivially negative. However, the return to for-profit certificates is not

statistically significantly diﬀerent than the return to not-for-profit certificates. Neither the

for-profit Associate’s degree premium nor the certificate discount disappears after controlling

for field of study.

   This conclusion comes with a number of caveats. First, some of the highest-return majors

such as registered and licensed practical nursing are unrepresented at for-profits and therefore

do not aﬀect the comparison when we control for field of study. However, since the for-

profit education industry has grown significantly, even since 2003 when our sample started

post-secondary education, it is possible that for-profit institutions have begun to oﬀer these

higher-return majors.

   Second, our income data are from 2009, during an economic recession. It is possible

that the recession aﬀected the return to certificates and Associate’s degrees diﬀerently in

diﬀerent sectors. Furthermore, since for-profits and not-for-profits specialize in diﬀerent

majors, if the recession aﬀected certain fields more than others, we would expect that to

aﬀect the diﬀerential return.

                                              27
   Finally, our data only allow us to observe wages at most a few years after completing a

certification; we can only estimate short-run labor market eﬀects. The wages of individuals

getting certifications from for-profits may subsequently grow faster or more slowly than those

with certifications from not-for-profits.

   In general, our results suggest that the percentage increase in earnings from for-profit and

not-for-profit certifications are similar. However, students who enroll at for-profits start with

a lower earnings base, and the cost of tuition at for-profit universities is much higher than

at not-for-profit institutions. Using data from the BPS, in 2003, tuition and fees for those

starting in for-profit certificate programs were about $6300 more than for those starting in

not-for-profit certificate programs (statistically significant at the .01 level). Similarly, the

total was approximately $6900 more for students starting for-profit relative to not-for-profit

Associate’s degree programs (statistically significant at the .01 level). Given these large

diﬀerences, the return on investment is undoubtedly lower at for-profits.

   Perhaps most significantly, this paper underscores the large diﬀerences across field in

the labor market benefits of certificates and Associate’s degrees, and the minimal benefits

of certificates in many fields. As policy-makers consider their response to the explosion of

student debt, they may want to consider programs within institutions rather than simply

the overall performance of the institution.




References
 [1] Becker, Sascha O. and A. Ichino. “Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects Based on
     Propensity Scores.” Stata Journal. Vol. 2, Number 4. 2002.




                                               28
 [2] Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Occupational Outlook Handbook." www.bls.gov/ooh. Ac-
     cessed December, 2012.
 [3] Cellini, S. and L. Chaudhary. “The Labor Market Returns to a For-Profit College Edu-
     cation.” NBER Working Paper 18343. August, 2012.
 [4] Chung, A. “Eﬀects of For-Profit College Training on Earnings.” Working Paper. Octo-
     ber, 2008.
 [5] Crump, R., V.J. Hotz, G. Imbens, and O. Mitnik. “Dealing with Limited Overlap in
     Estimation of Average Treatment Eﬀects” Biometrika. Vol. 96(1). 2009.
 [6] Deming, D., C. Goldin, and L. Katz. “The For-Profit Postsecondary school sector:
     Nimble critters or Agile Predators?” NBER Working Paper 17710. 2011.
 [7] Glaeser, E., A. Shleifer. “Not-for-Profit Entrepreneurs.” Journal of Public Economics.
     Vol. 81. 2001.
 [8] Hansmann, H. The Ownership of Enterprise. Harvard University Press. Cambridge, MA.
     1996.
 [9] Imbens, G. “Methods for Estimating Treatment Eﬀects I: Unconfounded Treatment
     Assignment.” Lecture at Impact Evaluation Network. 2010.
[10] Lang, K., and R. Weinstein. "Evaluating Student Outcomes at For-Profit Colleges."
     NBER Working Paper 18201. June, 2012.
[11] McClellan, M., and D. Staiger. “Comparing Hospital Quality at For-Profit and Not-for-
     Profit Hospitals.” In The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing For-Profit and Not-
     for-Profit Institutions. Ed. D. Cutler. University of Chicago Press. p. 93-112. January,
     2000.
[12] Philipson, T. “Asymmetric Information in the Not-for-Profit Sector: Does its Output
     Sell at a Premium?” In The Changing Hospital Industry: Comparing For-Profit and
     Not-for-Profit Institutions. Ed. D. Cutler. University of Chicago Press. January, 2000.
[13] Turner, Nicholas. "Do Students Profit from For-Profit Education? Estimating the Re-
     turns to Postsecondary Education with Tax Data." Unpublished manuscript. October,
     2011.
[14] US Department of Education. Federal Student Aid Data Center. “Comparison of 2-Year
     Oﬃcial National FY 2010 Cohort Default Rates to Prior Two Oﬃcial Calculations.”
     2012a.
[15] US Department of Education. National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Edu-
     cation Statistics. Table 196. 2011a.
[16] US Department of Education. Federal Student Aid Data Center. “Proprietary School
     90/10 Revenue Percentages Report”. Accessed 10/29/12. 2012b.
[17] US Department of Education. “Federal Student Aid Annual Report, 2011.” 2011b.

                                             29
A          Appendix
A.1        Propensity Score Methods

In order to calculate the propensity of an individual to start post-secondary education at
a for-profit institution, we first used the algorithm proposed by Imbens (2010). As noted
in the paper, we calculate propensity scores separately for the three samples/specifications
described.

  1. Estimate the standard logit model with all of the variables in 1 including the under-
     24-only variables in the specifications where they are included in the propensity score
     specification.

  2. Estimate a standard logit model, with the regressors being the same as those in Step
     1, but each time include an additional interaction term between the linear terms in
     Step 1. Calculate the likelihood ratio test statistic.

  3. If the likelihood ratio test statistic is greater than 2.71, then include the interaction.

  4. Now estimate a standard logit model, with the regressors being the linear terms in
     Step 1, and the interaction terms chosen in step 3, but each time include an additional
     interaction term which was not chosen. Calculate the likelihood ratio test statistic.

  5. If the likelihood ratio test statistic is greater than 2.71, then include the interaction.
  6. The propensity score specification has been determined to be all of the linear terms in
     Step 1 and all of the interaction terms chosen in Steps 3 and 5.

    For the younger sample, the algorithm finds that we should include the 23 linear terms,
and 47 interaction terms for those starting in certificate programs and 100 interaction terms
for those starting in Associate’s degree programs. For the older sample, the algorithm
finds that we should include the 20 linear terms and 35 interaction terms for those starting
in certificate programs and 70 interaction terms for those starting in Associate’s degree
programs.
    We employ the algorithm suggested by Crump, Hotz, Imbens, and Mitnik (2009) to trim
the sample in order to address lack of overlap. In most cases, this results in discarding
observations with propensity scores below approximately .1 and above approximately .9.
    Once we have calculated the probability that an individual started in a certificate (As-
sociate’s degree) program at a for-profit college, those probabilities are used to generate
weights. With i denoting the individual, and j denoting the type of institution at which the
individual started (for-profit, not-for-profit), we weight the observations by
       1                                    1
      
                                        1−
                                                  
        1    for j = for-profit, and        1      for j = not-for-profit.  denotes the number of
      ∈                              ∈ 1−

observations starting in a certificate (Associate’s degree) program at institution type j, and
 denotes the propensity to start at a for-profit institution for individual i in institution
type j. The weights for each subgroup (start in a certificate (Associate’s degree) program

                                                        30
at a for-profit, not-for-profit institution) are such that the sum of the weights within the
subgroup is the number of observations in that subgroup.
    These weights are then used in the regression of income outcomes on whether the indi-
vidual started at a for-profit college.
    In order to check that the balancing property is satisfied for the propensity score (using
the trimmed sample) we use an algorithm similar to that developed by Becker and Ichino
(2002). We start by dividing the sample into five evenly spaced blocks of the propensity
score. Then, within each interval, we check whether the average propensity score of those
who start at for profit institutions diﬀers from those who start at not for profit institutions,
and if the average propensity score of those who start at for profit institutions diﬀers from
those who start at not-for-profit institutions. If the averages diﬀer, then we split that block
into two, and check if the averages diﬀer in the new blocks. Once we have divided the sample
into blocks such that within each block the average propensity score of the for-profit and
not-for-profit groups is the same, we check whether the average value of each term in the
propensity score specification diﬀers between the for-profit and not-for-profit groups.
    We use the standard Bonferroni correction for determining the threshold p-value for sig-
nificance of each test since we have multiple tests of whether the average propensity score for
each group diﬀers within blocks. When we test whether the average of each variable diﬀers
within blocks, we use the Bonferroni correction adjusted for correlation across explanatory
variables. Since we have many variables, and some of those variables are presumably cor-
related, a balancing test for one variable could provide information on the balancing test
for another variable. The information from these correlations should be accounted for in
the Bonferroni correction, raising the threshold p-value (lowering the critical t) relative to
the traditional Bonferroni p-value used to determine significance for each test. In order to
implement this strategy, we find the correlation between each of the variables used in the
propensity score specification, and then take the mean of those correlations. The mean
correlation is then used to adjust the standard Bonferroni correction. Since the propensity
score specifications for the older and younger samples are diﬀerent, we test the balance of the
propensity score separately for these two samples. In the younger sample of those starting in
certificate programs, this algorithm results in 5 blocks and no variables that are unbalanced,
while in the older sample the algorithm results in 5 blocks and one variable out of 275 that
is unbalanced. In the younger sample of those starting in Associate’s degree programs, we
obtain 7 blocks and 6 variables out of 861 that are unbalanced, while in the older sample
the algorithm results in 5 blocks and no variables that are unbalanced.


B     Major Definition
Majors are divided into 13 categories: business; liberal arts and sciences; vocational (manual
and technical); human services; undeclared, and eight categories of health majors (registered
nursing, licensed practical/vocational nursing, health administration, allied health-assisting,
allied health-treatment, somatic bodywork and related therapeutic services, health prepar-
atory programs, other health majors). If the major is not available from transcript data,
we use the survey response, which does not distinguish between the various categories of
health majors. We thus add an additional category, “healthsurvey”, which equals one if the


                                              31
individual does not have transcript data on major and reports his as health. The CIP codes
included in each definition are listed below

   Business: CIP Codes
   52 (Business, Management, Marketing, and Related Support Services)


   Liberal Arts and Sciences: CIP codes
   4 (Architecture and Related Services)
   5 (Area, Ethnic, Cultural, Gender, and Group Studies)
   14 (Engineering)
   16 (Foreign Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics)
   23 (English Language and Literature/Letters)
   24 (Liberal Arts and Sciences, General Studies, and Humanities)
   26 (Biological and Biomedical Sciences)
   27 (Mathematics and Statistics)
   30 (Multi/Interdisciplinary Studies)
   38 (Philosophy and Religious Studies)
   40 (Physical Sciences)
   45 (Social Sciences)
   50 (Visual and Performing Arts)
   54 (History)

   Vocational (Manual and Technical):
   1 (Agriculture, Agriculture Operations, and Related Sciences)
   3 (Natural Resources and Conservation)
   15 (Engineering Technologies and Engineering-Related Fields)
   29 (Military Technologies and Applied Sciences)
   41 (Science Technologies/Technicians)
   46 (Construction Trades)
   47 (Mechanic and Repair Technologies/Technicians)
   48 (Precision Production)
   49 (Transportation and Materials Moving)
   10 (Communications Technologies/Technicians and Support Services)
   11 (Computer and Information Sciences and Support Services)

   Human Services:
   9(Communication, Journalism, and Related Programs)
   12 (Personal and Culinary Services)
   13 (Education)
   19 (Family and Consumer Sciences/Human Sciences)
   22 (Legal Professions and Studies)
   25 (Library Science)
   28 (Military Science, Leadership and Operational Art)
   31 (Parks, Recreation, Leisure, and Fitness Studies)
   39 (Theology and Religious Vocations)

                                           32
   42 (Psychology)
   43 (Homeland Security, Law Enforcement, Firefighting and Related Protective Services)
   44 (Public Administration and Social Service Professions)

   Registered Nursing: CIP Codes
   51.38 (Registered Nursing, Nursing Administration, Nursing Research and Clinical Nurs-
ing)

   Licensed Practical/Vocational Nursing: CIP Codes
   51.39 (Practical Nursing, Vocational Nursing and Nursing Assistants)
   Excluding 51.3902 (Nursing Assistant/Aide and Patient Care Assistant/Aide)

   Health Administration: CIP Codes
   51.07 (Health and Medical Administrative Services)

   Allied Health-Assisting: CIP Codes
   51.08 (Allied Health and Medical Assisting Services)
   51.0601 (Dental Assisting/Assistant)
   51.0699 (Dental Services and Allied Professions, Other)
   51.1802 (Optometric Technician/Assistant)
   51.1899 (Ophthalmic and Optometric Support Services and Allied Professions, Other)
   51.3902 (Nursing Assistant/Aide and Patient Care Assistant/Aide)
   51.1502 (Psychiatric/Mental Health Services Technician)

   Allied Health-Treatment: CIP Codes
   51.09 (Allied Health Diagnostic, Intervention, and Treatment Professions)
   51.0602 (Dental Hygiene/Hygienist)
   51.1801 (Opticianry/Ophthalmic Dispensing Optician)
   51.1803 (Ophthalmic Technician/Technologist)
   51.10 (Clinical/Medical Laboratory Science/Research and Allied Professions)
   51.0603 (Dental Laboratory Technology/Technician)
   51.2308 (Physical Therapy/Therapist)
   51.2309 (Therapeutic Recreation/Recreational Therapy)
   51.3103 (Dietetic Technician)

   Somatic Bodywork: CIP Codes
   51.3501 (Massage Therapy/Therapeutic Massage)

   Health Preparatory Programs: CIP Codes
   51.11 (Health/Medical Preparatory Programs)

   Other Health Programs:
   Programs with CIP Codes 51 (Health Professions and Related Programs) or 60 (Resid-
ency Programs), and not included in the above categories.




                                           33
Table 1: Summary Statistics by Initial Institution Type
                                        (1)                     (2)            (3)                 (4)
                                          Start Certificate Program            Start Associates Program
                                    For-Profit             Not-For-Profit   For-Profit        Not-For-Profit
Highest Degree
                         Certificate     0.642                0.521***        0.03                0.022
                                        (0.030)               (0.030)        (0.014)             (0.006)

                        Associates       0.014                 0.026         0.405                0.332*
                                        (0.007)               (0.007)        (0.036)             (0.018)

                         Bachelors       0.001                 0.009*        0.052               0.133***
                                        (0.001)               (0.004)        (0.028)             (0.012)

Months Since Last Enrolled              50.522                43.35***       44.314             32.892***
                                        (0.905)               (0.991)        (1.284)             (0.798)

Total Months Enrolled                   13.678               20.068***       20.615             28.078***
                                        (0.411)               (0.738)        (1.147)             (0.668)

Expected Family Contribution,            1.871                5.687***        3.262              8.586***
2003 ($,000)                            (0.246)               (0.454)        (0.350)             (0.569)

Years Delayed Starting Post-             8.983                11.094          5.012               5.772
Secondary Education                     (1.737)               (0.965)        (0.548)             (0.657)

High School Diploma                      0.747                 0.788           0.8               0.879**
                                        (0.027)               (0.023)        (0.033)             (0.012)
GED                                      0.174                 0.156          0.181              0.076***
                                        (0.022)               (0.019)        (0.033)             (0.009)

English is Primary Language              0.856                 0.889          0.883               0.911
                                        (0.019)               (0.020)        (0.021)             (0.010)

Number of Dependent Children,
2003                                     0.734                 0.847          0.567               0.446
                                        (0.061)               (0.080)        (0.067)             (0.041)

Dependent, 2003                          0.425                0.348*          0.451              0.649***
                                        (0.030)               (0.027)        (0.037)             (0.020)

Married, 2003                            0.144                0.318***        0.129              0.177*
                                        (0.020)               (0.031)        (0.020)             (0.017)

Age, 2003                               24.163               29.126***        23.69              23.744
                                        (0.415)               (0.731)        (0.459)             (0.433)

Male                                     0.254                0.438***        0.45                0.429
                                        (0.029)               (0.031)        (0.037)             (0.020)

Hispanic                                 0.267                0.14***         0.212              0.137**
                                        (0.025)               (0.024)        (0.028)             (0.014)

Black                                    0.335                0.156***         0.2                0.149
                                        (0.030)               (0.020)        (0.033)             (0.014)

Income in 2002 ($,000)                  23.409               38.625***       28.815             50.698***
                                        (1.341)               (1.671)        (1.500)             (1.830)
Born in the US                           0.876                 0.886          0.891               0.894
                                        (0.017)               (0.021)        (0.029)             (0.011)

Parents Born in the US                   0.763                 0.819          0.758               0.82*
                                        (0.024)               (0.024)        (0.034)             (0.014)

Household Size, 2003                     3.207                 3.36           3.059              3.638***
                                        (0.090)               (0.101)        (0.101)             (0.061)

Parents' Ed < 12                         0.636                 0.578          0.528              0.436**
                                        (0.030)               (0.030)        (0.039)             (0.020)
                                         (1)                     (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                           Start Certificate Program                Start Associates Program
                                      For-Profit            Not-For-Profit       For-Profit        Not-For-Profit
Under-24-Only Regressors
HS GPA > 3.0                            0.558                   0.634              0.651                0.63
                                       (0.038)                 (0.038)            (0.042)              (0.023)

Took the SAT                            0.33                  0.584***             0.537              0.755***
                                       (0.034)                (0.040)             (0.048)             (0.019)

SAT/ACT score/100                      8.287                   8.739              8.672                9.000
                                       (0.216)                 (0.176)            (0.255)              (0.092)

N                                        400                    340                 250                 1190
Outcome Variable
Income, 2009 ($,000)                   26.059                32.514***            29.213              32.272**
                                       (0.856)                (1.355)             (1.276)              (0.873)
N                                        680                    690                 380                 1520
Standard deviations in parentheses under the means. Observations are weighted by the sample weights from the
survey. All variables are measured in 2009, unless noted otherwise.
Stars next to values in Column 2 denote significant differences between Columns 1 and 2. Stars next to values in
Column 4 denote significant differences between Columns 3 and 4.
Sample sizes are as shown, except for Parents'Ed<=12 as some individuals did not know their parents' education, and
SAT/ACT score because some students did not take the exam.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Table 2: Composition of Certification by Major, for Selected Majors

                                                                          Liberal Arts    Human                  Allied Health- Allied Health-                Health          Health
                                               Business    Vocational    and Sciences     Services       RN        Assisting     Treatment        LPN      Administration    (survey)    Total
Panel A: Start in Certificate Program
Not-For-Profit Certificates                      14%           35%                          12%                        8%                         10%            3%            5%         340
For-Profit Certificates                           4%           14%                          24%                       26%                          1%           11%            8%         450
No Degree                                   12%                18%                          18%                       12%                          6%            4%            7%         540
Panel B: Start in Associate's Degree Program
Not-For-Profit Associate's Degrees               17%           17%           24%            18%          10%           4%             5%                                                  510
For-Profit Associate's Degrees                   15%           42%            8%            13%           a.          14%             3%                                                  190
No Degree                                        20%           16%           26%            19%          2%            3%             2%                                                  900


Note: Each cell gives the percentage of observations with the type of certification in that row, with the major in that column. Major definitions are in Appendix.
a. denotes the percentage was omitted to preserve confidentiality of the few individuals in that cell. Percentages are only reported for majors where at least 30 people obtained certification
(certificate in panel A, Associate's degree in panel B) with that major from either For-Profit or Not-for-Profit institutions. Health (survey) describes people who report a Health major in the
survey, and do not have transcript data.
        Table 3: Impact of For Profit Colleges on Log Income, 2009: Without Controls for Major
                                 (1)       (2)         (3)        (4)       (5)         (6)
                             All Ages Under 24 24 and Over All Ages Under 24 24 and Over
                                                              OLS                              Propensity Score Weighting
       Panel A: Start in Certificate Program
       Start Program at:
 (1)   For-Profit                -0.048    -0.064                           0.006            -0.067        -0.094            -0.007
                                 [0.067]   [0.086]                         [0.092]           [0.070]       [0.085]           [0.104]
       Highest Degree:
 (2)   Certificate                0.043     0.114                           0.042             0.012         0.069             0.024
                                 [0.059]   [0.082]                         [0.079]           [0.058]       [0.083]           [0.075]
       Certificate from:
 (3)   For-Profit                -0.098    -0.146                          -0.121            -0.062        -0.086            -0.114
                                 [0.090]   [0.123]                         [0.116]           [0.091]       [0.119]           [0.125]
 (4)   Combination (2) + (3)     -0.055    -0.032                          -0.079            -0.049        -0.016             -0.09
                                  [.070]    [.090]                          [.090]            [.071]        [.087]            [.102]
       N                           1370       740                             630              1260           660               590
       Panel B: Start in Associate's Degree Program
       Start Program at:
 (1)   For-Profit               -0.123    -0.014                          -0.301*           -0.149**       -0.055            -0.297*
                                [0.076]  [0.062]                          [0.166]            [0.072]       [0.066]           [0.152]
       Highest Degree:
 (2)   Certificate             0.295**    0.333*                          0.356**           0.292*** 0.258***               0.348**
                                [0.120]  [0.179]                          [0.138]            [0.096]  [0.084]                [0.155]
 (3)   Associate's             0.110**    0.091                           0.143**            0.097*    0.093                  0.085
                                [0.047]  [0.059]                          [0.070]            [0.054]  [0.067]                [0.088]
 (4)   Bachelor's              0.245*** 0.203***                          0.536*            0.220*** 0.197**                0.549***
                                [0.066]  [0.063]                          [0.291]            [0.073]  [0.080]                [0.179]
       Associate's from:
 (5)   For-Profit                0.066    -0.027                            0.209             0.071        -0.041             0.213
                                [0.091]  [0.091]                           [0.186]           [0.095]       [0.099]           [0.180]
       Bachelor's from:
 (6)   For-Profit               -0.082    -0.146                           0.133             -0.084        -0.157             0.046
                                [0.110]  [0.117]                          [0.431]            [0.113]       [0.128]           [0.392]
 (7)   Combination (3) + (5)   0.176**    0.064                           0.352**            0.168**        0.052            0.298*
                                 [.083]   [.075]                           [.171]             [.084]        [.083]            [.153]
       N                          1900     1430                              460               1420          1060               360
The basic specification weights the observations by the sampling weights of the survey, while the Propensity Score specification weights the
observations by propensity scores and sampling weights. Explanatory variables include: age, household size (parental for dependent
students, respondent for independent students), income in 2002 (parental for dependent students, respondent for independent students),
income in 2002*dependent, # dependent children in 2003, expected family contribution to college finances in 2003, years delayed
enrollment in college after high school, indicators for HS diploma, GED, dependent in 2003, parents born in the United States, Black,
Hispanic, male, English is primary language, married in 2003, born in the United States, and parents having at most 12 years of education.
For those under 24 in 2003, we have indicators for high school GPA above 3.0, took the SAT or ACT, and SAT/ACT score (included in 1st
column just for those under 24, and the 3rd column). Each column includes controls for highest degree certificate, Associate's, Bachelor's,
and interactions of each with for-profit
Degree institution types pertain to the highest degree obtained.
         Table 4: Impact of For Profit Colleges on Log Income, 2009 with Controls for
                         Major: Start in Certificate Program, All Ages
                                   (1)       (2)       (3)      (4)    (5)      (6)
                                                                                                       Propensity Score
                                                                   OLS                                    Weighting
      Start Program at:
  (1) For-Profit                                  -0.048          -0.012         -0.014          -0.067         -0.027         -0.014
                                                  [0.067]         [0.067]        [0.063]         [0.070]        [0.069]        [0.066]
      Highest Degree:
  (2) Certificate                                  0.043           0.017                          0.012         -0.006
                                                  [0.059]         [0.055]                        [0.058]        [0.055]
      Certificate from:
  (3) For-Profit                                  -0.098          -0.092         -0.068          -0.062         -0.062         -0.067
                                                  [0.090]         [0.088]        [0.084]         [0.091]        [0.088]        [0.089]
  (4) Combination (2) + (3)                       -0.055          -0.075                         -0.049         -0.068
                                                   [.070]          [.070]                         [.071]         [.071]
      Certificate with major:
  (5) Business                                                                   -0.161                                       -0.215*
                                                                                 [0.113]                                      [0.126]
  (6) Vocational                                                                 0.170*                                        0.119
                                                                                 [0.096]                                      [0.098]
  (7) Human Services                                                             -0.046                                        -0.025
                                                                                 [0.127]                                      [0.127]
  (8) LPN                                                                         0.170                                        0.184
                                                                                 [0.134]                                      [0.124]
  (9) Health Administration                                                       0.006                                        -0.030
                                                                                 [0.095]                                      [0.098]
(10) Allied Health-Assisting                                                     -0.024                                        -0.023
                                                                                 [0.093]                                      [0.089]
(11) Health (Survey)                                                              0.044                                        0.116
                                                                                  [.130]                                       [.127]
        Control for Major                            N              Y                Y              N             Y               Y
        N                                           1370           1370           1370             1260          1260           1260

The basic specification weights the observations by the sampling weights of the survey, while the Propensity Score specification
weights the observations by propensity scores and sampling weights. Explanatory variables are the same as those listed in Table 3.
Degree institution types pertain to the highest degree obtained. Columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) include controls for highest degree
certificate, Associate's, Bachelor's, and interactions of each with for-profit. Columns (2) and (4) include linear controls for each major.
Columns (3) and (6) include linear controls for each major, and interact each major with certificate, Associate's, and Bachelor's. The
latter three variables are additionally interacted with for-profit. The returns to certificates by major are shown in the table only for
majors where at least 30 students obtained a certificate in the OLS sample.
   Table 5: Impact of For Profit Colleges on Log Income, 2009 with Controls for Major:
                      Start in Associate's Degree Program, All Ages
                                                           (1)             (2)            (3)               (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                                                                              Propensity Score
                                                                         OLS                                     Weighting
       Start Program at:
   (1) For-Profit                                       -0.123          -0.106         -0.108          -0.149** -0.127*               -0.140*
                                                        [0.076]         [0.070]        [0.077]          [0.072] [0.071]               [0.075]
       Highest Degree:
   (2) Certificate                                     0.295**        0.313**                          0.292***       0.240***
                                                        [0.120]        [0.136]                          [0.096]        [0.087]
   (3) Associate's                                     0.110**          0.073                           0.097*          0.068
                                                        [0.047]        [0.047]                          [0.054]        [0.056]
   (4) Bachelor's                                      0.245***       0.236***                         0.220***       0.195***
                                                        [0.066]        [0.066]                          [0.073]        [0.070]
       Associate's from:
   (5) For-Profit                                        0.066           0.064          0.072            0.071          0.066          0.075
                                                        [0.091]         [0.093]        [0.107]          [0.095]        [0.102]        [0.110]
       Bachelor's from:
   (7) For-Profit                                       -0.082          -0.119         -0.176           -0.084         -0.113         -0.116
                                                        [0.110]         [0.105]        [0.128]          [0.113]        [0.115]        [0.121]
   (8) Combination (3) + (5)                            0.176**          0.137                          0.168**         0.135
                                                         [.083]          [.086]                          [.084]         [.090]
       Associate's with major:
   (9) Business                                                                        0.159*                                         0.157*
                                                                                       [0.096]                                        [0.093]
 (10) Vocational fields                                                                -0.017                                          0.029
                                                                                       [0.139]                                        [0.137]
 (11) Liberal Arts and Sciences                                                        -0.009                                          0.052
                                                                                       [0.070]                                        [0.086]
 (12) Human Services                                                                    0.073                                          0.117
                                                                                       [0.096]                                        [0.111]
 (13) RN                                                                              0.482***                                       0.393***
                                                                                       [0.138]                                        [0.150]
 (14) Allied Health-Assisting                                                          0.272*                                          0.053
                                                                                       [0.161]                                        [0.188]
 (15) Allied Health-Treatment                                                         0.522***                                       0.423***
                                                                                       [0.147]                                        [0.135]
        Controls for Major                                 N              Y               Y                N              Y              Y
        N                                                 1900           1900           1900              1420           1420          1420

The basic specification weights the observations by the sampling weights of the survey, while the Propensity Score specification weights the
observations by propensity scores and sampling weights. Explanatory variables are the same as those listed in Table 3. Degree institution
types pertain to the highest degree obtained. Columns (1), (2), (4), and (5) include controls for highest degree certificate, Associate's,
Bachelor's, and interactions of each with for-profit. Columns (2) and (4) include linear controls for each major. Columns (3) and (6) include
linear controls for each major, and interact each major with certificate, Associate's, and Bachelor's. The latter three variables are additionally
interacted with for-profit. The returns to Associate's degrees by major are shown in the table only for majors where at least 30 students
obtained an Associate's degree in the OLS sample.
