                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               LOANS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION:
                                DOES THE DREAM COME TRUE?

                                             Tomás Rau
                                            Eugenio Rojas
                                            Sergio Urzúa

                                        Working Paper 19138
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19138


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We are indebted to the useful comments of Lori Beaman, Luc Behaghel, Claudio Ferraz, Salvador
Navarro, Giordano Palloni, Esteban Puentes, Rodrigo Soares, Jean-Marc Robin, Bernardita Vial, Mauricio
Villena and seminar participants at the annual meeting of the Society for Economics Dynamics (Cyprus,
2012), North American Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society (Evanston, 2012), PUC Rio
(Brazil, 2012), IADB (DC, 2012), IZA (Germany, 2012), Toulouse School of Economics (France,
2012), Paris School of Economics (France, 2012), 34th Meeting of the Brazilian Econometric Society
(Brazil, 2012), Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile (Chile, 2012), Universidad de Chile (Chile,
2011), and the World Bank (DC, 2011). We thank the Finance Ministry of Chile and its Budget Office
for providing us access to the data. Tomas Rau and Sergio Urzua thank the support of Centro de Microdatos
at the University of Chile through the Millennium Science Initiative sponsored by the Chilean Ministry
of Economics, Development and Tourism, Project NS100041. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Tomás Rau, Eugenio Rojas, and Sergio Urzúa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Loans for Higher Education: Does the Dream Come True?
Tomás Rau, Eugenio Rojas, and Sergio Urzúa
NBER Working Paper No. 19138
June 2013
JEL No. C31,D14,I24,I28

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes the impact of student loans for higher education on enrollment, dropout decisions,
and earnings. We investigate the massive State Guaranteed Loan (SGL) program implemented in Chile
in 2006. Our empirical analysis is based on the estimation of a sequential schooling decision model
with unobserved heterogeneity. We supplement this model with labor market outcomes. The model
is estimated using rich longitudinal data generated from administrative records.

Our findings show that the SGL program increased the probability of enrollment and reduced the
  probability of dropping out from tertiary education: SGL reduced the first year dropout rate by 6.8%
for students enrolled in five-year colleges and by 64.3% for those enrolled in institutions offering two-
or four-year degrees. Moreover, we document that the SGL program has been more effective in reducing
the probability of dropping out for low-skilled individuals from low-income families. When analyzing
labor market outcomes, we find that SGL beneficiaries have lower wages (up to 6.4% less) than those
who did not "benefit'' from the program. We attribute this negative result to the design of the SGL
program, which has incentivized higher education institutions to retain students at the expense of not
securing the quality of education


Tomás Rau                                           Sergio Urzúa
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile            Department of Economics
Avda. Vicuna Mackenna 4860, Macul                   University of Maryland
Santiago, Chile                                     3105 Tydings Hall #3115C
trau@uc.cl                                          College Park, MD 20742
                                                    and NBER
Eugenio Rojas                                       urzua@econ.umd.edu
Chilean Budget Office
Teatinos 120
Santiago, Chile
erojas@dipres.cl
1       Introduction

This paper investigates the short and long-term impact of loans for higher education on enrollment,

dropout decisions, and adult earnings in the context of a developing economy. In theory, access to

loans should alleviate the short term financial constraints preventing students from enrolling in post-

secondary education. Furthermore, awareness of the future economic obligations should motivate

marginal students to increase effort, which itself should lead to a lower probability of dropping out

and a better performance in the labor market. However, this hinges on the assumption that the

loan agreement does not affect the quality of education offered by higher education institutions

(HEI). In practice, however, this may not be the case. Poorly designed contracts might increase

enrollment and decrease dropout rates at the expense of education quality.

    This article contributes to the literature analyzing the impact of access to student loans on

enrollment and the decision to drop out of a Higher Education Institution (HEI). We analyze

the case of Chile, a country which has experienced a massive increment in college enrollment

during the last decade. This process has been, at least in part, the result of public policies aimed

at alleviating short term credit constraints through a student loan programs. Our analysis is

particularly relevant in the context of the recent expansion of student loan programs in developing

and developed economies. We empirically document how an imperfect design of these contracts

can lead to unexpected consequences.1

    Specifically, we use a rich panel of administrative records from the Chilean higher education

system to estimate a structural model of sequential schooling decisions with unobserved het-

erogeneity and labor market outcomes. The empirical model takes into account the complexi-

ties of the Chilean college admission system, including the loan application process. We follow

Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006), and interpret unobserved heterogeneity as a combination of

cognitive and non-cognitive skills.
    1
     See Cameron and Heckman, 1998, 2001; Carneiro and Heckman, 2002; Kane, 1996; Keane and Wolpin, 2001;
Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2008) for an analysis of the importance of credit constraints in the context of the
United States. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2008) directly asks students if they would borrow more at a fair
interest rate. Their results indicate that while credit constraints likely play an important role in the drop-out
decisions, the majority of attrition of students from low income families should be primarily attributed to reasons other
than credit constraints. On the other hand, Restuccia and Urrutia (2004) develop an overlapping generations model
and use it to show that increasing college subsidies increases both the aggregate college enrollment rate (especially
for poorest families) and the aggregate college dropout rate. For Chile, González and Uribe (2002), Microdatos
(2008) and Meller (2010) analyze the determinants of the dropout decision. The empirical findings document that
preferences, familiar problems, and economic reasons are the most important determinants of dropping out of college.



                                                           1
   Using this framework, we estimate the impact of the State Guaranteed Loan program (SGL) on

enrollment and the decision to drop out of tertiary education.2 This loan program is quite similar

to the Federal Guaranteed Loan (Stafford Loan) in the US: both provide subsidized interest rates

and guarantee repayment to the lender if a student defaults. However, the SGL program does not

consider waiver and makes the HEI responsible for the balance of the loan if the student drops

out. We discuss the potential consequences of this feature on education quality. Table 1 shows

the importance of the SGL program in Chile. Between 2006 and 2010, the allocation of SGL loans

quadrupled, rising from 10% of total student aid (loans and scholarships) in 2006 to 43% of aid

in 2010. The administrative SGL records provide information on all loan applicants, allowing the

precise identification of which individuals apply and obtain the loans.

   In addition to modeling the sequential decisions of enrollment and dropping out from higher

education, we analyze the impact of the SGL on labor market outcomes. We show that the potential

impact of SGL on earnings is strongly dependent on the details of its design. In particular, SGL

creates incentives for HEIs to reduce dropout rates since they are obliged to repay the lender if a

student drops out. In order to prevent students from dropping out, some HEIs may lower their

standards and shift resources to activities that are less successful at producing human capital but

more attractive to students on the margin between continuing their education and dropping out.

This can have labor market consequences because of the reduction in accumulated human capital

resulting from the shift in the HEI objectives. By merging the administrative SGL records with

individual-level information on earnings from Chile’s unemployment insurance (UI) system, we are

able to present an empirical analysis of this hypothesis.

   Our empirical strategy allows for the existence of unobserved factors that influence the decision

to dropout. Not allowing for this heterogeneity can bias estimates of the impact of the SGL on

dropping out (Dynarski, 2002; Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner, 2008, 2012) if there is important

sorting on student ability. One explanation for this sorting pattern is what Carneiro and Heckman

(2002) calls “long-run constraints”. These constraints are related to long-run characteristics such as

ability unlike short-run constraints which are assumed to be largely financial. This paper evaluates

the importance of both types of constraints on the probability of dropping out.

   Additionally, our model allows for students to select into two different types of HEIs: universities
   2
       The name of the program is Crédito con Aval del Estado, usually referred as CAE.



                                                          2
offering five-year college degrees, and a category combining Technical Institutes (two-year college

degrees) and Professional Institutes (four-year college degrees). We find that there is sorting in

ability, such that higher skilled students enroll in universities and have a lower dropout rate after

the first year. After controlling for ability, we find that the SGL increases the overall probability

of post-secondary enrollment by 24% and reduces the dropout rate after the first year by 6.8% for

universities and and 64.3% for TI-PI. These effects are lower than those obtained with reduced

form approaches.3 Our results suggest that both short and long run constraints are binding.

    Despite reducing dropout rates, we also find that the SGL negatively effects labor market

outcomes. Specifically, we find that SGL beneficiaries have lower wages (up to 6.4% less than

non beneficiaries) even after adjusting for individual characteristics, measures of the quality of

the higher education institution, ability and selection bias. This could be the result of perverse

incentives for HEIs generated by the SGL.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the SGL program and the Chilean edu-

cation system in detail. In Section 3, we present our model of sequential decisions with unobserved

heterogeneity. Section 4 describes the database and presents descriptive statistics. In Section 5,

we present results and an analysis of sorting on ability. In Section 6, we compute some relevant

treatments effects, and in Section 7 we conclude.



2       The Chilean Institutions

The education reforms implemented in the 1980s created incentives for private agents to participate

in the Chilean education system. This permitted the incorporation of a large number of private

HEIs including universities, Professional Institutes (PI) and Technical Institutes (TI).4 As shown

in Figure 1, enrollment in higher education institutions quadrupled between 1984 and 2010, driven

largely by the increase in the number of universities (from 10 to 60 in the 1981-2009 period) shown

in Figure 2. A second enrollment boom took place during the early 1990s, when the effects of the
    3
      Solis (2012) analyzes the effect of two loan programs (SGL and a different program for students from a small
set of public universities) and finds significant positive effects on enrollment and negative effects on dropout rates.
He exploits a discontinuity in the assignment rule to estimate a local average treatment effect for students within
a narrow band around the minimum qualifying score in the University Selection Test (PSU). He finds a significant
effect on enrollment and dropout rates after the first and second year.
    4
      The TI are institutions that are allowed to grant technical degrees and PI are permitted to grant technical and
professional degrees that not require a bachelor’s degree.




                                                          3
educational reform seems to be larger as pointed out by Meller (2010).

    Though the expansion of the higher education sector increased aggregate post-secondary en-

rollment, it did not increase enrollment evenly (Espinoza, Fecci, González, Kluge, Mora, Ocaranza,

Prieto, and Rodrig 2006). To address this, in 2006 the Chilean government began providing in-

creased financial support for vulnerable students in the form of grants and loans. Figure 3 shows

the total amount of financial aid awarded to undergraduate students between 1989 and 2009.

    Also in 2006, the Ministry of Education of Chile (MINEDUC) started implementing a new

system of loans, the State Guaranteed Loan (SGL), where the Chilean government is the guarantor.

The creation of the SGL filled a considerable void in the student loan market as private financial

institutions had been reluctant to offer loans to vulnerable students.

    Since its inception, the SGL has increased in importance. Figure 4 shows the increase in student

aid coverage since 2006. This increase coincides with implementation of the SGL. Annual allocation

statistics for SGL are presented in Table 1. Table 1 also illustrates substantial growth in the ratio

of SGL financial aid disbursements to all other student aid awarded since 2006.

    In addition to increased coverage, a second reason for creating the SGL was to reduce the

dropout rates in higher education. Specifically, it was hoped that students with an SGL loan

would be less likely to work and less likely worry about making tuition payments. A number of

previous papers present evidence that supports this idea (González and Uribe, 2002; Meller, 2010;

Goldrick-Rab, Harris, and Trostel, 2009). In Table 3 we display dropout rates for different types of

education between 2004 and 2009. Strikingly, nearly 50% of students enrolled in university do not

complete their studies. This figure is similar to those reported for the US (Restuccia and Urrutia,

2004; Chatterjee and Ionescu, 2012).

    To receive a loan through the SGL, applicants must meet certain requirements. They must

be Chilean, score above 475 points on the University Selection Test (PSU), maintain satisfactory

academic performance, not have graduated from any HEI, not have dropped out more than once

from a higher education institution, have a socio-economic environment that justifies the allocation

of SGL, and be currently enrolled at a HEI (certificate of registry or letter of acceptance).5 6 The
   5
      The University Selection Test (Prueba de Seleccin Universitaria, PSU) is a standardized test needed to access
the Chilean higher education system. It assesses, by separate tests, language and communication skills, mathematics,
social sciences and history, and science. Mathematics and language are required and students must take one of the
last two.
    6
      In case a student is applying for a TI or PI it is allowed optionally to the PSU minimum, a GPA greater than



                                                         4
Chilean government sells packages of student loans (which are bundled to be as homogeneous as

possible) by using auctions where private institutions bid on interest rates. The winning financial

institution (typically a bank) then provides the loans to students at the interest rate they bid.7

    Once they are approved for a loan through the SGL, beneficiaries must continue to meet a list

requirements which vary by level of study. If the beneficiary drops out from a HEI, it triggers a

“guarantee for academic dropout”8 . In effect, the HEI guarantees payment of a significant portion

of the loan amount (at most 90% of the principal plus interest) to the lending institution. When an

SGL recipient student drops out, the HEI must pay the guarantee amount. If the HEI guarantee

is less than 90% of the capital (plus interest), the government covers the additional amount (up to

90%). In Table 2 we present the percentage of the academic dropout guarantee that HEI and the

government cover.

    The HEIs, even when a student is on the verge of graduating, always covers a significant

percentage of the loan awarded to the student in the event of a drop out.9 The HEI is required to

make loan payments to the financial institution until the guarantee has been met.

    For HEIs, making students who drop out financially responsible for loan repayment can be very

complicated and expensive. Thus, the SGL creates incentives for HEIs to reduce dropout rates. To

the extent that the reduction in dropout rates is achieved by imposing lower academic standards,

the SGL could negatively impact the quality of education.10 We present evidence that suggests

that this may be the case.

    When SGL beneficiaries graduate a different collection mechanism operates: the “state guar-

antee”. If the graduate cannot make the SGL loan payments (after allowing for a grace period of

18 months after graduation), financial institutions may start legal proceedings against the benefi-

ciary. Alternatively, institutions have the right to require to Chile to pay the guarantee (90% of

the amount due including capitalized interest).
or equal to 5.3 in high school. The Chilean scale ranges from 1.0 to 7.0 being a 4.0 the minimum passing grade.
    7
      The average real interest rate of this loan was about 5.8% until 2012 when after student pressures, the government
decided to subsidize the interest rate for all the student loans (retroactively) ending in a real 2%.
    8
      A dropout is defined formally as an unjustified schooling interruption for at least 12 consecutive months.
    9
      This is once you have met certain requirements, such as the exhaustion of judicial collection agencies.
   10
      For instance, lowering course failure rates or relaxing dismissal policies are mechanisms that HEI can use to
prevent dropouts. These measures have a direct effect on the quality of education.




                                                           5
3         A Simple Structural Model for Dropout Decisions with Unob-

          served Heterogeneity

An individual’s schooling attainment is the outcome of a sequence of decisions where choice sets

are determined by the education system. When modeling schooling attainment, it is important

to acknowledge that the individual’s decisions are conditional on a set of feasible alternatives.

Furthermore, observed choices will also depend on the decision maker’s skills and preferences.

As a result, simply comparing observed results (sequences of decision) across individuals can be

misleading.

     Below we present a model that allows for “dropping out” to be the final result of a sequence of

decisions. At each node in the model, observed choices are influenced by observable and unobserv-

able characteristics. Even after controlling for potential endogeneity in decision-making, selectivity,

and observable characteristics, we may see observationally equivalent individuals responding dif-

ferently to the same stimulus. This can be explained by the presence of unobserved heterogeneity

in endowments as in Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004), Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006),

Urzúa (2008), and Rau, Sánchez, and Urzúa (2011). These unobserved endowments are a combi-

nation of cognitive and noncognitive skills, and they can vary considerably among individuals.

     The timing of decisions in our model is as follows: before taking the University Selection Test

(PSU), if they decide to study, students can apply for the SGL and then, after learning the test

results, they can enroll in Technical Institutes (TI), Professional Institutes (PI) or in universities.11


3.1        The Model

We model a tree of sequential binary decisions, which is based on the structural choice models in

Rau, Sánchez, and Urzúa (2011). Following Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) we model the

decisions as follows.

     Consider a choice node j (for instance, whether to apply to the SGL). Let Vid(j) represent the

indirect utility that individual i obtains when choosing alternative d (with d ∈ {0, 1}) from the
    11
         For purposes of this paper we consider two groups of institutions: universities and non universities, the TI-PI.




                                                              6
alternative set at node j:


                                              Vid(j) = Zid(j) δd(j) + µid(j)                                             (1)


where Zid(j) is a vector of observed characteristics that affects the individual’s schooling decision

and µid(j) is an error term.12

Let Did(j) be a binary variable defined as follow

                                                        
                                                        
                                                        1
                                                              if   Vid(j) ≥ 0
                                             Did(j) =                                                                    (2)
                                                        
                                                        0
                                                              otherwise


The previous expression implies that individual i chooses the schooling path that maximizes her

utility conditional on her characteristics.13 Thus, we observe sequences of decisions with observed

choices represented by Dl , with l = 1, 2, . . . , L.14 In Figure 5 we show the tree of sequential

decisions. In our model L = 6.

    Finally, after observing the sequences of optimal schooling decisions we observe two outcomes:

higher education completion (i.e. dropout or non-dropout) and wages (for both dropouts and

non-dropouts). The equation we use to model the dropout decision is
                                                        
                                                        
                                                        1
                                                             if    ViDl ≥ 0
                                              ΛD
                                               i =
                                                l
                                                                                                                         (3)
                                                        
                                                        0
                                                             otherwise


where the dropout decision depends on the node in which individual i is. The wage equation is

given by:


                                                  Dl
                                                WiΛ  = αD  Dl    Dl
                                                        Λ MiΛ + νiΛ
                                                         l
                                                                                                                         (4)
   12
      In particular, we consider six nodes: the first one is the decision to enroll or not in a higher education institution,
the second one is to apply to SGL, the third and fourth consider the decision of enrolling into a university or TI/PI
conditional on having applied or not to the SGL. The fifth and sixth nodes consider the allocation of the SGL
conditional in that individuals enroll in a university or TI/PI and apply to the SGL.
   13
      We assume that indirect utility of unchosen alternatives is strictly negative.
   14
      For instance, D1 is the sequence for students that decided to enroll in a higher education institution, applied to
the SGL, enrolled in a university, and obtained the SGL.




                                                             7
        Dl
Where WiΛ  corresponds to the log wages associated with the choice Λ at node Dl for individual

i, MD
    iΛ is a vector containing observed characteristics which also determine wages for individual
      l


                      Dl
i under choice , and νiΛ is an error term. The observed outcome vector is given by the dropout

decision and the observed wage, denoted by:


                                      Y Dl = [ΛDl     WΛDl ] l = 1, . . . , L                     (5)


It is important to mention that the model allows for all of the error terms (νΛDl ) to be correlated.

Thus, schooling decisions are correlated with outcomes through unobservable factors. The model

allows for unobserved heterogeneity, which we refer to as an individual’s factor and denote with

f . The factor represents the individual’s unobserved ability and plays an important role in the

decisions made at each node. With this model we are able to estimate counterfactual outcomes and

treatment effects for different policies, as it will be shown in Section 6. Imposing some structure

on the factor allows us to identify the effect of ability on the sequential choices. We impose the

following structure:


                                            µid(j) = ηd(j) fi − εid(j)                            (6)
                                               Dl    Dl       Dl
                                              νiΛ = ψΛ  fi + ξiΛ                                  (7)


where ε and ξ are error terms of the corresponding equations. We assume that εd ⊥⊥ ξΛ ⊥⊥

f . Following Carneiro, Hansen, and Heckman (2003) and Heckman, Stixrud, and Urzúa (2006),

we posit a linear measurement system and use it to identify the distribution of the unobserved

endowments f . We supplement the model described above with a set of linear equations linking

measured ability with observed characteristics and unobserved endowments. This allows us to

interpret the unobserved factor f as purely a combination of different abilities (cognitive and non-

cognitive). The ability measurements we use are the University Selection Test (PSU) and high

school GPA. To simplify discussion, we refer to both measurements as “test scores”.15 The test
  15
       Then we consider three measures: high school GPA, language and mathematics PSU scores.




                                                        8
score equations are


                                     Tik = Xik γk + λik     k = 1, 2, 3                               (8)


Where Tik is test score k of individual i, Xik is a vector containing observed characteristics (e.g.

socioeconomic characteristics, parents’ education, type of school attended) and λik is an error term

for test score k for individual i.16 As before, we impose a factor structure for the error terms in

the test score equations


                                      λik = ωk fi + θik    k = 1, 2, 3                                (9)


where θ is the error term. We assume that εd ⊥⊥ θk ⊥⊥ ξΛ ⊥⊥ f and that the measurement system

allows to identify the distribution of unobserved abilities. We can use equations (8) and (9) to

express the test score equations as follows:


                                 Tik = Xik γk + ωk fi + θik     k = 1, 2, 3


Similarly, we can use equations (6) and (7) to express equations (1) and (4) as:


                                  Vid(j) = Zid(j) δd(j) + ηd(j) fi − εid(j)
                                     Dl
                                   WiΛ  = αDl Dl    Dl      Dl
                                           Λ MiΛ + ψΛ fi + ξiΛ



Assuming that εid(j) ∼ N (0, 1), from equation (2) we have a probit model for choice d. Conditioning

on the factor we have:

                                                                                           
                Pr Did(j) = 1|Zid(j) , fi , Did(j−1) = Pr Vid(j) ≥ 0|Zid(j) , fi , Did(j−1)          (10)
                                                                                  
                                                      = Φ Zid(j) δd(j) + ηd(j) fi                    (11)


Where Did(j−1) are the previous decisions taken by individual i (if there is a previous decision).

Consequently, we can express the probability of observing a particular schooling sequence Dl for
   16
      Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) shows that three is the minimum number of measurements to achieve
identification, which is our case.



                                                     9
individual i, given the observed characteristics and the factor f , in the following way:

      Y                                            Did(j)                                            1−Did(j)
             Pr Did(j) = 1|Zid(j) , fi , Did(j−1)                Pr Did(j) = 0|Zid(j) , fi , Did(j−1)                 (12)
      d∈Hi


Hi represents the set of nodes visited by individual i. The structural model depends on observed

variables and the unobserved factor. Given this structure, we can use a method similar to those

used by Hansen, Heckman, and Mullen (2004) and Kotlarski (1967)to identify the distribution of

the factor and the parameters of the model.


3.2     Implementing the Model

To estimate the model, we use observed schooling decisions, individual characteristics, the outcome

vector, and test scores (Dl , Z, Y, M, T and X, respectively). We assume the decision timing is as

described above. We observe wages after the schooling sequence is completed.

   The model allows for the existence of endogeneity in decisions since the choices made at each

node depend on unobserved characteristics which are likely to be correlated with some character-

istics. The assumption of independence between the error terms and the factor, after conditioning

on unobserved ability, is crucial since it allows us to write the likelihood function as follows:

                                                 N Z
                                                 Y
                     L(T, D, Y|X, Z, M) =                 f (Ti , Di , Yi |Xi , Zi , Mi , f )dF (f )df
                                                 i=1


Where we integrate with respect to the density of the unobserved factor. We assume the factor

is drawn from a mixture of normal distributions which is flexible enough to allow for asymmetries

and multi modalities:


                                f ∼ ρ1 N (τ1 , σ12 ) + ρ2 N (τ2 , σ22 ) + ρ3 N (τ3 , σ32 )


It is important to mention that this mixture structure for the distribution of the factor does not

imply normality a priori. Given the numeric complexity in maximizing the likelihood introduced

by the integral, we estimate the model by Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC).



   One final comment with regard to the factor is that because there is no intrinsic scale for ability,


                                                            10
it is necessary to normalize the mean of the factor to 0 and to normalize the loading parameter on

the factor in the math test score equation to 1. We also normalize all of the test scores so they

have zero mean and standard deviation one.



4        Data

The data used in this paper is constructed from several different administrative records.17 To

identify dropouts we use administrative enrollment data from the Chilean Higher Education System

that cover the years 2006 and 2007. We focus only on individuals enrolled in a HEI in 2006 for

two reasons. First, we are able to merge this data with unemployment insurance (UI) data so

we can observe wages in 2012 (January-August). If we include individuals enrolled for the first

time in 2007 it is likely that a large fraction of them would not be in the labor market by 2012.

Second, in 2006 the SGL was mistakenly assigned to individuals from all quintiles of the income

distribution. This did not happened in 2007.18 Because individuals from all quintiles were allowed

to receive SGL loans in 2006, we will be able to estimate different parameters for individuals from

each income quintile.

     The enrollment data was merged with administrative records from the University Selection

Test (PSU) from 2005. From these records we observe test scores, socioeconomic characteristics,

and family background characteristics. Additionally, administrative data from the SGL permit

the identification of SGL applicants and recipients in 2006. The merged database contains 47,115

observations, 33,814 of which enrolled at a HEI. 19 In Figure 5 we display the number of observations

at each decision node.

     The variables included as controls are a male dummy , age (in 2006), geographic location

dummies, family size, and family income (converted into income categories with 0 to $278.000

Chilean pesos as the base category) . We also include dummies for parents’ years of schooling (with

less than 8 years of schooling as the base category), dummies for the type of high school (public,

private-voucher, or private), a dummy for whether the individual received a scholarship during the
    17
      The data were provided by the Budget Office of the Chilean Ministry of Finance.
    18
      The misallocation of the loans was due to a computational mistake that assigned the SGL to individuals in the
fourth and fifth quintiles. Political pressure led to an increase in the number of loans assigned to students in the
lowest three quintiles. For details see Ingresa (2010).
   19
      These 47,115 observations include only individuals with no missing values. We did not use imputation methods
to increase the number of observations.


                                                        11
first year, dummies for post-secondary area of study (with Administration and Commerce as the

base category), a measure of the designed length of the post-secondary program in semesters, years

of certification of the higher education institutions in 2006 (a measure of HEI quality), and test

scores (mathematics and language and high school GPA.

     In Tables 5 and 6 we show some descriptive statistics by decision node and observed choice at

each decision node. The sample appears well balanced at each decision nodes. However, there are

some important observable differences at node D5 (enrolled in a university) with respect to GPA

and test scores. Students enrolled in university score significantly higher than students enrolled at

a TI-PI or those not enrolled at any HEI.



5         Results

Table 7 presents the parameter estimates at each of the six decision nodes and we describe some

results below.

     Overall, men are more likely to study and have a lower probability of applying to SGL, receiving

a loan through SGL, and enrolling in a university. Older individuals have a lower probability of

attending an HEI. When they do decide to attend an HEI, older individuals are more likely to

enroll at a university. Also, conditional on applying for a loan through the SGL, age is positively

associated with being selected as an SGL beneficiary.

     Socioeconomic characteristics are important in the student’s decision patterns. Individuals from

high-income families are more likely to attend an HEI, more likely to attend a university conditional

on attending an HEI, and less likely to apply to the SGL program. Owing to the previously

described loan misallocation in 2006, the probability of obtaining an SGL loan is increasing in

household income for students enrolled at universities(Ingresa, 2010).

     Last, we can see the importance of ability (as measured by the factor) in the schooling and loan

take-up decisions. Individuals with higher ability are more likely to attend any HEI, more likely to

attend a university conditional on attending an HEI, and more likely to apply to the SGL program.

Also, high ability applicants have a higher probability of receiving the SGL. This is interesting

since credit is not supposed to be assigned based on academic merit or ability.20
    20
         475 in PSU test score or a GPA of 5.3 for the case of TI and PI.




                                                            12
    Table 8 presents parameter estimates from the decision nodes corresponding to the drop out deci-

sion.21 At some nodes, men have a higher probability of dropping out. In four nodes (D2 , D4 , D5 , D6 )

older students have a higher probability of dropping out. Geographic region dummies appear to not

explaining the dropout decision, except for students who enrolled in a higher education institution

and did not obtain an SGL loan and for students who did not apply to the SGL but enrolled in a

TI/PI. In the former case, being from the north or the south is associated with a lower likelihood

of dropping out. In the latter case being from the north or the south is associated with a higher

likelihood of dropping out.

    Students from larger households have a higher probability of dropping out and higher family

income is associated with a lower probability of dropping out. Attending a public or private-

voucher school increases the probability of dropping out from a HEI. The association is particularly

strong for students enrolled in universities and those who did not apply to SGL. Having received

a scholarship significantly decreases the probability of dropping out after the first year in most of

the terminal nodes.

    Program length increases the probability of dropping out for students enrolled at a university

who did not receive the SGL. On the other hand, program quality, as measured by the length (in

years) of certification, reduces this probability for students enrolled in a TI/PI that did not obtain

the SGL. We also see that ability (as measured by the factor) is negatively correlated with dropping

out. It is important to mention that, apart from learning about the effect of ability on decisions,

it allows to obtain estimations of the structural parameters purged of endogeneity due to ability.

    Table 9 presents results from the wage equations.22 In most cases men have higher wages than

women and wages increase with age as expected. The program length is negatively related with

wages, which is likely related to the fact that those enrolled in longer programs have spent less

time in the labor market. Finally, we see that ability is strongly and positively related to wages

for non-dropouts, for dropouts from a TI/PI that did not receive the SGL and for individuals who

did not attend any HEI.

    Next we analyze the results from the test score equations. In Table 10 we see that men perform

better than women on the mathematics examinations and worse on the language examinations.
   21
      There are some nodes with few numbers of observations that make us to choose more parsimonious specifications
to achieve convergence.
   22
      We did not include characteristics of career they attended for those who dropped out in the first year.



                                                        13
Age is positively correlated with the language score but negatively correlated with high school

GPA and the mathematics score.

    Household size is negatively correlated with PSU scores and GPA while family income is pos-

itively correlated with both. Having attended a public or private-voucher school is negatively

associated with all three scores.Parent’s education is positively associated with PSU scores but

negatively correlated with high school GPA. Lastly, ability is strongly positively correlated with

the three test scores. This suggests that the factor is strongly related with true ability.


5.1    Goodness of fit

We compute goodness of fit statistics for the model. Specifically, we compute χ2 tests to contrast

the estimated and the actual proportions of individuals making each choice at each decision node.23

We first implement a simple hypothesis test through decision nodes. Table 11 displays the results.

    In particular, the table displays the p-values from the test of equality between the model

predictions and the actual data. In most cases we are unable to rejected the null hypothesis of

equality at the 1% level. This suggests that our structural model performs well at predicting the

data averages.


5.2    The Role of Ability in the Sequential Decisions

In this subsection we analyze in detail the role that ability plays in determining individual choices

in our structural model. In particular, we study if there is sorting on ability. To do so, we use the

estimated structural parameters of our model to simulate the distribution of the ability factor.24

    Figure 6 shows the unconditional distribution of the factor and the estimated parameters from

the mixture of normals that generate it. Clearly, the distribution is non-standard which suggests

we were right to relax normality assumptions.25

    Next, we show the distribution of ability for those who decided to continue studying at an HEI

relative to those who did not. Unsurprisingly, students attending HEIs are higher ability than those

who do not attend a post-secondary institution. In fact, the ability distribution for HEI attendees
  23
     Since we have the structural parameters, we can simulate an economy with one million observations. The null
hypothesis is that M odel = Actual.
  24
     The simulation considers one million observations.
  25
     Additionally, we performed a normality test and reject the null hypothesis of normality.




                                                      14
first order stochastically dominates the distribution for non-attendees. A similar relationship is

observed between SGL applicants and non-applicants.

    The distribution of ability by type of HEI is presented in Figure 9. There is a positive sorting

into universities (relative to TI/PI) . This is consistent with the evidence presented in Table 7.

    Figure 10 presents the distribution of the ability factor by whether the student was awarded

a loan through the SGL program or not conditional on having applied. For students enrolled in

a university or a TI/PI, more able students have a higher probability of being awarded a loan

through SGL. This sorting is strongest for those enrolled in a TI/PI. This is also consistent with

the estimates shown in Table 7. Finally, in Figure 11 we observe sorting in the decision to drop

out of a HEI. Less able students have a higher probability of dropping out, even after controlling

for observable characteristics. This result is consistent across decision nodes . Again these results

coincide with Table 8, where the ability factor is consistently negatively predictive of the decision

to drop out.26



6     Treatment Effects

In this section we estimate the causal effect of the SGL program on the probability of enrolling in

a HEI, the probability of dropping out after the first year, and on observed wages five years after

enrolling in a HEI for students who did not drop out during their first year. To do so, we employ

less structural approaches (OLS and Regression Discontinuity Design) as well as our structural

approach. Given that receiving an SGL loan is perfectly predictive of ever enrolling at an HEI, we

restrict our analysis to impact of SGL on the likelihood of dropping out during the first year and

wages five years after initial enrollment.27


6.1     Effects of SGL on Enrollment Decision

6.1.1    Structural Approach

We start by estimating the effect of the SGL program on the enrollment decision. We control for

both observable characteristics and unobserved heterogeneity. Given that enrollment is not a final
   26
      We performed stochastic dominance analysis for all comparisons finding first order dominance in all pair wise
comparisons mentioned.
   27
      We do not observe individuals that were offered the SGL and decided to not enroll at a HEI, then individuals
with SGL are enrolled with probability one in our sample


                                                        15
node, we estimate the probability of enrollment in any HEI conditional on applying and obtaining

the SGL and compare with the probability of enrollment conditional on not having the SGL.

            Z                                                         Z
ΩSGL
 D1     =       Pr(D1 = 1|SGL = 1, D2 = 1, ζ)dFf |SGL=1,D2 =1 (ζ) −       Pr(D1 = 1|SGL = 0, ζ)dFf |SGL=0 (ζ)

                                                                                                     (13)


In Table 12 we present the estimated treatment effects of SGL on enrollment for different household

income categories. Receiving an SGL loan increases the probability of ever enrolling by 15.6 per-

centage points on average. The point estimate is higher for low income students. Our results are

in line with those found by Solis (2012) who estimate an effect of 18 percentage points for students

just above and just below the PSU eligibility cutoff (475 points) using a Regression Discontinuity

(RD) approach. However, the impact we estimate is considerably lower since our 15.6 percentage

points corresponds to 24.1% of total enrollment and Solis’ (2012) 18 percentage points corresponds

to 100% for those around the cutoff. As Solis remarks, “...access to the loan programs increases

the college enrollment probability by 18 percentage points - equivalent to a nearly 100% increase in

the enrollment rate of the group with test scores just below the eligibility threshold.” Hence, our

results are much smaller than those found by Solis. Certainly the interpretation of RD estimates

must be taken with caution as with any local average treatment effect.

   Because people who decide to not enroll at an HEI are grouped together, we cannot compare

within this group along different paths of the decision tree. For the dropout decision and wages we

will have more counterfactual alternatives as explained below.


6.2     Effects of SGL on Dropout Decision

6.2.1       A conventional approach

We estimate the effect of being an SGL beneficiary on the probability of dropping out from an HEI

in the first year using a fuzzy RD approach implemented as Two Stage Least Squares (2SLS) as

follows:


                              Di = λ0 + λ1 · SGLi + λ2 · f (Ti − 475) + µi ,                         (14)

                            SGLi = ζ0 + ζ1 · 1(Ti ≥ 475) + ζ2 · f (Ti − 475) + υi ,                  (15)


                                                      16
where Di is a binary variable that is equal to 1 if individual i decides to dropout from a HEI and

0 if not. SGLi is a binary variable that takes the value of 1 if the individual is eligible for the SGL

(i.e. has at least 475 points on average on the mathematics and language PSU scores) and 0 if not.

f (Ti − 475) is a function that flexibly controls for the distance from the threshold.

    One thing to consider is that proper identification of the treatment effect with an RD approach

may not be possible for students enrolled in TI/PIs. This is because the eligibility conditions

for these students is a minimum score of 475 on the PSU (average between the mathematics and

language tests) or a GPA of 5.3 in high school. Hence, the eligibility condition we consider (at

least 475 points in the PSU) may be a weak instrument. As such, we cannot accurately estimate

the desired treatment parameter for students enrolled in TI/PIs.

    The results the RD estimation suggest that receiving an SGL loan reduces the likelihood of

dropping out from a university by 9.3 percentage points. This is significant at the 10% level. This

implies that receipt of an SGL loan decreases the probability of dropping out by 112%. This is

again similar to the estimates obtained by Solis (2012).


6.3    Structural Approach

We estimate the causal impact of the SGL on the probability of dropping out of an HEI by type

of institution. It is important to realize that naive estimates are likely to suffer from endogeneity

and selection issues (Dynarski, 2002; Acuña, Makovec, and Mizala, 2010). However, we are able

to control for these issues by modeling the decision process at each node in our structural model.

This allows us to estimate counterfactual scenarios and to compute treatment effects of interest

after having purged the effects of endogeneity.

    In Table 4 we showed that there was no apparent change in dropouts rates before and after

the introduction of the SGL in 2006.28 However, this simple comparison does not account for

observable characteristics and unobserved ability.

    As a first approach, we compute the unconditional impact of SGL on dropping out of a HEI
  28
     We see that througTIh decision nodes there are significant differences. In particular, for those enrolled in a
university, the SGL reduces the dropout probability by 2.8 percentage points and by 11.4 for those enrolled in a
TI/PI. These are unadjusted measures.




                                                        17
after the first year.29 Thus, we estimate the following treatment parameters:

                                        Z
                           ΥSGL
                            D3 =1   =       E(ΛD1 − ΛD2 |D3 = 1, f = ζ)dFf |D3 =1 (ζ)                               (16)
                                        Z
                           ΥSGL
                            D3 =0 =         E(ΛD3 − ΛD4 |D3 = 0, f = ζ)dFf |D3 =0 (ζ),                              (17)


where ΥSGL                                                        SGL
       D3 =1 is the treatment effect for university students and ΥD3 =0 is the treatment effect for

TI/PI students.30

    In Table 13 we present the treatment effect estimates. The impacts of the SGL program on the

probability of dropping out of an HEI are statistically significant (we reject the null hypotheses that

ΥSGL            SGL
 D3 =1 = 0 and ΥD3 =0 = 0 at the 1% level) and heterogeneous. For students enrolled at a university

the SGL reduces the probability of dropping out by 0.5 percentage points. This corresponds to

a reduction of 6.8% in the dropout rate. For students enrolled in a TI/PI, we estimate a 9.2

percentage point reduction in the dropout rate. This corresponds to a decrease of 64.3%.31 Our

results differ considerably from those of Solis (2012). He finds that SGL receipt leads to a decrease

of 6 percentage points for students enrolled in universities. In his data, this corresponds to a

decrease of 82.1% in the dropout rate. This is vastly different from the 6.8% reduction that we

find. Our RD estimates also differ significantly from our structural model. Of course, our structural

estimates are average treatment effects while the RD estimates represent local average treatment

effects.

    We next turn to conditioning on variables other than the type of HEI. In order to see if the

impact of SGL on the probability of dropping out after the first year varies by income level or

quintile of the unobserved factor distribution, we estimate the following treatment parameters:

                                Z
                    Υ̃SGL
                      D3 =1 =       E(ΛD1 − ΛD2 |D3 = 1, X = x, f = ζ)dFf |D3 =1,X=x (ζ)                            (18)
                                Z
                    Υ̃SGL
                      D3 =0 =       E(ΛD3 − ΛD4 |D3 = 0, X = x, f = ζ)dFf |D3 =0,X=x (ζ),                           (19)

   29
      This effect is unconditional, thus it does not control for observable variables, such as income, and integrates over
the density of the ability factor.
   30
      These parameters are not conditioned on having obtained the SGL or not. Hence, they estimate the effect of
the SGL on the probability of dropping out in the first year for an average student, enrolled in a higher education
institution, who applied to the SGL.
   31
      For these calculations we consider the dropout rates simulated in our structural model. The simulated dropout
rate for students enrolled in a university is 7.3% and 14.3% for those enrolled in a TI/PI.




                                                           18
where the vector X includes family income categories, quintiles of the ability factor, and quintiles of

the PSU score.32 The ability factor quintiles represent a mix of cognitive and noncognitive ability

and the PSU quintiles are a proxy for cognitive ability. We consider only three income categories

because of the reduced number of observations in the right tail of the income distribution in our

sample.33

   In Table 14 we present the estimated effect of SGL on dropout rates for students enrolled in

a university who applied to the SGL by income category and ability factor quintile. Similarly, in

Table 15 we present the same effects but use PSU quintiles instead of ability factor quintiles. It is

important to note that students enrolled in universities from high-income families benefit more in

reduction in dropout rates. When just ability factor quintiles are considered, we see that individuals

with less ability benefit more. However, when we condition on both the household income category

and the factor quintile (or the PSU score quintile) there is no clear pattern. In general, less able

students from the highest and lowest income categories benefit more than those from the middle

income category.

   Similarly, Tables 16 and 17 show the effect of SGL on dropout rates for those enrolled in a

TI/PI by income category and factor (PSU score) quintile. There are three interesting results in

these tables. First, student from low-income families benefit the most. Second, students with less

ability benefit significantly more than those in the upper tail of the factor distribution. Third,

when we condition on both income and factor (PSU score), we find that students from low-income

families with lower levels of ability benefit more in terms of reduced dropout rates.

   In Figure 12 we summarize the previous results. We plot the percentage point impact of the

SGL program on dropout rates by income category and factor (PSU scores) quintiles for each type

of HEI.

   The results suggest that short run constraints related to income are binding in Chile. Addi-

tionally, there is evidence that long-term constraints are also important. The reductions are larger

for students with low ability levels who come from low-income families and attend TI/PIs. The

reductions are also large for students with low ability levels who come from high-income families

and attend a university.
  32
     Quintiles of PSU scores are calculated over the average PSU score.
  33
     The income categories are from $0 to $278,000 Chilean pesos (1), from $278,000 to $834,000 (2), and from
$834,000 on (3).



                                                     19
6.4     SGL access and Wages

6.4.1    A conventional approach

We consider an RD approach to estimate the effect of the SGL program on wages. As previously

discussed, the eligibility may be a weak instrument for those enrolled in TI/PIs. Thus, we do not

analyze the effect of SGL on wages for students who attend a TI/PI and focus only in students

who attend universities. The specification we estimate is as follows:


                            ln Wi = τ0 + τ1 · SGLi + τ2 · f (Ti − 475) + ϑi ,                                      (20)

                            SGLi = ρ0 + ρ1 · 1(Ti ≥ 475) + ρ2 · f (Ti − 475) + σi ,                                (21)


where ln Wi is the log wage of individual i, SGLi is a binary variable that is equal to 1 if the

individual obtained the SGL and 0 otherwise, and f (Ti − 475) is a function that accounts for the

distance from the threshold. We approximate f (·) with a local linear estimator and the bandwidth

suggested in Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). The results of the RD estimation suggest that SGL

eligibility decreases wages by 11% on average (for the LATE population). However, this estimate

is statistically insignificant at conventional levels. When we restrict to non-dropouts the point

estimate suggests a decrease of 5.4%. Again, this result is insignificant.


6.4.2    Structural Approach

We now estimate the impact of SGL on wages using our structural model. As discussed earlier,

the design of the SGL program could incentivize higher education institutions to reduce dropout

rates at the expense of overall education quality.34 Although the Chilean higher education system

does not have a method to measure the quality of its graduates, we can use information on the

labor market performance of individuals as a proxy of quality. To investigate this question we

estimate wage equations and interpret the results to differences in quality among SGL recipients

and non-recipients.

    To estimate the impact of SGL on wages, we first recognize that SGL receipt could have an
   34
      Table 2 shows the guarantee that HEI would pay while students are enrolled. As can be appreciated, this
guarantee decreases along the study period and disappears after graduation. Potential incentives to prevent dropouts
might arise between these institutions that could be reflected in the quality of education they provide to their students
(e.g., easier courses or lower failure rates).



                                                           20
effect on two different decisions. First, the prospective student decides whether or not to apply

to the SGL. This not only determines the type of financing that she will eventually have access

to, but also the type of institution where she decides to study. This second instance is defined by

obtaining the loan (conditional on the application). Hence, we can define two pairs of treatment

effects, depending on the HEI where the individual is enrolled:

                               Z
               ∆SGL
                D1 ,D2    =           D1
                                   E(WΛ=0    D2
                                          − WΛ=0 |D5 = 1, ΛD1 = 0, ζ)dFf |D5 =1,ΛD1 =0 (ζ)                    (22)
                               Z
               ∆SGL
                D3 ,D4 =
                                      D3
                                   E(WΛ=0    D4
                                          − WΛ=0 |D6 = 1, ΛD3 = 0, ζ)dFf |D6 =1,ΛD3 =0 (ζ)                    (23)


and

                               Z
               ∆SGL
                D1 ,D5 =
                                      D1
                                   E(WΛ=0    D5
                                          − WΛ=0 |D5 = 1, ΛD1 = 0, ζ)dFf |D5 =1,ΛD1 =0 (ζ)                    (24)
                               Z
               ∆SGL
                D3 ,D6 =
                                      D3
                                   E(WΛ=0    D6
                                          − WΛ=0 |D6 = 1, ΛD3 = 0, ζ)dFf |D6 =1,ΛD3 =0 (ζ)                    (25)


It is important to note that the effects above are conditional on the student applying to the SGL

program, enrolling in a particular type of HEI, being awarded an SGL loan, and not dropping out

in the first year.

Hence, the first pair of parameters identify the effect of SGL on wages for students that applied for

an SGL loan and did not dropout during their first year.35 The second pair of parameters identify

the impact of receiving the SGL versus not having applied for an SGL loan.36

    In Table 18 we present the results of the estimation. For students enrolled in a university, the

impact of getting the SGL on wages is -2.8%. This is statistically significant at the 1% level.37 For

students enrolled in a TI/PI, the impact of SGL on wages is 0.5% and not statistically significant.

These results are quite different from naive comparisons of means. For university students the

naive wage gap is -3.2%. For TI/PI students the wage gap is 8.6%. When comparing the estimates

from the structural model with those from the RD approach, we also observe important differences.
   35
      According to Figure 5 this is equivalent when comparing wages of those in node D1 who did not drop out, with
wages of those in node D2 who did not drop out. For those in a TI/PI, this is equivalent to comparing wages of
people at node D3 and did not drop out, with those from individuals at node D4 and also did not drop out.
   36
      According to Figure 5 this is equivalent to compare wages of those in node D1 who did not drop out with those
from people at node D5 and did not drop out either. For those enrolled in a TI/PI this is equivalent to compare
wages of individuals at node D3 and did not drop out with those of node D6 and did not drop out as well.
   37
      To compute the significance we perform difference in mean tests for the estimated parameters.



                                                        21
This suggests that selectivity bias and/or endogeneity issues are important.

    The estimated treatment effects ∆SGL         SGL
                                     D1 ,D5 and ∆D3 ,D6 , indicate even larger reductions in wages.

Compared with those who did not apply to the SGL program, individuals enrolled in universities

who received an SGL loan earn 6.4% lower wages. The corresponding figure for TI/PI is 1.1%.

These results are statistically significant at 1% level and the 10% level, respectively.38

    In Tables 19 to 22 we present estimates that also condition on the household income categories

and the ability factor quintiles. The negative effect of the SGL program on wages appears to be

strongest for students with lower levels of ability and from low income households.

    Finally, Tables 23 and 24 show the effects of the SGL on wages after also conditioning on our

measure of institution quality (years of certification) and the ability factor quintiles. We see that

the SGL decreases wages most for low-skilled students who are enrolled in HEIs that are of lower

quality. In contrast, high-skilled students enrolled in institutions with a large number of years of

certification obtain greater wages as a result of the SGL.

    The results suggest that after controlling for self-selection and endogeneity, students who receive

SGL loans in their first year (especially those enrolled in universities) have lower wages six years

later in comparison with students who do not receive an SGL loan.


6.4.3    Understanding the Wage Gap

According to the previously discussed results, the SGL program reduces the probability of dropping

out after the first year. Thus, a simple comparison of the wages of those who did not dropout and

received an SGL loan with the wages of those who did not obtain an SGL loan could be biased by

differences in potential labor market experience. Specifically, those who drop out of school earlier

have more potential years of work experience. To the extent that labor market experience positively

impacts wages, naive estimates will tend to understate (i.e. make more negative) the true effect of

the SGL program.

    In Tables 25 and 26 we show the cumulative average number of pension contributions between

2007 and 2010 for individuals enrolled in universities and TI/PI. For university enrollees we fail to

reject the null hypothesis of equality of pension contributions between SGL and non-SGL recipients
   38
      Similarly, uncorrected measures shows a wage gap of -9.7% for those enrolled in universities and 8.2% for those
in TI/PI. This suggests that endogeneity and selectivity bias is present, especially for those in TI/PI.




                                                         22
for most years. On the other hand, for TI/PI enrollees, the number of pension contributions

is significantly larger for those who did not obtain the SGL. The difference, on average, is 3.7

contributions. It seems unlikely that this would account for the entire wage gap. For instance,

according to Sapelli (2009) the average annual return to experience is 2.4%. Thus, the increase

in the number of pension contributions could explain a 0.07% wage gap but we observe a wage

gap of at least -4.8% (depending on the treatment effect considered) between SGL recipients and

non-recipients.

   One plausible hypothesis for the observed wage gap, is that the incentive for HEIs to retain

SGL students may decrease the retention requirements for students with the loan. As explained

before, HEIs are responsible for the loan (up to 90% of principal plus interests) during the period

in which beneficiaries are enrolled. Thus, higher education institutions have an incentive to ensure

graduation. This may affect the average quality of SGL graduates, which could then be reflected

in initial wages.

   Evidence of perverse incentives to reduce dropout rates have also been reported at the high

school level in the US. In Texas, schools are evaluated based on standardized test scores, attendance,

and dropout rates, and cash bonuses are granted to the staff of successful schools. A major scandal

occurred at Sharpstown High School in 2003 where dropouts were misclassified as transfers in

order to boost the district’s graduation rate (Domina, Ghosh-Dastidar, and Tienda, 2010). We

do not claim to have evidence of this behavior in Chile. However, there is some evidence of

irregular certification of some private universities by the National Certification Commission (CNA),

the government agency that certifies universities in Chile. A former president of the CNA is

under investigation for allegedly accepting bribes in exchange for certifying a number of private

universities39 . Hence, we believe that it may be beneficial to revise the design of this loan program

in order to reduce the incentive for universities to dilute education quality at the expense of dropout

rates.

   Another potential explanation for the negative effect of receiving an SGL loan is what Lochner

and Monge-Naranjo (2011) calls over-investing. According to the authors, under certain circum-

stances poor low ability students may invest so much in education that marginal return is below

the marginal cost. However, we believe this explanation is less plausible in our setting. This is
  39
       Once certified, universities are eligible to public funding for student loans (such as SGL) and scholarships.



                                                            23
because we find a negative effect of having the SGL on wages.



7    Conclusions

The relationship between access to credit and dropping out from higher education is an important

topic in economics. Previous papers have attempted to estimate this effect using reduced form

techniques. However, the evidence is mixed and there is little clarity as to the importance of credit

constraints on student dropouts Kane (2007).

    In this paper we analyze the effect of loans for higher education on enrollment, dropouts, and

adult earnings using a unique database that includes information on the type of higher education

institution, credit access, and labor market outcomes. We estimate a structural model of sequen-

tial schooling decisions that allows us to control for endogeneity, self-selection, and unobserved

heterogeneity. We estimate the causal effect of the State Guaranteed Loan (SGL) program, the

most important funding program in Chile, on the probability of dropping out from a HEI. We also

estimate the effect of the SGL program on wages for non-dropouts.

    Our findings document large heterogeneity in the estimated effect of the SGL program on the

likelihood of dropping out of an HEI. In particular, we find that the SGL increases enrollment

by 24% and reduces the dropout rate during the first year by 6.8% for universities and 64.3% for

TI-PI.

    We also compute the heterogeneous impact of the SGL for different levels of family income and

ability. This allows us to investigate if there are short- (related to income) and long-term (related

to ability) constraints, as defined by Carneiro and Heckman (2002). We find a significantly higher

impact on dropout rates for students with low levels of ability from poorer families.

    Although the SGL has positive effects on dropout rates, it also has negative effects. In particular,

we find that students with SGL loans have lower wages even after adjusting for ability and HEI

quality measures. This may reflect serious issues in the design of the SGL program that encourage

HEIs to retain marginal students at the cost of the overall education quality.




                                                  24
References

Acuña, C., M. Makovec, and A. Mizala (2010): “Access to Higher Education and Dropouts:

  Evidence from a Cohort of Chilean Secondary School Leavers,” Working Paper.

Arrau, F. (2003): “Deserción en la Educación Superior en Chile,” Biblioteca del Congreso Na-

  cional.

Bravo, D., C. Sanhueza, and S. Urzúa (2008): “Ability, Schooling Choices And Gender Labor

  Market Discrimination: Evidence For Chile,” Research Network Working Paper, IADB, (No.

  R-558).

Cameron, S., and J. Heckman (1998): “Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias:

  Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(2),

  262–333.

        (2001): “The Dynamics of Educational Attainment for Black, Hispanic, and White Males,”

  Journal of Political Economy, 109(3), 455–499.

Card, D. (1994): “Earnings, Schooling and Ability Revisited,” National Bureau of Economic

  Research Working Paper Series, No. 4832.

Carneiro, P., K. T. Hansen, and J. J. Heckman (2003): “Estimating Distributions of Treat-

  ment Effects with an Application to the Returns to Schooling and Measurement of the Effects

  of Uncertainty on College Choice,” International Economic Review, 44(2), 361–422.

Carneiro, P., and J. J. Heckman (2002): “The Evidence on Credit Constraints in Post-

  Secondary Schooling,” The Economic Journal, 112(482), 705–734.

Cellini, S. R., and C. Goldin (2012): “Does Federal Student Aid Raise Tuition? New Evidence

  on For-Profit Colleges,” Working Paper 17827, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chatterjee, S., and F. Ionescu (2012): “Insuring student loans against the financial risk of

  failing to complete college,” Quantitative Economics, 3(3), 393–420.




                                               25
Domina, T., B. Ghosh-Dastidar, and M. Tienda (2010): “Students Left Behind: Measuring

  10th to 12th Grade Student Persistence Rates in Texas High Schools,” Educational Evaluation

  and Policy Analysis, 32(2), 324–346.

Dynarski, S. (2002): “The Behavioral and Distributional Implications of Aid for College,” Amer-

  ican Economic Review, 92(2), 279–285.

Espinoza, O., E. Fecci, L. E. González, V. Kluge, A. Mora, O. Ocaranza, J. P. Prieto,

  and E. Rodriguez (2006): “Informe: Educación Superior en Iberoamérica El Caso de Chile,”

  Centro Interuniversitario de Desarrollo CINDA.

Glocker, D. (2010): “The Effect of Student Aid on the Duration of Study,” Economics of

  Education Review, 30(1), 177–190.

Goldrick-Rab, S., D. Harris, and P. Trostel (2009): “Why Financial Aid Matters (or

  does not) for College Success: Toward a New Interdisciplinary Perspective,” Higher Education:

  Handbook of Theory and Research, pp. 1–45.

González, L. E., and D. Uribe (2002): “Estimaciones Sobre la Repitencia y Deserción en

  la Educación Superior Chilena. Consideraciones sobre sus Implicaciones,” Consejo Superior de

  Educación.

Goodman, J. (2008): “Skills, Schools and Credit Constraints : Evidence from Massachusetts,”

  Columbia University Department of Economics, Discussion Paper Series, No.0809-03.

Hansen, K., J. J. Heckman, and K. J. Mullen (2004): “The Effect of Schooling and Ability

  on Achievement Test Scores,” Journal of Econometrics, 121(1-2), 39–98.

Heckman, J., L. Lochner, and C. Taber (1998): “Tax Policy and Human Capital Formation,”

  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 6462.

Heckman, J., J. Stixrud, and S. Urzúa (2006): “The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive

  Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior,” Journal of Labor Economics, 24(3),

  411–482.

Imbens, G., and K. Kalyanaraman (2012): “Optimal Bandwidth Choice for the Regression

  Discontinuity Estimator,” The Review of Economic Studies, 79(3), 933–959.

                                               26
Ingresa (2010): “Balance Anual 2006-2010,” Cuenta Pública 2010.

Kane, T. J. (1996): “College Cost, Borrowing Constraints and the Timing of College Entry,”

  Eastern Economic Journal, 22(2), 181–194.

        (2007): “Evaluating the Impact of the D.C. Tuition Assistance Grant Program,” Journal

  of Human Resources, 42(3), 555–582.

Keane, M., and K. Wolpin (2001): “The Effect of Parental Transfers and Borrowing Constraints

  on Educational Attainment,” International Economic Review, 42(4), 1051–1103.

Kotlarski, I. (1967): “On Characterizing the Gamma and the Normal Distribution,” Pacific

  Journal of Mathematics, 20(1), 69–76.

Lang, K. (1994): “Does the Human Capital/Educational Sorting Debate Matter for Development

  Policy?,” American Economic Review, 84(1), 353–358.

Lochner, L. J., and A. Monge-Naranjo (2011): “The Nature of Credit Constraints and Human

  Capital,” American Economic Review, 101(6), 2487–2529.

Meller, P. (2010): Carreras Universitarias: Rentabilidad, Selectividad y Discriminación. Uqbar

  Editores, Santiago.

Microdatos (2008): “Estudio Sobre Causas de Deserción Universitaria,” Departamento de

  Economı́a, Universidad de Chile.

Rau, T., C. Sánchez, and S. Urzúa (2011): “Unobserved Heterogeneity, School Choice and

  The Effect of Voucher Schools: Evidence from Chile,” Working Paper.

Restuccia, D., and C. Urrutia (2004): “Intergenerational Persistence of Earnings: The Role

  of Early and College Education,” American Economic Review, American Economic Association,

  94(5), 1354–1378.

Rolando, R., J. Salamanca, and A. Lara (2010): “Retención de Primer Año en el Pregrado:

  Descripción y Análisis de la Cohorte de Ingreso 2007,” Ministerio de Educación de Chile.

Sapelli, C. (2009): “Los Retornos a la Educación en Chile: Estimaciones por Corte Transversal

  y por Cohorte,” Documento de Trabajo N 254, Instituto de Economı́a PUC.

                                                27
Solis, A. (2012): “Credit Access and College Enrollment,” Mimeo University of California, Berke-

  ley.

Stinebrickner, R., and T. Stinebrickner (2008): “The Effect of Credit Constraints on the

  College Drop-Out Decision: A Direct Approach Using a New Panel Study,” The American

  Economic Review, 98(5), 2163–2184.

Stinebrickner, T., and R. Stinebrickner (2012): “Learning about Academic Ability and the

  College Dropout Decision,” Journal of Labor Economics, 30(4), 707 – 748.

Urzúa, S. (2008): “Racial Labor Market Gaps: The Role of Abilities and Schooling Choices,”

  Journal of Human Resources, 43(May 2006), 919–971.

Willis, R. J., and S. Rosen (1979): “Education and Self-Selection,” Journal of Political Econ-

  omy, 87(5), S7.




                                              28
Tables


                    Table 1: SGL Assignment and share over student aids

                        Year      2006        2007      2008      2009      2010
                        SGL     21,251      35,035    42,696    69,901    91,202
                       Share    10.0%       19.8%     27.5%     36.2%     42.9%
                       Source: Authors’ elaboration based on SIES/MINEDUC.




                            Table 2: Academic Dropout Guarantee

                       Year of Studies        1st      2nd            3rd and on
                                  HEI        90%      70%    60%      60% 60%
                         Government           0%      20%    30%      30% 30%
                       Source: SIES/MINEDUC.




                        Table 3: Average Dropout Rates by HEI Type

                                             University          PI        TI
                             First   Year        20.0%       35.3%     33.1%
                           Second    Year        30.8%       52.0%     47.2%
                            Third    Year        38.0%       60.2%     51.9%
                           Fourth    Year        46.4%       63.2%     53.3%
                             Fifth   Year        48.5%
                           Source: Consejo Nacional de Educación.
                           Cohorts from 2004 to 2009 are considered.
                           PI stands for Institutos Profesionales and TI for
                           Centros de Formación Técnica.




                        Table 4: Average Dropout Rates by HEI Type

     HEI Type      Dropout Rate       First Year      Second Year      Third Year   Fourth Year
     University     Before 2006           20.0%             30.4%          37.4%          42.6%
                      After 2006          19.9%             31.1%          38.5%          43.2%
             PI      Before 2006          31.7%             47.9%          57.4%          61.7%
                      After 2006          37.2%             54.7%          63.0%          66.2%
             TI      Before 2006          34.1%             47.5%          52.1%          52.6%
                      After 2006          32.7%             46.9%          51.6%          54.7%
     Source: Authors’ Elaboration based on Consejo Nacional de Educación.




                                                     29
              Table 5: Summary Statistics by Choices D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 , D5 and D6 .

                                               Variable       D1        D2        D3        D4        D5        D6
                                                Gender      0.501     0.506     0.486     0.521     0.471     0.538
                                                          (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.500)   (0.499)   (0.499)
                                                   Age     18.731    18.664    18.732    18.613    18.754    18.655
                                                          (2.123)   (1.767)   (1.786)   (1.752)   (1.817)   (1.668)
                                                 North      0.129     0.134     0.108     0.153     0.111     0.094
                                                          (0.335)   (0.340)   (0.310)   (0.360)   (0.315)   (0.292)
                                                 South      0.213      0.21     0.243     0.186     0.251     0.212
                                                          (0.409)   (0.408)   (0.429)   (0.389)   (0.434)   (0.408)
                                 Size of Familiar Group     4.906     4.866     4.797     4.917     4.792     4.814
                                                          (1.578)   (1.510)   (1.452)   (1.551)   (1.433)   (1.516)
       Household Income 278-834 (Thousands of Pesos)        0.309     0.358     0.338     0.374     0.353     0.285
                                                          (0.462)   (0.480)   (0.473)   (0.484)   (0.478)   (0.452)
      Household Income 834-1.400 (Thousands of Pesos)       0.054     0.068     0.031     0.095     0.035     0.016
                                                          (0.227)   (0.251)   (0.174)   (0.293)   (0.185)   (0.127)
    Household Income 1.400-1.950 (Thousands of Pesos)       0.019     0.024     0.006     0.038     0.007     0.002
                                                          (0.138)   (0.154)   (0.074)   (0.192)   (0.081)   (0.040)
Household Income 1.950 and More (Thousands of Pesos)        0.029     0.038     0.003     0.064     0.003     0.001
                                                          (0.169)   (0.190)   (0.051)   (0.244)   (0.055)   (0.035)
                         Father’s Education: 8-12 Years     0.244     0.211     0.237     0.191     0.225     0.279
                                                          (0.429)   (0.408)   (0.425)   (0.393)   (0.418)   (0.449)
                           Father’s Education: 12 Years     0.352     0.363     0.383     0.349     0.381     0.387
                                                          (0.478)   (0.481)   (0.486)   (0.477)   (0.486)   (0.487)
                Father’s Education: More than 12 Years      0.287     0.344     0.287     0.385     0.307     0.218
                                                          (0.452)   (0.475)   (0.453)   (0.487)   (0.461)   (0.413)
                        Mother’s Education: 8-12 Years      0.274     0.238     0.254     0.226     0.246     0.284
                                                          (0.446)   (0.426)   (0.435)   (0.418)   (0.431)   (0.451)
                          Mother’s Education: 12 Years      0.372     0.391     0.417     0.372     0.415     0.424
                                                          (0.483)   (0.488)   (0.493)   (0.483)   (0.493)   (0.494)
               Mother’s Education: More than 12 Years        0.24     0.292     0.241      0.33     0.258     0.179
                                                          (0.427)   (0.455)   (0.427)   (0.470)   (0.438)   (0.383)
                                         Public School      0.451     0.401     0.457      0.36     0.445       0.5
                                                          (0.498)   (0.490)   (0.498)   (0.480)   (0.497)   (0.500)
                                Private-Voucher School       0.45     0.474     0.491     0.461     0.496     0.474
                                                          (0.497)   (0.499)   (0.500)   (0.498)   (0.500)   (0.499)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                     30
Table 6: Summary Statistics by Choices D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 , D5 and D6 (Continuation).

                       Variable       D1          D2        D3        D4        D5        D6
                    Scholarship      0.06       0.083     0.122     0.054     0.112     0.155
                                  (0.237)     (0.276)   (0.327)   (0.227)   (0.315)   (0.362)
      Agriculture and Livestock     0.025       0.035     0.037     0.034     0.041     0.025
                                  (0.157)     (0.184)   (0.189)   (0.180)   (0.198)   (0.155)
         Arts and Architecture      0.046       0.064     0.057      0.07     0.042     0.108
                                  (0.210)     (0.245)   (0.231)   (0.255)   (0.201)   (0.310)
                  Basic Sciences    0.016       0.023     0.028     0.019     0.035     0.001
                                  (0.126)     (0.149)   (0.164)   (0.136)   (0.184)   (0.031)
                 Social Sciences    0.096       0.134     0.127     0.139     0.143     0.072
                                  (0.294)     (0.340)   (0.333)   (0.345)   (0.350)   (0.259)
                            Law     0.048       0.067     0.059     0.073      0.05     0.093
                                  (0.214)     (0.250)   (0.236)   (0.260)   (0.218)   (0.291)
                      Education     0.133       0.185     0.211     0.165     0.256     0.052
                                  (0.339)     (0.388)   (0.408)   (0.372)   (0.436)   (0.221)
                    Humanities      0.013       0.018     0.018     0.018     0.023     0.004
                                  (0.113)     (0.133)   (0.135)   (0.131)   (0.148)   (0.064)
                         Health     0.083       0.116     0.126     0.109     0.125     0.129
                                  (0.277)     (0.321)   (0.331)   (0.312)   (0.330)   (0.335)
                    Technology      0.183       0.255     0.246     0.263     0.221     0.332
                                  (0.387)     (0.436)   (0.431)   (0.440)   (0.415)   (0.471)
          Number of Semesters        6.06       8.443     8.707     8.247     9.367     6.376
                                  (4.234)     (2.203)   (2.086)   (2.267)   (1.679)   (1.669)
      HEI Years of Certification    1.774       2.472     2.572     2.397      2.33     3.427
                                  (2.284)     (2.355)   (2.286)   (2.402)   (2.155)   (2.520)
                           GPA     -0.147      -0.029     0.135    -0.152     0.267    -0.329
                                  (0.965)     (0.971)   (0.934)   (0.981)   (0.917)   (0.840)
                   Mathematics     -0.177       0.043     0.162    -0.046     0.333    -0.442
                                  (0.945)     (0.916)   (0.809)   (0.978)   (0.748)   (0.725)
                      Language     -0.188       0.034     0.192    -0.084     0.365    -0.417
                                  (0.955)     (0.907)   (0.797)   (0.964)   (0.732)   (0.715)
       Number of Observations      47,115      33,814    14,424    19,390    11,242     3,182
      Note: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                31
              Table 7: Estimation Results for Choices D1 , D2 , D3 , D4 , D5 and D6 .

                                                              D1        D2        D3        D4        D5        D6
                       Constant                             1.587     -0.437     0.104    -0.007    -0.699     0.405
                                                           (0.077)   (0.088)   (0.186)   (0.138)   (0.160)   (0.334)
                        Gender                              0.033     -0.091    -0.246    -0.266    -0.073    -0.232
                                                           (0.015)   (0.015)   (0.031)   (0.024)   (0.027)   (0.048)
                          Age                               -0.031     0.007     0.045     0.046     0.027    -0.016
                                                           (0.003)   (0.004)   (0.009)   (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.014)
                         North                              0.192     -0.264     0.318     0.337    -0.626    -0.095
                                                           (0.023)   (0.023)   (0.053)   (0.035)   (0.052)   (0.086)
                         South                              0.130      0.109     0.421     0.299    -0.518     0.112
                                                           (0.018)   (0.019)   (0.037)   (0.032)   (0.034)   (0.060)
                Size of Familiar Group                      -0.053    -0.003    -0.022     0.001    -0.038    -0.044
                                                           (0.005)   (0.005)   (0.010)   (0.008)   (0.010)   (0.016)
   Household Income 278-834 (Thousands of Pesos)            0.643     -0.212    0.403     0.402     0.378      0.173
                                                           (0.018)   (0.017)   (0.035)   (0.027)   (0.030)   (0.055)
   Household Income 834-1.400 (Thousands of Pesos)          0.801     -0.762    0.738     0.719     0.714      0.243
                                                           (0.042)   (0.034)   (0.108)   (0.049)   (0.070)   (0.194)
  Household Income 1.400-1.950 (Thousands of Pesos)         0.808     -1.176    1.223     1.042     0.736      0.281
                                                           (0.069)   (0.067)   (0.292)   (0.090)   (0.146)   (0.627)
Household Income 1.950 and More (Thousands of Pesos)        0.913     -1.759    0.768     1.073     0.671     -0.380
                                                           (0.066)   (0.079)   (0.350)   (0.080)   (0.222)   (0.712)
                     Public School                          -0.528     0.303    -0.675    -0.723    -0.467    -0.086
                                                           (0.038)   (0.033)   (0.084)   (0.047)   (0.058)   (0.160)
                Private-Voucher School                      -0.273     0.301    -0.466    -0.513    -0.353    -0.058
                                                           (0.037)   (0.031)   (0.082)   (0.043)   (0.056)   (0.158)
                        Factor                              0.846      0.561     1.503     1.258     0.077     0.724
                                                           (0.013)   (0.012)   (0.035)   (0.025)   (0.029)   (0.061)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      32
          Table 8: Estimation Results for Choices ΛD1 , ΛD2 , ΛD3 , ΛD4 , ΛD5 and ΛD6 .

                                                             ΛD1       ΛD2       ΛD3       ΛD4       ΛD5       ΛD6
                       Constant                             -2.567    -3.139    -1.872    -3.716    -2.579    -2.146
                                                           (0.440)   (0.275)   (0.819)   (0.543)   (0.205)   (0.251)
                        Gender                               0.342     0.090    0.406      0.152     0.136     0.103
                                                           (0.081)   (0.045)   (0.126)   (0.083)   (0.034)   (0.045)
                          Age                                0.037     0.058    -0.029     0.083     0.044     0.039
                                                           (0.019)   (0.010)   (0.043)   (0.020)   (0.008)   (0.010)
                         North                               0.201     0.043    -0.053     0.233    -0.005     0.228
                                                           (0.170)   (0.063)   (0.230)   (0.108)   (0.045)   (0.057)
                         South                              -0.141    -0.153    -0.098    -0.150    -0.069    -0.071
                                                           (0.128)   (0.051)   (0.158)   (0.091)   (0.041)   (0.054)
                Size of Familiar Group                      -0.003     0.039     0.100     0.028     0.043     0.063
                                                           (0.028)   (0.014)   (0.040)   (0.021)    (0.01)   (0.012)
   Household Income 278-834 (Thousands of Pesos)            0.089     -0.145    0.015     -0.287    -0.293    -0.377
                                                           (0.085)   (0.046)   (0.137)   (0.088)   (0.036)   (0.042)
   Household Income 834-1.400 (Thousands of Pesos)          -0.178    -0.138    0.161     -0.425    -0.436    -0.725
                                                           (0.203)   (0.140)   (0.136)   (0.339)   (0.063)   (0.119)
  Household Income 1.400-1.950 (Thousands of Pesos)         0.118      0.345       -      0.736     -0.421    -0.718
                                                           (0.344)   (0.277)       -     (0.794)   (0.094)   (0.241)
Household Income 1.950 and More (Thousands of Pesos)           -      0.253        -      0.494     -0.677    -0.479
                                                               -     (0.406)       -     (0.827)   (0.095)   (0.174)
                     Public School                           0.497     0.542       -       0.982     0.439     0.475
                                                           (0.177)   (0.124)       -     (0.320)   (0.061)   (0.106)
                Private-Voucher School                       0.412     0.376       -       0.770     0.285     0.364
                                                           (0.161)   (0.122)       -     (0.318)   (0.057)   (0.103)
                      Scholarship                              -      -0.694       -      -0.257    -0.616    -0.296
                                                               -     (0.105)       -     (0.122)   (0.113)   (0.087)
               Agriculture and Livestock                       -       0.028       -       0.096     0.201    -0.038
                                                               -     (0.127)       -     (0.254)   (0.106)   (0.119)
                 Arts and Architecture                         -       0.125       -       0.207     0.194    -0.095
                                                               -     (0.117)       -     (0.135)   (0.099)   (0.082)
                    Basic Sciences                             -       0.336       -         -       0.170       -
                                                               -     (0.128)       -         -     (0.131)       -
                    Social Sciences                            -      -0.176       -       0.205    -0.028    -0.015
                                                               -     (0.098)       -     (0.152)   (0.081)   (0.092)
                         Law                                   -       0.067       -       0.084     0.285    -0.017
                                                               -     (0.117)       -     (0.146)   (0.088)   (0.071)
                      Education                                -      -0.377       -       0.005    -0.060    -0.159
                                                               -     (0.089)       -     (0.155)   (0.076)   (0.084)
                      Humanities                               -       0.205       -         -       0.436       -
                                                               -     (0.150)       -         -     (0.111)       -
                        Health                                 -      -0.107       -       0.100     0.200    -0.279
                                                               -     (0.106)       -     (0.129)   (0.084)   (0.073)
                      Technology                               -       0.008       -       0.126     0.181     0.034
                                                               -     (0.092)       -     (0.111)   (0.077)   (0.057)
                 Number of Semesters                           -       0.058       -       0.020     0.016     0.001
                                                               -     (0.013)       -     (0.022)   (0.010)   (0.012)
               HEI Years of Certification                   -0.008    -0.006       -      -0.073    -0.013    -0.101
                                                           (0.027)   (0.011)       -     (0.015)   (0.009)   (0.008)
                        Factor                              -0.576    -0.710    -0.565    -0.552    -0.542    -0.568
                                                           (0.124)   (0.050)   (0.182)   (0.091)   (0.035)   (0.048)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                      33
                                                         Table 9: Estimation Results for Wage Equations.

                                          W D1                   W D2                    W D3                   W D4                   W D5                   W D6           Don’t Study
                                  ΛD1 = 1    ΛD1 = 0     ΛD2 = 1    ΛD2 = 0     ΛD3 = 1     ΛD3 = 0     ΛD4 = 1    ΛD4 = 0     ΛD5 = 1    ΛD5 = 0     ΛD6 = 1    ΛD6 = 0
                     Constant      12.118      12.882      11.65      13.236     14.432       12.360     12.405      12.673     11.854      13.021     12.161      12.594    12.273
                                   (0.552)     (0.233)    (0.248)     (0.117)    (1.388)      (0.270)    (0.377)     (0.202)    (0.191)     (0.099)    (0.178)     (0.122)   (0.043)
                       Gender       0.052       -0.008     0.109       -0.044     0.471         0.079     0.253       0.055      0.175        0.001     0.200       0.024     0.222
                                   (0.129)     (0.039)    (0.053)     (0.020)    (0.200)      (0.049)    (0.080)     (0.040)    (0.042)     (0.016)    (0.037)     (0.023)   (0.012)
                           Age      0.019        0.014     0.043        0.009     -0.121        0.014     0.006       -0.001     0.032        0.008     0.023       0.009     0.013
                                   (0.029)     (0.010)    (0.013)     (0.005)    (0.076)      (0.013)    (0.020)     (0.010)    (0.010)     (0.005)    (0.009)     (0.006)   (0.002)
     Agriculture and Livestock        -         -0.697       -         -0.444        -         -0.368       -         -0.223       -         -0.400       -         -0.134      -
                                      -        (0.111)       -        (0.060)        -        (0.128)       -        (0.135)       -        (0.054)       -        (0.063)      -
         Arts and Architecture        -         -0.467       -         -0.523        -         -0.268       -         -0.348       -         -0.357       -         -0.179      -
                                      -        (0.114)       -        (0.059)        -        (0.076)       -        (0.068)       -        (0.046)       -        (0.038)      -
                Basic Sciences        -         -0.775       -         -0.558        -            -         -            -         -         -0.411       -            -        -
                                      -        (0.126)       -        (0.067)        -            -         -            -         -        (0.055)       -            -        -
                Social Sciences       -         -0.140       -         -0.157        -         -0.107       -         -0.050       -          0.096       -         -0.087      -
34




                                      -        (0.085)       -        (0.045)        -        (0.093)       -        (0.078)       -        (0.037)       -        (0.048)      -
                          Law         -         -0.735       -         -0.463        -         -0.338       -         -0.216       -         -0.332       -         -0.262      -
                                      -        (0.106)       -        (0.057)        -        (0.082)       -        (0.069)       -        (0.046)       -        (0.041)      -
                    Education         -         -0.176       -         -0.145        -          -0.27       -         -0.078       -         -0.188       -         -0.156      -
                                      -        (0.084)       -        (0.040)        -        (0.129)       -        (0.081)       -        (0.036)       -        (0.049)      -
                   Humanities         -         -0.728       -         -0.410        -         -0.295       -            -         -         -0.337       -            -        -
                                      -        (0.131)       -        (0.075)        -        (0.675)       -            -         -        (0.062)       -            -        -
                        Health        -         -0.393       -         -0.151        -          -0.08       -         -0.185       -         -0.259       -         -0.196      -
                                      -        (0.086)       -        (0.046)        -        (0.082)       -        (0.062)       -        (0.041)       -        (0.037)      -
                   Technology         -         -0.101       -         -0.102        -          0.143       -         0.115        -         -0.075       -         0.160       -
                                      -        (0.093)       -        (0.042)        -        (0.064)       -        (0.051)       -        (0.037)       -        (0.029)      -
         Number of Semesters          -         -0.038       -         -0.064        -          0.023       -         0.017        -         -0.029       -         0.002       -
                                      -        (0.012)       -        (0.006)        -        (0.016)       -        (0.011)       -        (0.005)       -        (0.006)      -
     HEI Years of Certification       -          0.007       -         -0.012        -          0.017       -         0.010        -          0.000       -         0.013       -
                                      -        (0.011)       -        (0.004)        -        (0.013)       -        (0.008)       -        (0.004)       -        (0.004)      -
                        Factor      0.151        0.358     0.062        0.247     -0.205        0.225     0.196       0.166      0.059        0.182     0.175       0.166     0.071
                                   (0.187)     (0.050)    (0.059)     (0.020)    (0.262)      (0.057)    (0.090)     (0.042)    (0.042)     (0.015)    (0.047)     (0.022)   (0.013)
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
             Table 10: Estimation Results for Test Score Equations.

                                                            GPA     Mathematics    Language
                                              Constant      1.217          0.005      -0.455
                                                          (0.048)        (0.044)     (0.045)
                                                 Gender    -0.346          0.185      -0.100
                                                          (0.009)        (0.008)     (0.008)
                                                   Age     -0.043         -0.004       0.023
                                                          (0.002)        (0.002)     (0.002)
                                                  North     0.025         -0.119      -0.212
                                                          (0.013)        (0.012)     (0.012)
                                                  South     0.053          0.065       0.026
                                                          (0.011)        (0.010)     (0.010)
                                 Size of Familiar Group    -0.008         -0.013      -0.020
                                                          (0.003)        (0.002)     (0.002)
       Household Income 278-834 (Thousands of Pesos)        0.034          0.186       0.169
                                                          (0.011)        (0.009)     (0.010)
      Household Income 834-1.400 (Thousands of Pesos)       0.135          0.335       0.286
                                                          (0.021)        (0.019)     (0.019)
    Household Income 1.400-1.950 (Thousands of Pesos)       0.280          0.531       0.418
                                                          (0.035)        (0.031)     (0.031)
Household Income 1.950 and More (Thousands of Pesos)        0.393          0.662       0.534
                                                          (0.031)        (0.028)     (0.029)
                                          Public School    -0.180         -0.473      -0.423
                                                          (0.019)        (0.018)     (0.018)
                                 Private-Voucher School    -0.189         -0.397      -0.294
                                                          (0.018)        (0.016)     (0.016)
                         Father’s Education: 8-12 Years    -0.091          0.029       0.037
                                                          (0.015)        (0.013)     (0.013)
                           Father’s Education: 12 Years    -0.173          0.036       0.084
                                                          (0.015)        (0.013)     (0.013)
                Father’s Education: More than 12 Years     -0.135          0.190       0.225
                                                          (0.017)        (0.015)     (0.015)
                        Mother’s Education: 8-12 Years     -0.117          0.026       0.054
                                                          (0.015)        (0.013)     (0.013)
                          Mother’s Education: 12 Years     -0.141          0.085       0.134
                                                          (0.016)        (0.013)     (0.014)
               Mother’s Education: More than 12 Years      -0.082          0.196       0.269
                                                          (0.018)        (0.015)     (0.016)
                                                 Factor     0.818          1.000       0.986
                                                          (0.006)        (0.000)     (0.006)
Note: Standard errors in parentheses.




                    Table 11: Goodness of Fit - Model Choices.

                                  Actual     Model    P-Value
                            D1    0.718      0.719     0.841
                            D2    0.427      0.427     0.969
                            D3    0.779      0.772     0.120
                            D4    0.663      0.672     0.096
                            D5    0.234      0.234     0.986
                            D6    0.367      0.357     0.065




                                            35
                    Table 12: Estimated Impact of the SGL ΩSGL
                                                               
                                                           D1    on Enrollment.

                             Income Category
                                     1                      2            3            Unconditional
                   Percentage Points 0.174∗∗∗               0.080∗∗∗     0.113∗∗∗     0.156∗∗∗
                     Percentage (%) 30.7%                   14.4%        9.3%         24.1%
     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).

                       Table 13: Estimated Impact of the SGL on Dropout Rates.

                                   ΥSGL
                                    D4 =1                                  −0.005∗∗∗
                                   ΥSGL
                                    D5 =1                                  −0.092∗∗∗
                                   Note:   ∗∗∗
                                                 denotes statistical significance at 1%.




 Table 14: Estimated Impact of the SGL on Dropout Rates Conditional on Income and Factor
                                      (University).

                                                          Income Category
                                                     1           2          3              Unconditional
                              1                  −0.034∗∗∗ −0.013∗∗∗ −0.076∗∗∗              −0.028∗∗∗
            Factor            2                  −0.012∗∗∗    0.010∗∗∗  −0.043∗∗∗           −0.006∗∗∗
            Quintile          3                  −0.005  ∗∗   0.010∗∗∗  −0.035∗∗∗             −0.001
                              4                  −0.003∗      0.011∗∗    −0.010∗              0.002
                              5                  0.005 ∗∗∗     0.012    −0.011∗∗∗            0.006∗∗∗
                         Unconditional           −0.009∗∗∗    0.005∗∗   −0.036∗∗∗           −0.005∗∗∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).

  Table 15: Estimated Impact of the SGL on Dropout Rates Conditional on Income and PSU
                                      (University).

                                                        Income Category
                                                     1         2         3                 Unconditional
                               1                 −0.028∗∗∗  −0.008 ∗ −0.071∗∗∗              −0.022∗∗∗
              PSU              2                 −0.007∗∗∗   0.005   −0.062∗∗∗              −0.004∗∗∗
             Quintile          3                 −0.003∗    0.008∗∗∗ −0.049∗∗∗                −0.001
                               4                 −0.004∗∗∗  0.009∗∗∗ −0.034∗∗∗                −0.001
                               5                  −0.000    0.009∗∗∗ −0.021∗∗∗                0.002∗
                          Unconditional          −0.009∗∗∗ 0.005∗∗ −0.036∗∗∗                −0.005∗∗∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).




                                                             36
 Table 16: Estimated Impact of the SGL on Dropout Rates Conditional on Income and Factor
                                        (TI/PI).

                                                                 Income Category
                                                             1          2          3                    Unconditional
                                          1              −0.156∗∗∗  −0.061∗∗∗  −0.058∗∗                  −0.118∗∗∗
             Factor                       2              −0.138∗∗∗  −0.059∗∗∗    −0.009                  −0.111∗∗∗
             Quintile                     3              −0.114∗∗∗ −0.039∗∗∗     −0.026                  −0.092∗∗∗
                                          4              −0.089∗∗∗  −0.043∗∗∗  −0.053∗∗                  −0.078∗∗∗
                                          5              −0.067∗∗∗  −0.024∗∗∗  −0.069∗∗∗                 −0.059∗∗∗
                                     Unconditional       −0.110∗∗∗ −0.047∗∗∗ −0.043∗∗∗                   −0.092∗∗∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).

  Table 17: Estimated Impact of the SGL on Dropout Rates Conditional on Income and PSU
                                        (TI/PI).

                                                                 Income Category
                                                             1          2          3                    Unconditional
                                          1              −0.147∗∗∗ −0.061∗∗∗     −0.022                  −0.125∗∗∗
              PSU                         2              −0.131∗∗∗ −0.063∗∗∗     −0.020                  −0.111∗∗∗
             Quintile                     3              −0.113∗∗∗  −0.047∗∗∗    −0.034                  −0.093∗∗∗
                                          4              −0.085∗∗∗ −0.039∗∗∗ −0.058∗∗                    −0.071∗∗∗
                                          5              −0.071∗∗∗ −0.032∗∗∗ −0.066∗∗∗                   −0.056∗∗∗
                                     Unconditional       −0.110∗∗∗ −0.047∗∗∗ −0.043∗∗∗                   −0.092∗∗∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).

       Table 18: Estimation of the Impact of Having Attended a HEI with SGL on Wages

                                                         Parameter         Estimate
                                                          ∆SGL
                                                            D1 ,D2         −0.028∗∗∗
                                                          ∆SGL
                                                            D3 ,D4           0.005
                                                          ∆SGL
                                                            D1 ,D5         −0.064∗∗∗
                                                          ∆SGL
                                                            D3 ,D6          −0.011∗

    Note:   ∗∗∗
                  ,   ∗∗
                           and   ∗
                                     denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.




                                                                      37
                                                                                    
     Table 19: Estimated Impact of Having Attended a HEI with SGL on Wages ∆˜ SGL
                                                                              D1 ,D2
                       Conditional on Income and Factor (University).

                                                     Income Category
                                                 1           2          3                 Unconditional
                               1             −0.150∗∗∗ −0.116∗∗∗ −0.132∗∗∗                 −0.130∗∗∗
            Factor             2             −0.115∗∗∗   0.038∗∗     −0.034                −0.071∗∗∗
            Quintile           3             −0.072∗∗∗   −0.005      0.075∗                −0.028∗∗∗
                               4              0.002       0.034∗     0.082∗∗                 0.023∗
                               5              0.010      0.060∗∗∗    0.133∗∗                0.043∗∗∗
                          Unconditional      −0.056∗∗∗   −0.014 ∗     0.027                −0.028∗∗∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).
                                                                                    
     Table 20: Estimated Impact of Having Attended a HEI with SGL on Wages ∆˜ SGL
                                                                              D3 ,D4
                         Conditional on Income and Factor (TI/PI).

                                                      Income Category
                                                    1         2         3              Unconditional
                                 1              −0.087 ∗∗∗ −0.048 −0.114                −0.072∗∗∗
               Factor            2              −0.061∗∗∗ −0.004      0.014             −0.040∗∗∗
               Quintile          3               −0.017    0.069∗∗∗   0.068               0.012
                                 4               0.015      0.036    0.199∗               0.024∗
                                 5               0.015     0.089∗∗∗   0.111              0.032∗∗∗
                            Unconditional        −0.009    0.036∗∗∗   0.064               0.005

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).
                                                                                    
     Table 21: Estimated Impact of Having Attended a HEI with SGL on Wages ∆˜ SGL
                                                                              D1 ,D5
                       Conditional on Income and Factor (University).

                                                      Income Category
                                                 1           2          3                 Unconditional
                               1             −0.179 ∗∗∗  −0.236 ∗∗∗ −0.270∗∗∗              −0.219∗∗∗
            Factor             2             −0.112 ∗∗∗  −0.137 ∗∗∗ −0.141∗∗∗              −0.126∗∗∗
            Quintile           3             −0.047 ∗∗∗  −0.063 ∗∗∗ −0.082∗∗∗              −0.060∗∗∗
                               4              0.011       −0.024    −0.082∗∗                 −0.013
                               5             0.096 ∗∗∗    0.036∗∗     0.035                 0.065∗∗∗
                          Unconditional      −0.031 ∗∗∗  −0.086 ∗∗∗ −0.110∗∗∗              −0.064∗∗∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).




                                                          38
                                                                                    
     Table 22: Estimated Impact of Having Attended a HEI with SGL on Wages ∆˜ SGL
                                                                              D3 ,D6
                         Conditional on Income and Factor (TI/PI).

                                                     Income Category
                                                   1         2         3                Unconditional
                                1              −0.096∗∗∗ −0.031     −0.182               −0.072∗∗∗
              Factor            2              −0.075∗∗∗ −0.007      0.110               −0.052∗∗∗
              Quintile          3               −0.010    0.052∗∗    0.197                  0.013
                                4               −0.019    −0.005     0.128                 −0.013
                                5               −0.001    0.055∗∗∗ 0.293∗∗∗                 0.014
                           Unconditional       −0.025∗∗∗   0.017     0.075                −0.011∗

     Note: ∗∗∗ , ∗∗ and ∗ denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively. Income categories are defined
as follows: between 0 and 278.000 pesos (category 1), between 278.000 and 834.000 pesos (category 2) and 834.000
or more pesos (category 3).




                                                          39
      Table 23: Estimated Impact of the CAE on Wages Conditional on Years of Certification and Factor (University).

                                                                                 Years of   Certification
                                                      0              2             3            4          5        6          7      Unconditional
                             1                    −0.201∗∗∗      −0.158∗∗∗      -0.041        0.016    −0.097∗    0.002     -0.088     −0.130∗∗∗
     Factor                  2                    −0.157∗∗∗       -0.025         0.004       0.032       0.059   0.127∗∗∗   -0.081     −0.071∗∗∗
40




     Quintile                3                    −0.087∗∗∗        -0.07         0.018       -0.009     0.081∗   0.162∗∗∗   0.135∗     −0.028∗∗∗
                             4                    −0.042∗∗∗        0.017        0.069∗      0.164∗∗∗ 0.123∗∗∗    0.146∗∗∗   0.157∗       0.023∗
                             5                    −0.027∗          0.060       0.113∗∗∗     0.140∗∗∗ 0.141∗∗∗    0.166∗∗∗   0.270∗∗     0.043∗∗∗
                        Unconditional             −0.167∗∗∗      −0.188∗∗∗       0.015       0.063∗    −0.071∗    0.016      0.090     −0.028∗∗∗
     Note:   ∗∗∗
                   ,   ∗∗
                            and   ∗
                                      denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
      Table 24: Estimated Impact of the CAE on Wages Conditional on Years of Certification and Factor (TI/PI).

                                                                               Years of Certification
                                                       0            2         3         4           5         6           7      Unconditional
                             1                    −0.092∗∗∗      -0.100    -0.052 −0.167∗∗        0.097     0.025      -0.050     −0.072∗∗∗
     Factor                  2                    −0.073∗∗∗      -0.016    -0.045    -0.032       0.033     0.082       0.035     −0.040∗∗∗
41




     Quintile                3                     -0.011        -0.068    0.049     -0.005       0.117    0.158∗∗∗    -0.069       0.012
                             4                       0.01         0.061     -0.04    -0.003      0.098∗    0.099∗∗      0.151       0.024∗
                             5                      0.003        -0.028    0.035 0.128∗∗∗ −0.013∗          0.196∗∗∗   0.288∗∗∗     0.032∗∗∗
                        Unconditional             −0.018∗∗       -0.020    -0.002     0.012      0.058∗∗   0.128∗∗∗    0.109∗       0.005
     Note:   ∗∗∗
                   ,   ∗∗
                            and   ∗
                                      denote statistical significance at 1%, 5% and 10%, respectively.
     ND     Table 25: Number of Average Pension Contributions for University Enrolled Students.
(14,424)
                                                         Year          SGL         No SGL            Same?
                                                         2007          2.53           2.31              No
                                                         2008          6.12           5.69              No
                                                         2009         10.28           9.84             Yes
                                                         2010         15.41          15.44             Yes

           Note: Students who did not dropout in the first year are considered. Mean difference tests were computed.

               Table 26: Number of Average Pension Contributions for TI/PI Enrolled Students.

                                                         Year          SGL         No SGL            Same?
                                                         2007          2.51           3.46              No
                                                         2008          6.37           8.46              No
                                                         2009         11.79          14.91              No
                                                         2010         18.88          22.61              No

           Note: Students who did not dropout in the first year are considered. Mean difference tests were computed.


       Figures

                                                             Total Undergraduate Enrollment
                 900000




                 800000




                 700000




                 600000




                 500000




                 400000




                 300000




                 200000




                 100000
                      1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010




                          Figure 1: Total Undergraduate Enrollment. Source: SIES/MINEDUC.




                                                                                   42
    D
(1312)                                  Total Undergraduate Enrollment by HEI Type
           600000

                                 University
                                 CFT
                                 IP
           500000




           400000




           300000




           200000




           100000




                0
                        1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010




         Figure 2: Total Undergraduate Enrollment by HEI Type. Source: SIES/MINEDUC.



                                                                     Number of Student Aids
            450000




            400000




            350000




            300000




            250000




            200000




            150000




            100000




             50000
                 1989     1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009




                            Figure 3: Number of Student Aids. Source: SIES/MINEDUC.




                                                                                     43
(9404)           0.5
                                                                      Aids−Enrollment Ratio



                0.45




                 0.4




                0.35




                 0.3




                0.25
                   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009




         Figure 4: Aids-Enrollment Ratio. Source: Authors’ Elaboration based on SIES/MINEDUC.




                                                                                     44
                                                                    D1                 Don’t Study
                                                                                        (13,301)
                                                                           Study
                                                                          (33,814)

                                                                    D2
                                     Apply for SGL                                   Don’t Apply for SGL
                                       (14,424)                                          (19,390)


                                     D3                                                            D4
              University                            TI/PI                    University                         TI/PI
                (11,242)                             (3,182)                   (12,861)                          (6,529)
45




                    D5                                 D6                            D5                             D6

       SGL                  No SGL         SGL                 No SGL
      (2,626)                (8,616)      (1,168)               (2,014)        (Λ5, W 5)                        (Λ6, W 6)
                                                                             (10.6%, 12.8)                    (20%, 12.7)
           D1               D2                D3               D4


        (Λ1, W 1)        (Λ2, W 2)         (Λ3, W 3)        (Λ4, W 4)
      (6.1%, 12.7) (8.9%, 12.7)           (5.9%, 12.8) (17.3%, 12.7)

     Figure 5: Decision Scheme. Number of Observations by Node, Average Dropout Rates and Average Natural Logarithm of Wages in
                                                            parentheses.
                  .5
                  .4
                  .3
        Density
                  .2
                  .1
                  0




                       −4              −2                     0                       2                       4
                                                            Factor


                            Figure 6: Unconditional Distribution of the Factor.


The estimated distribution, f ∼ ρ1 N (τ1 , σ12 ) + ρ2 N (τ2 , σ22 ) + ρ3 N (τ3 , σ32 ), is given by the following parameters:


                                             τ = (−0.547     0.510    0.136)
                                             2
                                            σ = (5.612     5.191     2.280)
                                             ρ = (0.412    0.391     0.197)




                                                          46
          .8
          .6
Density
  .4      .2
          0




               −4            −2               0               2       4
                                            Factor

                                   Study             Don’t Study



               Figure 7: Distribution of Factor by Study Decision.
          .6
          .4
Density
          .2
          0




               −4            −2               0               2       4
                                            Factor

                                   Apply             Don’t Apply



               Figure 8: Distribution of Factor by SGL Application.




                                           47
   W

             .8




                                                                             .8
(2,014)
             .6




                                                                             .6
          Density




                                                                          Density
            .4




                                                                            .4
             .2




                                                                             .2
             0




                                                                             0
                    −4   −2                  0               2   4                  −4        −2             0                   2       4
                                           Factor                                                          Factor

                                   University         CFT/IP                                       University             CFT/IP



                          (a) Apply for SGL                                              (b) Don’t Apply for SGL

                                        Figure 9: Distribution of Factor by HEI Type.
             .8




                                                                             .8
             .6




                                                                             .6
          Density




                                                                          Density
            .4




                                                                            .4
             .2




                                                                             .2
             0




                                                                             0




                    −2         0                     2           4                  −3   −2         −1              0                1   2
                                           Factor                                                          Factor

                                     SGL            No SGL                                           SGL                No SGL



                              (a) University                                                       (b) TI/PI

                               Figure 10: Distribution of Factor by SGL Assignment.




                                                                     48
        .8




                                                                                     .8




                                                                                                                                                                      .8
        .6




                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                      .6
     Density




                                                                           Density




                                                                                                                                                                   Density
       .4




                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                     .4
        .2




                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                      .2
        0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
               −2            0                         2               4                  −2           −1           0                1             2       3                 −2         −1               0                   1       2
                                       Factor                                                                               Factor                                                                     Factor

                             Dropout                Don’t Dropout                                                Dropout                 Don’t Dropout                                       Dropout                Don’t Dropout



                    (a) Apply, University and SGL                                               (b) Apply, University and No SGL                                                  (c) Apply, TI/PI and SGL
49




                                                                                     .6




                                                                                                                                                                      .8
        .8




                                                                                                                                                                      .6
        .6




                                                                                     .4
     Density




                                                                           Density




                                                                                                                                                                   Density
                                                                                                                                                                    .4
     .4




                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                      .2
        .2
        0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
               −3      −2        −1             0               1      2                       −2           −1          0                1             2       3             −3    −2           −1              0                1   2
                                       Factor                                                                               Factor                                                                     Factor

                             Dropout                Don’t Dropout                                                Dropout                 Don’t Dropout                                       Dropout                Don’t Dropout



                    (d) Apply, TI/PI and No SGL                                                     (e) Don’t Apply and University                                                (f) Don’t Apply and TI/PI

                                                                    Figure 11: Distribution of Factor by Dropout Decision.
                                                University                                                                 CFT/IP

(7692)
              0.02                                                                         0

                0
                                                                                        −0.05
             −0.02
                                                                                         −0.1
             −0.04
                                                                                        −0.15
             −0.06

             −0.08                                                                       −0.2
                     5                                                         3                5                                                     3
                            4                                                                          4
                                 3                                                                          3
                                        2                        2                                                 2                    2
                                            1                                                                          1
                                                 1                                                                         1
                     Factor Quintile                         Income Category                    Factor Quintile                     Income Category



                                                University                                                                 CFT/IP



              0.02                                                                         0

                0
                                                                                        −0.05
             −0.02
                                                                                         −0.1
             −0.04
                                                                                        −0.15
             −0.06

             −0.08                                                                       −0.2
                     5                                                         3                5                                                     3
                            4                                                                          4
                                 3                                                                          3
                                        2                        2                                                 2                    2
                                            1                                                                          1
                                                 1                                                                         1
                         PSU Quintile                        Income Category                        PSU Quintile                    Income Category




   Figure 12: Impact of the SGL on Dropout Rates Conditional on Income and Skill Measures.




                                                                                   50
