                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE FEMALE LABOR FORCE AND LONG-RUN DEVELOPMENT:
            THE AMERICAN EXPERIENCE IN COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE

                                          Claudia Olivetti

                                       Working Paper 19131
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w19131


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




This paper was prepared for the "Human Capital in History: The American Record" conference in
Cambridge, MA, December 2012. I thank Francine Blau, for her insightful discussion of the paper.
Comments from Carola Frydman and Robert Margo are also gratefully acknowledged. Many thanks
to Marric Buessing for her invaluable research assistance and to Sharon D'Souza for her help with
data collection. I am also grateful to Berthold Herrendorf, Richard Rogerson and Akos Valentinyi
for sharing their historical data on structural transformation. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Claudia Olivetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Female Labor Force and Long-run Development: The American Experience in Comparative
Perspective
Claudia Olivetti
NBER Working Paper No. 19131
June 2013
JEL No. J22,N11,N12

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper provides additional evidence on the U-shaped relationship between the process of economic
development and women's labor force participation. The experience of the United States is studied
in a comparative perspective relative to a sample of rich economies observed over the period 1890-2005.
The analysis confirms the existence of a U-shaped female labor supply function, coming from both
cross-country and within country variation. Further analysis of a large cross section of economies observed
over the post-WWII period suggests that the timing of a country's transition to a modern path of economic
development affects the shape of women's labor supply.


Claudia Olivetti
Boston University
Department of Economics
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
olivetti@bu.edu
1    Introduction
The nature and extent of segmentation of economic activity across genders and its changing
roles during the course of economic development has been a central topic of inquire since
Ester Boserup’s pioneering work on Woman’s Role in Economic Development. This is of
course a complex phenomenon and it’s systematic analysis is complicated by measurement
issues. Goldin’s work greatly contributed to its understanding and inspired much of the
subsequent work on the topic. In a series of seminal papers, Goldin establishes the existence
of a U-shaped labor supply of women across the process of economic development, and the
important roles played by education and the emergence of a white-collar sector in fostering
the paid employment of married women.

    The absence of a clear distinction between market production and work for the family
affects the measurement of labor force participation in early phases of economic development,
especially for women. Goldin’s extensive work to fill the gaps in the historical record on
women’s work in the United States reveals that female labor force participation was U-
shaped: it declined during the 19th century, reached the bottom sometimes in the 1920s, and
then it steadily increased during the 20th century.
    Goldin (1986, 1990) argues that, until the late nineteenth century, women in the United
States, whether married or single, worked almost exclusively in the home or as unpaid labor
in family enterprises. This work involved not only the care of children and the upkeep of
the house, but also goods production activities such as the cultivation and preparation of
food and the manufacture of many of the goods used in the home or sold in the marketplace
(clothing, canned food etc.). Women, both on farms and in cities, were active participants in
the labor force when the home and work activities could be performed in the same place. But
their participation declined as the nature of the production process changed and production
moved from the household to factories and offices.
    Official statistics, however, might not capture the full extent of female participation to the
labor market going back in time, especially for married women. According to Census data,
the labor participation for white women was 16.3 percent in 1890 and it increased to 24.5
percent by 1940, when the census established its labor force construct. As shown in Goldin
(1990), the figure for 1890 heavily underestimates women’s work, especially for married, white
women whose participation rate was particularly low, 2.5 percent (data are from Goldin 1990,
Table 2.1). Based on her calculations, adding paid and unpaid farm labor of married women
and boardinghouse keepers would imply a labor force participation rate for white women in
1890 similar to that observed in 1940. Moreover, Goldin (1986) shows that female labor force
participation in 1890 might have been considerably lower than earlier in the 19th century and
in the late 18th century. Thus, more inclusive measures of labor supply trace a U-shaped



                                                2
function: after declining for about a century, the female labor force participation rate was as
high in 1940 as it was in 1890 and kept rising thereafter. The bottom of the U must have
occurred somewhere between 1890 and 1940.
       Goldin (1995) finds further evidence of a U-shaped female labor supply function with
economic development (as measured by GDP per capita) using a large cross-section of coun-
tries observed in the first half of the 1980s. Goldin also establishes that increasing women’s
education and the emergence of the white-collar sector are important determinants of this
pattern, both historically and across countries. Subsequent work by Mammen and Paxson
(2000), Luci (2009) and Lundberg (2010) provides additional evidence of a U-shaped labor
supply based on larger panels of economies observed in the 1970s and 1980s and for the years
1965 to 2005, respectively.1

       This paper builds on this work by providing additional evidence on the relationship be-
tween the process of economic development and women’s labor force participation. Specif-
ically, it investigates whether the United States experience was exceptional historically and
whether the timing of a country’s transition to a modern path of economic development
affects the shape of women’s labor supply.
       First, the experience of the United States is studied in a comparative perspective relative
to a sample of economically advanced economies. Pre-WWII data on labor force partici-
pation rates and sectoral employment by gender from the International Historical Statistics
(IHS, Mitchell, 1998) are combined with comparable post-WWII data from the International
Labour Organization (ILO) to construct a sample of sixteen developed economies for which
data are consistently available for most of the 1890 to 2005 period. The sample includes the
following countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Finland, Germany, Ire-
land, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom and the United
States.2 The analysis confirms the existence of a U-shaped female labor supply function,
coming from both cross-country and within country variation.
       Next, ILO data for the years 1950 to 2005 are used to study the link between female labor
force participation and income in a large cross-section of countries. The analysis of this long
panel confirms the findings of Goldin (1990), Mammen and Paxson (2000) and Luci (2009).
In addition, it shows that the U-shape is more muted when early OECD economies are not
included in the sample. One possible explanation of this evidence is that the stigma towards
married women’s participation to labor market, or women’s dislike for factory production,
might be lower when manufacturing production is cleaner or less brawn intensive than it was
   1
      See Blau, Ferber and Winkler (2010, Chapter 12) for a comparative discussion of a recent cross-section of
world economies. This work includes a discussion of the experience of the former Soviet countries as well as
differences among African economies.
    2
      Far from being perfect, these data are as close as possible to being harmonized in terms of the definition
of the employment construct. See section 3.1 and section 7 for a detailed discussion.



                                                       3
in the 19th century. For example, if, as it is the case with electronics in Asia, industrialization
is associated with an increased demand for fine motor skills (in which women have a compar-
ative advantage), then industrialization can generate an increase in women’s relative wages
that, by counteracting the income effect, could potentially be associated with a smaller drop
in female labor force participation.
       Lastly, the evolution of women’s employment is linked to the process of structural trans-
formation. This process is defined in the growth literature as the reallocation of labor across
the three main sectors of production: agriculture, manufacturing and services.3 The typical
process of sectoral reallocation over the course of economic development involves a systematic
fall in the share of labor allocated to agriculture, a hump-shaped change in the share of labor
in manufacturing, which increases in the early stages of the reallocation process and then
declines, and a steady increase in the share of labor in services. This paper establishes gen-
der differentials in the process of sectoral re-allocation. The share of women employed in the
agricultural sector drops more rapidly than that of men. The employment share in manufac-
turing exhibits the distinct hump-shaped profile for both genders but women’s profile is much
flatter than men’s. The employment share in services increases much more rapidly for women
than for men. Interestingly, the gender differentials are smaller in emerging economies.
       Taken together, these findings seem to suggest that the timing of a country’s transforma-
tion from agriculture to manufacturing determines whether female labor force participation
experiences the first, downward portion of the U. The U-shaped association between eco-
nomic development and female labor force participation seems to be a feature of economies
that went through the transition from agriculture to manufacturing in the nineteenth century.
The cleaner, precision manufacturing of the present time and the rapidly expanding service
economy in some developing countries may be less likely to trigger norms against women’s
work.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the
literature. Section 3 discusses data collection and presents the analysis for the historical
sample of developed economies. Section 4 analyzes the cross-section of world’s economies
from 1950 to 2005. Section 5 documents gender differentials associated to the process of
structural transformation. Section 6 concludes.
   3
     This process has been extensively documented starting with the work by Kuznets (1966) and Maddison
(1980). Recent work by Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013) provides systematic evidence about the
‘facts’ of structural transformation for a large cross-section of countries and going back in time as far as
possible.




                                                     4
2    Background
The relationship between gender equality and economic development has been widely inves-
tigated. On the one end, gender equality contributes to economic development, particularly
when the well-being of children is involved. On the other end, economic development might
foster gender equality. Among the many useful indicators of women’s economic status, in-
cluding women’s educational attainment, health, role in politics and legal rights, labor force
participation is arguably the most fundamental to the evolution of gender roles. However, in
the early stages of economic development growth initially lowers female participation to the
(formal) labor market, and only subsequently is associated with higher female employment.
For this reason, Goldin (1995) points out that the positive relationship between women’s
status and economic development might be camouflaged, and opposing views on whether
economic growth enhances gender equality might arise.
    What do we know or can speculate about the U-shaped female labor supply function and
its determinants?
    A rich literature exists that analyzes this phenomenon with reference to supply and de-
mand factors that played an important role in the evolution of female labor force participa-
tion, and can explain the observed cross-country variation (cfr. Goldin (1990, 2006), Blau
(1998) and Blau and Kahn (2007) for a comprehensive discussion of the factors affecting the
trends in the United States at different points in time; Blau et. al. (2010, Ch.11) for interna-
tional comparisons, and Lundberg (2010) for a discussion of the changing sexual division of
labor with economic development.) Here, the discussion is organized around the link between
female labor force participation and structural transformation.
    Women’s presumably distinct influence on production across phases of economic devel-
opment, ranging from agricultural to industrial and postindustrial, depends on the degree of
substitution between their own labor in agricultural production and other activities, on the
degree of substitution between labor and capital, and between male and female labor inputs
under different production, organizational, and social conditions.
    For example, the declining portion of the U-shape can be explained by the change in the
nature of agricultural work as an economy moves away from subsistence agriculture. This
change typically involves a shift from very labor-intensive technologies, where women are
heavily involved as family workers, to capital-intensive agricultural technologies where men
tend to have a comparative advantage because of the physical strength these technologies
require. For example, as noted by Boserup (1970), plough cultivation is much more capital
intensive than shifting cultivation, and it requires significant strength to be operated. Be-
cause of these requirements, she argues, when plough agriculture is practiced, men have an
advantage in farming, and this might originate traditional gender role attitudes that affect



                                               5
the gender division of labor, potentially lowering female labor force participation.4
       The early transition to a mostly industrial economy is characterized by conflicting forces
affecting women’s work. For instance, in the United States, the expansion of the manufactur-
ing sector was accompanied by a process of de-skilling as the factory system began to displace
the artisanal shop in the 1820s (Goldin and Sokoloff 1982). De-skilling became rapidly more
marked as production increasingly mechanized with the adoption of steam power after 1850
(Atack, Bateman, and Margo 2008). Goldin and Sokoloff (1984) argue that the United States
agricultural areas, where the marginal products of females and children are low relative to
those of adult men (which is, in and of itself a function of the agricultural technology used),
were the first to industrialize. This “relative productivity hypothesis” predicts that the lower
the relative productivity of females and children in the pre-industrial agricultural or tradi-
tional economy, the earlier manufacturing is likely to evolve.
       Thus, it seems that with the increasing industrialization happening during the 19th cen-
tury there was initially a greater demand for (relatively unskilled) female labor. Why then
female labor force participation decreased during early industrialization?
       First, as shown by Katz and Margo (2013), the demand for unskilled female workers was
probably not exceedingly high. They show that the share of female workers was positively
correlated with the use of steam and water power, and with capital deepening. However,
the positive correlation largely disappears (becoming negative for steam power) once they
control for establishment size, which is positively associated with the percent of unskilled
workers, as in Goldin and Sokoloff (1982). Moreover, as they argue, “the evidence on size
and relative use of female and child labor might not reflect the full extent of division of labor
in nineteenth century manufacturing, because many establishments did not hire women or
children, and yet were relatively large.” (Katz and Margo, 2013, pg. 23)
       Second, there was some kind of redistribution of employment across groups, as single
women, who began to leave the house to work in factories, displaced widows handling the
artisanal shop of their deceased husbands (Goldin, 1986).
       Third, as emphasized in Goldin (1990), production processes in the early phases of indus-
trialization were characterized by dirty, noisy and often physically demanding jobs. While it
might be acceptable for a single woman to work in such conditions, the expectation was that
a single woman would work only until her marriage. Stated differently, there was a stigma
against married women working as manual laborers in factory-type work.5 Because of the
changing nature of agricultural production, as well as the stigma attached to women’s em-
   4
      Recent work by Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn (2013) proves Boserup’s hypothesis right. They show that
still today the descendants of societies that traditionally practiced plough agriculture, have less equal gender
norms and female participation in the workplace, as well as in politics and entrepreneurial activities.
    5
      The stigma towards a working married woman was strong. In August 1936, a Gallup Poll asked: “Should
a married woman earn money if she has a husband capable of supporting her?”. A resounding 82 percent
answered yes.



                                                       6
ployment in manufacturing, the ‘income effect’ dominates during this phase of development,
and female labor force participation declines.
        The increasing portion of the U during the transition from the industrial to the post-
industrial phase of economic development is unambiguously associated with increasing female
labor force participation and changing gender roles. The expansion of the service sector with
its attendant white-collar jobs and/or the pervasive skilled-biased technological change in
the economy (see Goldin and Katz, 2008, and Katz and Margo, 2013) greatly facilitate this
transformation (Goldin, 1990, 2006). As intellectual skills grew in importance in market pro-
duction relatively to physical power, increasing relative wages lowered fertility and increased
labor force participation (Galor and Weil, 1996).6 Other types of technological progress rein-
forced this process by affecting women’s investment in human capital and fertility choices.7
        This discussion, of course, provides an incomplete representation of the vast literature on
this topic. Section 5 will return to the link between structural transformation and female
labor supply.


3        The American Experience in Comparative Perspective: De-
         veloped Economies.
This section uses data from sixteen high-income countries over the period 1890 to 2005 to trace
the relationship between economic development and women’s labor force participation. The
data set is constructed using information reported from the International Historical Statistics
(Mitchell, 1998) and, for the post-1950 period, the International Labour Organization (ILO).8
The past experience of economically advanced countries is interesting. While they are similar
to the United States in many ways, they transitioned across stages of economic development
at different points in time. Table 1 summarizes statistics on log GDP per capita expressed in
1990 international dollars (column 2), sectoral employment shares (column 3 to 5) and value
added shares (column 6 to 8), for a subset of developed economies at three points in time:
1890, 1950, and 2000. The first panel in the table reports statistics for the United States
followed by Belgium, the Netherlands, France, Spain, Sweden and the UK.9 .
    6
     Most models in this vein predict a monotonic relationship between growth and female labor force partici-
pation. Galor and Weill (1996, pg. 384-385) is an exception. They propose extensions of their model that can
generate the U-shaped labor supply. For example, by adding a technology for producing market goods that is
not fully rival with raising children at home and does not require capital.
   7
     For example, progress in medical technologies related to motherhood (Albanesi and Olivetti, 2011),
progress in contraceptive technology (Goldin and Katz, 2002, Bailey, 2006) and progress in household technolo-
gies in new domestic appliances (Greenwood, Seshadri and Yorukoglu, 2005). Changing cultural norms and
attitudes towards gender roles might also have played a role (see for example, Fernandez, Fogli and Olivetti,
2004, Fogli and Veldkamp, 2011, and Fernandez, 2013.)
   8
     See Data Appendix for details about data sources and measurement issues.
   9
     Data on GDP per capita are from Maddison, 2010. Sectoral data are constructed and discussed in
Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2012). The choice of this specific subset of economies in my sample is


                                                      7
   The range of experiences spanned by these countries is quite heterogeneous. The UK had
the highest (log) GDP per capita in 1890, only 16 percent of its workers were employed in
agriculture and the agricultural value added share was below 10 percent, a relatively “postin-
dustrial” value. The UK, in other words, was well ahead in its process of industrialization.
The manufacturing sector employed 44 percent of its workers (valued added share of 41 per-
cent). The broad service sector employed 40 percent of its workers and had the highest valued
added share, 50 percent. The other countries were well behind in the process of structural
transformation. In the United States, the country with the third highest log GDP per capita
in 1890, the employment share in agriculture was still quite high (42 percent), although the
size of the sector as measured by its value added share was already less than 20 percent,
an indication of low labor productivity in agriculture. The rest of the economically active
population was equally distributed in the manufacturing sector (27 percent) and in services
(30 percent), but the service sector had the largest valued added share (46 percent). The re-
maining economies were still prevalently agricultural at the turn of the 20th Century. At least
half of the economically active population in France, Spain and Sweden, the three countries
with the lowest log GDP per capita in 1890, was employed in agriculture. However, by 1950
most of these countries had industrialized and were on the verge of a phase of rapid economic
growth. In all countries, except for Spain, the employment share in agriculture had dropped
to less than 30 percent (with a value added share around or below 10 percent), and the log of
GDP per capita was around 9, a level that is associated with the onset of the decline of the
manufacturing sector and the rise of the so-called service economy (Herrendorf et al. 2012).
By 2000, all the countries in the table are in a mature phase of economic development. The
employment and value added shares are 5 percent or lower in agriculture, approximately 20
percent in manufacturing, and 70 percent or higher in the service sector.10
   Table 1 shows that, although these countries are comparable in terms of standards of
living (and have been since the 1970s, at least), they still display substantial cross-country
variation in the timing of economic development and industrial transformation. Consequently,
looking at the past experience of currently developed economies can contribute to our under-
standing of the U-shape relationship between economic development and female labor force
participation.

3.1    Data and Measurement Issues
The history of women’s participation in market work is complicated by measurement issues.
The concept of being in the labor force is often ambiguous, and its definition can vary
substantially across countries and time periods as well as over time within a country. This
guided by the availability of sectoral value added shares from Herrendorf et al. (2013).
  10
     The convergence of employment and valued added shares during economic development is yet another
interesting regularity documented in Herrendorf et al. (2013).


                                                 8
section describes the data collection effort and data comparability across countries and within
a country over time. The end product is a balanced panel of 16 high-income economies for
which data are available for most of the period. That is, for these countries, information by
gender spanning the entire 1890-2005 period on both labor force participation, defined over
the population aged 15 and above, and the sectoral distribution of workers is consistently
available. This sample of “developed economies” includes: Australia, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, France, Finland, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, United Kingdom and the United States. The year 1890 is the first for which a
starting data point is available for almost all countries, except Australia and Denmark for
which the first available year is 1900. The end date is the latest year for which International
Labour Organization (ILO) statistics are available. The data are available at 10- or 5-year
intervals for most of the countries in the sample. Starting with 1990, data at 5-year intervals
are available for all countries.11

The United States

Prior to 1940, only workers who reported an occupation were classified as ‘gainfully employed’
and thus included in the labor force in the United States. Starting in 1940, and consistent
with the ILO construct of ‘economically active’ population, the definition of labor force
participation was revised to include all individuals working for pay, unpaid family workers,
and also the unemployed seeking work during the survey week. It is not surprising then
that the International Historical Statistics (IHS), that uses the ILO definition of labor force
participation, does not report data for the United States prior to 1940. To circumvent
this problem, this paper combines 1890 to 1930 female labor force participation rates from
Goldin (1990, Table 2.1, first row), with 1940 to 2005 data from the IHS and the ILO, in
the same way as for the other countries in the sample.12 Note that when they overlap (that
is, between 1940 and 1980), the labor force participation statistics from the IHS and the
ILO are almost identical to those from Table 2.1 in Goldin (1990). This perfect overlap is
also noted in Goldin (1990, pg. 43). She argues that the 1940 change in the definition of
employment has no effect on the participation rate of women: “Applying the labor force
concept to the pre-1940 data produces approximately the same numbers as obtained by the
gainful worker definition”. Goldin (1990, pg. 44) also shows that the most important source
of bias for female labor force participation comes from the undercounting of people working
as boardinghouse keepers, unpaid family farm workers and manufacturing workers in homes
and in factories. This is because women were disproportionately engaged in these activities.
  11
      Keeping only the statistics at 10-year intervals or changing the start and end point of the sample does not
significantly alter the main findings of the analysis.
   12
      Labor force participation rates for men aged 15 and above for years prior to 1940 were gathered from
Pencavel (1986, Tables 1.1). See section 7 for further details.



                                                       9
Section 3.2 returns to this point.

Other Countries

It is difficult to construct somewhat comparable female labor force statistics going back to
the second half of the 19th Century for a relative large cross section of countries. Goldin’s dis-
cussion centers on U.S. statistics, however, and similar concerns about undercounting women
working in family enterprises or working for very few hours generally applies. For example,
Costa (2000) discusses the existence of similar measurement issues related to historical data
on female participation for France and Great Britain. Here, pre-WWII data on economically
active population by gender and by industrial group, as well as population counts by gender
from the IHS (Mitchell, 1998) are combined with similar post-WWII data from the ILO.
Based on this data a long time series of labor force participation rates for women and men
aged 15 and above can be constructed.13 Far from being perfect, these data are probably as
close as possible to being harmonized in terms of the definition of the employment construct.
This is the ILO definition that classifies an individual as economically active if he/she is work-
ing for pay or profit at any time during the specific reference period, whether he/she receives
wages or not. This definition of employment varies across countries, but it generally includes
unpaid family farm workers, those in family business, and own-account traders. According
to Mitchell (1998, pg. 161), the statistics prior to 1968 were unified across different countries
and different time periods to adhere to this definition as much as possible. Post-1968 IHS
data were pulled directly from the ILO tables, and thus should be harmonized using sophis-
ticated estimation and imputation procedures.14 Recent versions of the ILO labor statistics
report data starting with the 1940s. This overlap between the available ILO and IHS statis-
tics is exploited to detect and fix inconsistencies in the data (see section 7 for details). As a
consequence of this further check, some of the 19th Century data points had to be dropped
from the sample. The resulting panel of 16 countries is analyzed below.15 Comparisons be-
tween countries, however, must still be made with some caution owing to remaining potential
differences in classification, including differences in the definition of “economically active”.
  13
     See section 7 for additional details. Unfortunately, the data do not allow the construction of historical
labor force statistics by age.
  14
     See ILO report (2011) for a discussion of the difficulties collecting high quality data for women’s labor
force participation.
  15
     For a few of these countries, namely Belgium, the Netherlands and the UK, it is possible to calculate labor
force participation rates by gender going as far back as 1840-1850. The trade-off is that the statistics for the
earlier decades of the 19th Century, especially pre-1870, are only available for a very small subset of countries.
Using 1890 as a start date delivers the most balanced panel of countries going as far back in time as possible.
The results of the analysis are basically unchanged if the sample starts in 1870 or 1880.




                                                       10
3.2      Long-run trends in female labor force participation
Figure 1 displays female labor force participation rates for each of the 16 countries in the
sample. Based on the figure, it is possible to loosely identify two alternative patterns for the
evolution of female labor supply.
       Female labor force participation grew monotonically in the United States and Canada.
Only 18 percent of women in the U.S. worked for pay in 1890 and the figure had risen to
around 26 percent in 1940, when the definition of the employment construct changes. By
year 2000 women’s participation rate in the United States was around 60 percent. However,
as argued by Goldin (1990) the 1890 figure is artificially low because it undercounts the paid
and unpaid work of married women within the home and on the farm. Goldin estimates a 7
percentage points adjustment in female labor force participation for 1890, mostly stemming
from unpaid employment of family members in agriculture and from widespread boarding in
late 19th Century cities (see, Table 2.9 in Goldin, 1990, p. 44). The adjustment implies that
female labor force participation in 1890 was in the vicinity of 26 percent, that is, as high as in
1940.16 It follows that, as argued by Goldin (1990, pg. 45), the “obvious implication is that
the labor force activity of adult and married women must have reached a minimum point
sometime just after the turn of the century, falling before that time and rising after. Thus
the participation of married women in the labor force may well be somewhat U-shaped over
the course of economic development.”          17   Although, the monotonicity of female labor supply
might be genuine for Canada, It is reasonable to think that undercounting of womens paid
or unpaid work at home and on the farm might be also be plaguing these estimates.
       In most of the remaining countries, the trends in female labor force participation are U-
shaped, although in some cases the U is more muted than in others. Women’s participation
rates in Great Britain were the same in the early 1960s as they were in the past two decades of
the 19th Century. This pattern is consistent with the analysis in Costa (2000). Belgium also
exhibits a U-shaped trend; female labor force participation hovers around 41 percent from
1890 to 1910, and then drops substantially and starts increasing again in the 1950s, reaching
back to 41 percent only by the mid-1990s. Ireland’s trend is very similar to that observed for
Belgium. Spain, Portugal and Italy also exhibit a U-shaped female labor supply although at
lower levels of female labor force participation. The female participation rate in Spain was
the same, around 23 percent, in 1890 as in 1970. In Italy women’s labor force participation
in year 2000 was still 13 percentage points lower than in 1900. Female labor supply is also
  16
     Most of the adjustment comes from white married women. Goldin (1990), estimates a rate of omission
of 10 percentage points for this group. This implies a 12.5 percent labor force participation rate for white
married women in 1890, as opposed to the 2.5 percent figure from the Census.
  17
     In other work, Goldin (1986) shows that female labor force participation might have been even higher at
the turn of the 19th century, thus implying an even stronger U-shape. Using data from 26 cities and business
directories for Philadelphia, she estimates that in 1800 the labor force participation rate for female head of
households (mostly widows) was around 65 percent, dropping to approximately 45 percent by 1860.



                                                      11
U-shaped in Australia, the Netherlands, and Sweden, although the U is more muted in these
countries. Finally, France and Finland both display a slightly N-shaped pattern for female
labor supply. Female labor force participation in France was around 44 percent at the turn of
the 20th Century, it peaked to 53 percent in 1920, and then dropped and raised again during
the course of the 20th century. Yet, by year 2000 female labor force participation was still
lower than in 1920.18 Finland’s trend is very similar to France’s, although the peak of the N
occurs twenty years later, in 1940.

3.3      Female labor force participation and economic development
Having discussed the trends, Figure 2 plots the relationship between female labor force par-
ticipation and log GDP per capita. The distinct U-shape relationship between the two series
is apparent. Female participation rates tend to be high, above 40 percent, both at low and
at high levels of income per capita, and dip below 40 percent in between.
       Table 2 reports the results of a quadratic regression of labor force participation against
log GDP per capita and its square term. Column 1 to 3 report the results obtained for women
as we progressively add year and country fixed effects. Column 4 displays the estimates for
men based on the full specification.
       Column 1 displays the estimates for the fitted U-shaped line shown in Figure 2. All
coefficients are statistically significant at the 1 percent level. This result is based on comparing
women’s labor force participation in a set of countries observed over multiple time periods and
it could be driven by some other (common) aggregate factors that are changing over time.
Thus the specification in column 2 adds year fixed effects, something akin to comparing
repeated cross sections of countries by year. The estimates are statistically significant at the
5 percent level, though the U becomes slightly more muted in this case. Column 3 reports the
results when instead we add both year and country fixed effects. This specification allows to
study the evolution of female labor force participation in individual countries as they grow.
With country fixed effects the shape of the U is identified from variation in income within
a country over time, rather than from the cross-country variation. At the same time, year
fixed effects account for differences across years that are common to all countries. The main
finding is confirmed, although the U-shape is slightly more muted than in the previous cases
and the point estimates on log GDP per capita and its square are now statistically significant
only at the 10 percent level. Finally, column 4 reports the estimates for males using the same
specification as in column 3. Males can be seen as a placebo group since almost all men aged
15 or above work and this is true at all levels of economic development spanned by this panel
of countries.19 Consistent with this hypothesis, I find no clear relationship between male
  18
    Costa (2000, figure 2) documents the same pattern for France using a different data source.
  19
    With the caveat that in all countries there is a declining trend in male labor supply driven by increasing
years of education and early retirement.


                                                     12
labor force participation and economic development. The estimates are very small and not
statistically significant.20
         To ease the interpretation of the results in Table 2, Figure 3, Panel A, graphs the implied
relationship between labor force participation and income based on the estimates in column
2 and 3.21 The figure shows that the country fixed effects estimates produce a slightly more
muted U-shape, but the two curves are not substantially different from each other. That is,
a quadratic can capture equally well the evolution of female labor force participation across
countries and for individual countries as they grow. This is not surprising in light of the
finding that in many of the countries in this sample female labor force participation traces
a U-shape over time (see Figure 1) but, as shown in the next section, this is not a pattern
that generally holds for the post-WWII period.
         As discussed in section 2, one of the regularities established in the literature on structural
transformation is that the manufacturing share peaks when log GDP per capita is around
9 (Herrendorf et al. 2013). This peak corresponds to the onset of the expansion of the
so-called service economy. Based on the estimates in Table 2, we can compare the trough
of the U-shaped labor supply function to the peak of the manufacturing share. The lowest
female labor force participation rate is 29 percent for the regression with year effects and 32
percent for the country effect specification, corresponding to a log GDP per capita of 8.04 and
7.98, respectively (equivalent to 1990 international dollars 2,900 and 3,100). These estimates
indicate that the growth in female labor force participation precedes the acceleration in the
growth of the service sector. Men may gain from the shift away from agriculture initially,
with more robust manufacturing growth, but women who concentrate in service sector jobs
are well positioned in what will eventually be the leading sector.


4         Female Labor Force Participation and Economic Develop-
          ment: 1950-2005
This section analyzes a full sample of advanced and emerging economies for the period 1950
to 2005.22 The purpose of repeating the analysis for this larger sample is twofold. First, it
enables the further investigation of the relationship between female labor force participation
    20
      To mitigate concerns that the results in Table 2 might be driven by cross-country differences in employ-
ment classification, a specification is also run where the dependent variable is the female-to-male labor force
participation ratio (miss-measurement should be, at least in part, common across genders within a country).
The results confirm the main findings based on levels.
   21
      Because the level of the U in the country and year effect specification differs across countries, the vertical
position of the function is scaled so that it lies at the average position of the curve across all countries.
   22
      Labor force participation data were pulled directly from the ILO web page, see section 7 for details. Note
that the analysis in this paper is consistent with that by Goldin (1995), and Mammen and Paxson (2000)
based on the United Nations WISTAT collection. This is because the labor statistics in WISTAT are taken
from the ILO. Data on educational attainment by gender are from Barro and Lee (2010).



                                                        13
and economic development by using information on education and labor force participation
rates by age group that is not available for the longer data series. Second, it enables to study
whether the findings in the previous section apply more generally.
   Table 3 presents the results of this analysis. Column (1) reports the coefficients for the
basic regressions with no controls, column (2) and (3) include year effects, column (4) to (6)
include both year and country fixed effects. Following Goldin (1995), column (3) and (5) add
the log gender differential (male-female) in years of schooling. Finally, column (6) reports the
results for males. The concept of labor force participation in the first panel is the fraction of
economically active women aged 15 to 64. The second panel reports the results for women
aged 45 to 59. Fertility is higher in countries with lower living standard and, at the same
time, it is inversely related to female labor force participation in a cross section of developed
and developing economies (Feyer, Sacerdote and Stern, 2008). The 45-59 age restriction, also
used by Goldin (1995) and Mammen and Paxson (2000), helps minimizing the confounding
effect that cross-country differences in fertility might have on the correlation between female
labor force participation and GDP per capita.
   Entries in Table 3 confirm the results obtained for the historical sample of developed
economies. Every specification shows a significant U-shaped relationship between female
labor force participation and log GDP per capita, though the U is more muted once we
control for country fixed effects. This effect holds controlling for the gender gap in years of
schooling and for both measures of female labor force participation, although, as predicted
by the theory, the U-shape is more marked for women past their childbearing age. At any
level of economic development, female labor force participation is lower when women have
fewer years of schooling relative to men (column 3), although the coefficient is not significant
when adding country effects (column 5). There is no evidence of a U-shaped labor supply
for men. If anything, consistent with trends in early retirement, labor force participation of
men aged 45 to 59 declines at higher levels of economic development.
   Table 4 reports the results when early OECD economies (i.e., countries that joined the
OECD before 1973) are excluded from the sample (see footnotes to Table 4 for the list of
countries). The results in column 1 to 3 are broadly similar to those observed in Table 3,
except for the fact that the U-shape is now more muted, especially when we use labor force
participation of women aged 15 to 64. However, unlike in the previous two tables, the U-
shape disappears once we control for country effect (column 4 and 5). In other words, for
non-OECD economies, female labor force participation does not drop as much as in the full
sample as income per capita increases. Interestingly, the labor supply of older men does not
decline with GDP as in the full sample and in the sample of developed economies (column
6). This indicates that, while being typical of rich economies, early retirement is not a staple




                                               14
of emerging economies.23
       To ease the comparison of the results across samples, Figure 3, Panel B and C, illustrates
how the U-shape varies, within and across countries, based, respectively, on the estimates for
the 1950-2005 full sample (column 2 and 4, table 3), and for the sample that excludes early
OECD economies (column 2 and 4, table 4). The figure highlights interesting differences in
the predicted relationship between female labor force participation and income, both across
panel B and C and relatively to the results in Panel A. For all samples, the solid line traces a
significant U-shape that becomes more muted once we keep only countries that were not part
of the OECD as of 1973. In both panel B and C, participation rates are at least 50 percent,
both at low and high levels of income. The trough of the U occurs when log GDP per capita
is 8.1 (in panel B) and 8.4 (panel C). The corresponding female labor force participation rate
is around 35 percent and 38 percent, respectively. Differences across samples emerge once
we add country fixed effects. For the full-sample (panel B), the U-shape predicted by the
regression with country effect is flatter relative to the specification with only year effects.24
Moreover, the difference between the solid and the dashed line is larger than that observed
for the sample of developed countries. For the sample of non-OECD economies (panel C), the
line predicted by the regression with country effect is flat. If anything it declines slightly. For
the specification with country and year effects, the bottom of the U corresponds to a female
labor force participation rate of 34 percent observed when log GDP per capita is equal to
8.4 (in panel B), and to a 42 percent female labor force participation rate when log GDP per
capita equals 9.4 (panel C). Interestingly, for the sample that drops OECD economies the
GDP level corresponding to the through of female labor force participation roughly coincides
with the peak of the manufacturing employment share.
       The findings are summarized in Figure 3, which suggests that the presence of a U-shaped
female labor supply might depend on the specifics of the process of structural transformation
of an economy. One possibility is that the nature of manufacturing production might be
cleaner or less brawn intensive for countries that industrialize in the 20th century relatively
to developed economies that went through the transition in the 19th century. For example,
industrialization could be associated with an increased demand for fine motor skills (in which
women have a comparative advantage), as it is the case with electronics in Asia. Alternatively,
in some countries, as it is the case in India, the process of economic development could
be associated with the expansion of the service economy were women have a comparative
advantage. In either case industrialization would generate an increase in women’s relative
wages that, by counteracting the income effect for married women, could potentially lead to
  23
     The results of a series of non-parametric regressions show that female labor supply is U-shaped in all
decades. For the pre-1980 period, the estimates are not statistically significant, this is due to sample imbalance:
There are fewer observations for the earlier years and they are skewed toward relatively richer economies.
  24
     Mammen and Paxson (2000, Figure 2) show a similar pattern for a panel of 90 countries observed in 1970,
1975, 1980, and 1985.


                                                        15
a smaller drop in female labor supply with economic development.25
         Before turning to the sectoral analysis, it is interesting to study the interplay between
income, occupational composition and women’s participation to the labor market. Goldin
(1995) suggests that one reason for the existence of a U-shaped female labor supply function is
the relationship between female education, increased white-collar employment and economic
development. At low levels of economic development, education increases for males far more
than for females, and women are under-represented in the clerical sector. Goldin argues
that women’s absence as clerical workers might be driven by the fact that their education
levels are low, not just relative to men’s, when the difference in education is highest. This
conjecture finds support in the data (see Table 1, Goldin, 1995, pg. 77). Table 5 reproduces
this analysis for the sub-sample of countries for which ILO data on occupation are available
(see data appendix for details). The results confirm Goldin’s findings. The ratio of female-
to-male clerical workers is positively correlated with the percentage of women with secondary
education and negatively correlated with the ratio of male to female total years of education.
As pointed out by Goldin (1995, pg. 74) this is consistent with Boserup’s observation that
competition from men serves to force women out of clerical employment. The coefficient on
female education looses significance once we control for country effects, indicating that the
level of female education is an important determinant of cross-country differences in womens
work outcomes.


5         Gender and structural transformation
The relationship between the process of structural transformation and women’s involvement
in the labor market has been noted by several authors, especially in relation to the increasing
importance of the service sector in the economy. The idea is that production of goods is
relatively intensive in the use of ‘brawn’ while the production of services is relatively intensive
in the use of ‘brain’. Since men and women may have different endowments of these factors,
with women having a comparative advantage in ‘brain’ activities, the historical growth in the
service sector may impact female participation in the labor market.
         Goldin (1995, 2006) notes that service jobs tend to be physically less demanding and
cleaner, thus more “respectable” for women entering the labor force, than typical jobs in
factories. Thus the expansion of the service sector is well positioned to generate the ris-
ing portion of the U. Insofar the decline in manufacturing and the parallel rise in services
are staggered across countries, this development can explain the international variation in
    25
    A valid concern, raised by the discussant, is that there might not be enough within country variation
to identify the U in this sample. This, legitimate, concern is partly mitigated by the fact that for all the
non-OECD countries there are at the very least four data points spanning 1990 to 2005 (in many cases one
can go back to the 1980s). Further investigation of this pattern with a longer data series and including a
larger set of controls is left for future work.


                                                    16
women’s labor market outcomes. Only a handful of papers in the recent literature have made
this connection explicitly (see Rendall, 2010, Akbulut, 2011, Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2011,
and Ngai and Petrongolo, 2012). All these papers are concerned with recent trends in fe-
male labor force participation in economically advanced economies and suggests that industry
structure affect women’s work.26 Other authors have studied the role of home production in
explaining the shift towards services but do not explicitly focus on the link with female labor
force participation (see Ngai and Pissarides, 2008, Rogerson, 2008, Buera and Kaboski, 2011,
2012).
    Far less has been written about the transition from agriculture to manufacturing. The
declining portion of the U can be linked to the change in the nature of agricultural work as
an economy moves away from subsistence agriculture. This change typically involves a shift
from very labor-intensive technologies, where women are heavily involved as family workers,
to capital-intensive agricultural technologies (such as the plough) where men tend to have
a comparative advantage because they require physical strength. De Vries (1994) argues
that market production increased (also for women) during the early stages of the industrial
revolution but home production gained importance as female labor market participation
declined. As discussed in Section 2, Goldin and Sokoloff’s (1984) “relative productivity
hypothesis” predicts that the manufacturing sector would develop earlier in agricultural areas
where the relative productivity of females and children is especially low relatively to men (for
example, because of the adoption of the plough). According to this hypothesis, we should
see an increase in the demand of female (unskilled) workers but, based on the evidence
in Katz and Margo (2013), this increase should be limited. They show that although the
share of female workers was positively correlated with firm size in the 19th century, many,
relatively large, establishments did not hire women or children. Moreover, since production
in manufacturing was arduous and relatively intensive in the use of ‘brawn’, especially in the
early phases of industrialization in the 19th century, women, especially married women, were
more likely to drop out of the market.
    To date, no study has proposed a mechanism that can simultaneously generate structural
transformation and the full U-shaped pattern for female labor force participation, at least to
the author knowledge. One notable exception, although the link to female labor supply is not
explicit, is Buera and Kaboski (2012). Their theory emphasizes the scale of the productive
unit as being important to understand both movements among broad sectors (agriculture,
manufacturing, technology) and movements between home and market production. Among
other things, scale technologies can generate the movement of services from the market sector
to the home sector, and vice versa. To the extent that the division of labor between home and
  26
     Of course, supply-side factors might be driving the change, although work by Lee and Wolpin (2006) sug-
gests that demand-side factors associated with technical change are likely to be the prevailing force underlying
these changes.



                                                      17
market activities is gendered, this mechanism has the potential to generate a declining female
labor supply, associated with the phase of greatest expansion of the manufacturing sector, as
well as the increasing portion of the curve, associated with the manufacturing sector decline
and the acceleration in the expansion of the service sector.
       This is a promising area of research. This paper contributes to it by documenting gender
differentials in the relationship between the process of structural transformation and economic
development, both historically and in a modern cross section of countries. Note that using
sectoral shares to study the evolution of women’s work mitigates some of the issues related to
the measurement of female labor force participation, especially for the sample of developed
economies. This is because it does not require to match population counts with data about
the economically active population.

5.1      Developed Economies
As discussed in Herrendorf et al. (2013), increases in GDP per capita have been associated
with decreases in employment share in agriculture, and increases in the employment share
in services. Manufacturing behaves somewhat differently from the other two sectors: its
employment share follows an inverted-U shape. That is, it is increasing for lower levels of
development and decreasing for higher level of development.27 .
       The first column in Figure 4 confirms these finding based on the historical sample of
developed economies. The vertical axis in each of the horizontal panels reports the share of
economically active population working in agriculture (panel A), manufacturing (panel B),
and services (panel C), respectively.28 The next two columns show how this relationship
varies by gender. Specifically, the vertical axis represents the share of economically active
women (column 2) and men (column 3) employed in each of the three sectors. The trends by
gender do not differ from those in the aggregate. That is, for both genders the correlation
between GDP per capita and sectoral employment shares is negative in the agricultural sector,
positive in the service sector, and it has an inverted-U shape in the manufacturing sector.
However, the graph reveals some interesting differences. The female employment share in
agriculture seems to drop somewhat less rapidly with log GDP per capita, the inverted-U
shape in manufacturing is more muted for women than for men, and the employment share
of women in services seems to grow more rapidly.
       To investigate whether these gender differentials are statistically significant, Table 6 re-
ports the results of pooled regressions, by industry, of employment shares against a female
dummy, log GDP per capita (entering both linearly and as a quadratic polynomial), and in-
teraction terms between the two. Column 1 to 3 report the results for the linear specification,
  27
     The same patterns are observed when using nominal value added shares.
  28
     Following the definition of the three sectors in Herrendorf et al. (2013), I include mining as well as the
utilities sector in the manufacturing sector.


                                                      18
column 4 and 5 those for the quadratic specification. As in earlier tables, controls for year
effects (column 2 and 4), as well as country effects (column 3 and 5), are progressively added.
       For the agricultural sector, as shown in panel A, the employment shares drop for both
genders but the rate of decline is smaller for women than for men. This finding might be
surprising in light of the discussion in section 2, but it stems from the fact that both shares are
converging to zero as GDP per capita increases. Since men’s employment share in agriculture
is initially higher than women’s, its drop is also larger. The results of the quadratic regressions
in column 4 and 5 confirm this pattern, although the gender differential is not statistically
significant in this case.
       Panel B reveals strong gender differentials in the manufacturing sector. In the linear
specification, male employment shares in manufacturing substantially increase with log GDP
per capita, even when we control for both year and country effects, but the increase is much
smaller, by about 8 log points, for females. The estimates for the quadratic specification
substantially differ by gender. Consistent with Goldin and Sokoloff (1982) and Katz and
Margo (2013), the employment share in manufacturing initially rises more rapidly for women
than for men, but it flattens out much earlier so that the inverted-U shape is much more
pronounced for men than for women.
       The last panel in Table 6 reports the results for the service sector. Column 1 to 3 show
that the employment share in the service sector increases at a higher rate for women than for
men, but the difference is not statistically significant (at standard levels of significance). The
results of the quadratic regressions (column 4 to 5) reveal the existence of important gender
differentials. The increase in the share of women working in services is steeper than men’s
at low levels of log GDP per capita, but it increases at a decreasing rate as GDP per capita
grows. This is not surprising since the share is bounded by 1 and, in all the countries in our
sample, 90 percent of all working women are in services. On the other end, the share of men
employed in the service sector increases somewhat linearly, or with a slightly convex profile
with economic development (being slow at first and then accelerating once the manufacturing
sector start rapidly shrinking).29

5.2      Full Sample
Figure 5 and Table 7 report the result of the sectoral analysis for the full sample. The results
are similar to those observed for the sample of developed economies with a few exceptions.
The share of working women employed in agriculture drops more abruptly relative to men
(at least for the quadratic specification); the gender gap in service sector shares (favorable
  29
    Additional regressions using the female share of total sector employment (that is a measure of female
input intensity) as a dependent variable have also been run. The results show that while in the manufacturing
sector female intensity declines as its relative importance in the overall economy increases, the female intensity
in the service sector is positively correlated with the size of the sector.



                                                       19
to women) is larger; the manufacturing share of female employment is higher than in the
sample of developed economies at all levels of economic development. Once again, this
evidence indicates that the nature of manufacturing work might matter for the declining part
of the U. Excluding early OECD economies from the sample does not substantially alter this
picture. The most notable difference is that both the female service sector share and the
gender differential grow more rapidly than in the full sample.


6    Conclusions
This paper shows that there is a consistent U-shaped relationship between women’s role in
the labor market and the process of economic development, both within and across countries.
Interestingly, the U-shape is more muted when early OECD economies are dropped from this
sample. One possible explanation is that the stigma towards married women’s participation
to labor market, or women dislike for factory production, might be lower when manufacturing
production is cleaner or less brawn intensive than it was in the 19th century. The paper is
purely descriptive and, among the other things, does not discuss the potential determinants
for the observed differences in female labor supply across countries and over time. However,
differences in taxation, childcare availability, maternity leave policies, institutions and culture
are obviously important.
    Although this paper focuses on female labor force participation, there are other dimensions
of women’s status that might not vary linearly with economic development. Alesina, Giuliano
and Nunn (2013), confirm the U-shaped relationship for female participation to the labor
market (even after controlling for cultural differences across countries), but not for indicators
of female participation in politics and entrepreneurial activities. Further investigation using
alternative indicators of economic status, such as women’s rights or maternal health, could
potentially uncover other interesting non-linear relationships.
    One interesting avenue for future research is to use the cross-state variation within the
United States to gain a deeper understanding of the determinants of the U-shaped female
labor supply: there was (and still is) a substantial amount of regional variation in economic
structure that can be exploited for identification (see Kim, 1998,1999, and Kim and Margo,
2004), as well as a substantial variation in married women labor force participation and
earnings (Olivetti and Petrongolo, 2011). This could be a promising identification strat-
egy because, historically, for married women the geographic location of the household was
arguably determined by the husband and thus, at least to a first approximation, can be
thought of as exogenous.




                                                20
7         Data Appendix
All datasets were merged with historical data on GDP per capita from Maddison (2010). See
http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm for data and documentation.

7.1         Developed Country Sample
There are reasonable concerns about data comparability, especially for the early period in
our sample. Fortunately, for developed economies, there is an overlap between the labor
force statistics from IHS and those from ILO. Data sources by year are listed in Section
7.1.1. Countries for which the IHS statistics are inconsistent with the ones from the ILO
have been dropped from the sample. In all cases the inconsistency was due to compati-
bility issues between the numerator (economically active population) and the denominator
(population counts). For example, for some of the countries geographical boundaries were
re-designed after wars. The IHS statistics usually refer to a countrys boundaries for the year
the information was reported, however there are instances in which the geographical unit at
the numerator is not consistent with that at the denominator (for example, Lombardia and
Veneto and Austria pre-1890). In other cases the numerator and denominator represented
a different age universe or referred to different populations.30 The next subsection provides
more details about this process. For the years of overlap between IHS and ILO statistics, the
data source selection rule was to switch to the ILO statistics for the first year they became
available, 1950 in most cases. Alternative data source selection rules have also been explored.
For instance, using IHS as the main data source and ILO data to ‘fill the blanks. The overall
results of the analysis were unchanged.

7.1.1         Developed Country Sample: Data Sources

Data for the developed countries sample come from the following sources: International
Historical Statistics [IHS], Mitchell (1998 a,b,c); International Labor Organization [ILO]. Pre-
1940 data for the United States are from: Goldin (1991) and Pencavel (1986). Specifically,
I use the following data source/year combinations: Australia: 1900-1920 [IHS], 1960-2005
[ILO]; Belgium: 1890-1930 [IHS], 1945, 1960-2005 [ILO]; Canada: 1890-1940 [IHS], 1950-
2005 [ILO]; Denmark: 1890-1940 [IHS], 1950-2005 [ILO]; Finland: 1900-1950 [IHS], 1960-
2005 [ILO]; France: 1895-1955 [IHS], 1960-2005 [ILO]; Germany: 1925-1945 [IHS], 1950-2005
[ILO]; Ireland: 1910-1935, 1950 [IHS], 1960-2005 [ILO]; Italy: 1900-1935 [IHS], 1950-2005
[ILO]; Netherlands: 1890-1930 [IHS], 1945, 1960-2005 [ILO]; Norway: 1890-1930 [IHS], 1945-
2005 [ILO]; Portugal: 1890-1910, 1940 [IHS], 1950-2005 [ILO]; Spain: 1900-1920, 1940 [IHS],
1950-2005 [ILO]; Sweden: 1890-1930, 1950 [IHS], 1960-2005 [ILO]; United Kingdom: 1890-
    30
         See Mitchell (2008), notes to “B1 Economically Active Population by Major Industrial Groups.



                                                        21
1930, 1950 [IHS], 1960-2005 [ILO]; United States: 1890-1930 [Goldin & Pencavel], 1940 [IHS],
1950-2005 [ILO].

7.1.2     Developed Country Sample: Assumptions and Corrections

Economically active data and sectoral data was combined within the International Historical
Statistics (IHS) as one table (Mitchell, 1998 a,b,c). The following set of notes are thus
relevant for both the analyses on overall labor force participation and sectoral shares. The
sector classification in agriculture, manufacturing and services is described in section 7.3. The
below list provides all the assumptions and corrections made to the data that was compiled
from the IHS.

   Economically Active Population - Europe

   • France: For the male population, the year 1866 was listed twice. It was assumed that
        the second 1866 was meant to be 1886 based on the corresponding year listed for women.

   • Germany: East and West Germany were combined in the IHS for consistency with the
        other data sources.

          – Observation for the period 1882 to 1939 Germany includes statistics for the area
             considered part of Germany from 1882-1939.
          – East Germany includes statistics for the respective territory from 1946-1971. Only
             years 1960 and 1971 include statistics for East Berlin.
          – West Germany includes statistics for the respective territory from 1946-1980. Only
             years 1961,1970, and 1980 include statistics for West Berlin.
          – Germany includes statistics for the respective territory from 1992.

   • Ireland: Northern Ireland was included in the United Kingdom and Southern Ireland
        is listed as Ireland following 1926 to be consistent with how the ILO reports data for
        Ireland.

Total Population - Europe

   • Denmark: From the second line for the year 1921 and below, Schleswig, which was
        acquired in that year, is included. In Stata, everything above the second line of 1921 is
        under the country ”Denmark-S”

   • Germany:

          – Germany: Areas ceded to Germany by Austria, Denmark, and France in 1860-1871
             are excluded until 1864.

                                                22
            – Germany: From 1910 the territories ceded after World War I are excluded.
            – East Germany: Statistics include East Berlin
            – West Germany: Statistics include West Berlin The last year following 1970 for
              West Germany was 1950. This year was changed to 1987 as that was the next
              census conducted after 1970.31 )

       • Italy:

            – The year 1921 was listed twice, the second observation includes territories acquired
              after World War I.
            – The year 1951 was listed twice, the second observation and all subsequent obser-
              vations are for the resident population.

       • Portugal: Years prior to 1841 do not include Azores and Maderia.

       • Sweden: The year 1890 was included twice, consecutively. Based on the Department
         of National Archives, it was assumed the first observation was in fact 1880 and was
         adjusted accordingly.32

       United States Labor force participation rate for men and women aged 15 and above in
the United States for periods prior to 1940 were gathered from Pencavel (1986, Tables 1.1)
and Goldin (1990, Table 2.1).
       Sector information for the United States prior to 1940 comes from author’s calculations
using IPUMS data for the years 1900 and 1910 and 1920 comes from Table Ba670-687 and
Table Ba688-705 contributed by Matthew Sobek in Carter et. al. (2006).
       The above data were combined with the EAPEP and ILO data for the 1950 to 2005 period
(see below for a full description).

7.2       Full Sample
7.2.1      Labor Force Participation Data

Data for 1990 - 2005 came from the the 6th edition of the Economically Active Population,
Estimates and Projections (EAPEP) published by the International Labour Organization
(ILO). The data provide labor force participation by age group for a harmonized panel of
  31
     Wall Street Journal: http : //online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303982504576423814268469244.html
http : //www.f aqs.org/f aqs/genealogy/german − f aq/part2/section − 4.html#b
  32
     http : //www.svar.ra.se/winder.asp?uidObjectGU ID = 6587EEF 0 − 3E98 − 4BE3 − A404 −
E1938D3AEA68&uidRedirectGU ID = 9BCE8D60 − 1DC2 − 43AD − A33C − B758BAE5ACEE&strT ype =




                                                 23
196 countries.33 Labor force data for the full sample prior to 1990 were pulled directly from
the Economically Active Population 1A Tables from the ILO website.34

7.2.2     Sector Data

Sector shares were calculated using data from the ILO Economically Active Population 1C
Tables. This data source has employment information by industry which can be broadly
categorized into agriculture, manufacturing and services. Data was generally available over
the period 1945-2005 but was not consistently gathered for all countries the International
Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC) also changed over time.

7.2.3     Occupation Data

The analysis on clerical work utilized the ILO data discussed above but limited the sample
to women aged 45 to 59. The labor force participation data was then merged with the ILO
Economically Active Population 1E Tables, which contains information on occupation by
industry and gender.

7.3      Classification of broad sectors of production
Sectors were assigned as follows:

      • Agriculture corresponds to the sum of ISIC-Rev.3 section A and B. If ISIC classification
        was not available, industries were assigned to agriculture if the source table heading
        said “Agriculture” or “Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.”

      • Manufacturing corresponds to the sum of ISIC-Rev.3 section C, D, F and includes min-
        ing, manufacturing and construction. If ISIC classification was not available, industries
        were assigned to manufacturing if the source table heading said “Mining” or “Extrac-
        tion Industries” or “Manufacturing” or “Construction” or “Electricity, Gas and Water
        Supply” or “Utilities.”

      • Services corresponds to the sum of ISIC-Rev.3 section E, G-P and includes wholesale,
        retail trade, hotels and restaurants, transport, storage and communication, finance,
        insurance, real estate, business services, and community, social and personal services.
        If ISIC classification was not available, industries were assigned to service if the source
        table heading said “Commerce” or “Finance” or “Trade” or “Transport” or “Commu-
        nication” or “Services.”
 33
     For     a     complete      write   up   of the methodology      used    see:      http      :
//laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/EAP EP/v6/ILOE AP EPm ethodology2 011.pdf
  34
     See http : //laborsta.ilo.org/ST P/guest



                                                 24
   The following economically active individuals were classified as missing sector information:

   • For 1950 and 1960: ISIC-Rev. 1, code “9 Activities not adequately described.”

   • For 1970-1990: ISIC-Rev. 2, code “0” Activities not adequately defined.”

   • For year 2000-2005: ISIC-Rev. 3, section “Q Extra-territorial organizations and bodies”
     and “X Not classifiable by economic activity”.


References
 [1] Akbulut, Rahşan. 2011. Sectoral Changes and the Increase in Women’s Labor Force
    Participation. Macroeconomic Dynamics 15: 240-264.

 [2] Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti. 2009. Gender Roles and Medical Progress.
    NBER Working Paper 14873.

 [3] Alesina, Alberto, Giuliano, Paola and Nathan Nunn. 2013. On the Origins of Gender
    Roles: Women and the Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2): 469-530.

 [4] Atack, Jeremy; Fred Bateman; and Robert A. Margo. 2008. Steam Power, Establishment
    Size, and Labor Productivity Growth in Nineteenth Century American Manufacturing,
    Explorations in Economic History, 45: 185-198.

 [5] Bailey, Martha J. 2006. More power to the pill: The impact of contraceptive freedom on
    women’s lifecycle labor supply. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121: 289-320.

 [6] Barro, Robert and Lee, Jong-Wha. 2010. A New Data Set of Educational Attainment
    in the World, 1950-2010. NBER Working Paper No. 15902.

 [7] Blau, Francine D. 1998. The Well-being of American Women, 1970-1995. Journal of
    Economic Literature pg. 112-165.

 [8] Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2003. Understanding International Differ-
    ences in the Gender Pay Gap. Journal of Labor Economics 21: 106–144.

 [9] Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. 2007. Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior
    of Married Women: 1980-2000. Journal of Labor Economics pg. 393-438.

[10] Blau, Francine D., Marianne A. Ferber and Anne E. Winkler. 2010. The Economics of
    Women, Men, and Work, 6th edition. Prentice-Hall.

[11] Boserup, Ester. 1970. Womans Role in Economic Development, London: George Allen
    and Unwin Ltd.

                                             25
[12] Buera, Francisco J. and Joseph P. Kaboski. 2011. Scale and the origins of structural
    change. Journal of Economic Theory, doi:10.1016/j.jet.2010.11.007.

[13] Buera, Francisco J. and Joseph P. Kaboski. 2012. The Rise of the Service Economy.
    American Economic Review, 102(6): 2540-69.

[14] Carter, S.B. 2006. Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the
    Present. Cambridge University Press.

[15] Costa, Dora. 2000. From Mill Town to Board Room: The Rise of Women’s Paid Labor.
    Journal of Economic Perspective 14: 101-122.

[16] De Vries, Jan. 1994. The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution. Journal
    of Economic History 54 (2): 249-70.

[17] Fernández, Raquel, Fogli, Alessandra and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. Mothers and Sons:
    Preference Development and Female Labor Force Dynamics. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 119, no. 4: 1249-1299.

[18] Fernández, Raquel. 2013. Culture as Learning: The Evolution of Female Labor Force
    Participation over a Century. American Economic Review, 103(1): 472-500.

[19] Feyrer, James, Bruce Sacerdote and Ariel D. Stern. 2008. Will the Stock Return to
    Europe and Japan? Understanding Fertility within Developed Nations. Journal of Eco-
    nomic Perspectives, 22 (3): 3-22.

[20] Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp. 2011. Nature or Nurture? Learning and Female
    Labor Force Participation. Econometrica, 79 (4): 11031138.

[21] Galor, Oded and David N. Weil. 1996. The Gender Gap, Fertility and Growth. American
    Economic Review, Vol. 86, 374-387.

[22] Goldin, Claudia, and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1982. Women, Children, and Industrialization in
    the Early Republic: Evidence from the Manufacturing Censuses’ Journal of Economic
    History, 42: 741-774.

[23] Goldin, Claudia and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1984. The Relative Productivity Hypothesis of In-
    dustrialization: The American Case, 1820 to 1850. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    Vol. 99 (3), 461-487.

[24] Goldin, Claudia. 1986. The Economic Status of Women in the Early Republic: Quanti-
    tative Evidence. The Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Vol. 16 (3): pp. 375-404.



                                            26
[25] Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Wage Gap: An Economic History of
    American Women. Oxford University Press.

[26] Goldin, Claudia. 1995. The U-Shaped Female Labor Force Function in Economic De-
    velopment and Economic History.In T. P. Schultz, ed., Investment in Women’s Human
    Capital and Economic Development, pp. 61-90.

[27] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 2002. The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives
    and Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions. Journal of Political Economy 100, 730-770.

[28] Goldin, Claudia. 2006. The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women’s Employment,
    Education, and Family, Ely Lecture, in American Economic Review, Papers and Pro-
    ceedings 96: 1-21.

[29] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 2008. The Race between Education and Tech-
    nology. Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

[30] Greenwood, Jeremy, Ananth Seshadri, and Mehmet Yorugoklu. 2005. Engines of Liber-
    ation. The Review of Economic Studies 72: 109-133.

[31] Herrendorf, Berthold, Rogerson, Richard and Akos Valentinyi. 2013. Growth and Struc-
    tural Tranformation. NBER Working Paper No. 18996.

[32] International Labour Organization. 1990. Economically Active Population Estimates and
    Projections, 1950- 2025: Volume 6.

[33] Katz, Lawrence F. and Robert A. Margo. 2013. Technical Change and the Relative
    Demand for Skilled Labor: The United States in Historical Perspective. NBER Working
    Paper No. 18752.

[34] Kim, Sukkoo. 1998, Economic Integration and Convergence: U.S. Regions, 1840-1990.
    Journal of Economic History, 58 (3): 659-683.

[35] Kim, Sukkoo. 1999. Regions, Resources and Economic Geography: The Sources of U.S.
    Regional Comparative Advantage, 1880-1987. Regional Science and Urban Economics,
    29 (1): 1-32.

[36] Kim, Sukkoo and Robert A. Margo. 2004. Historical Perspectives on U.S. Economic
    Geography. in V. Henderson and J. Thisse, eds. Handbook of Urban and Regional Eco-
    nomics, Volume 4: Cities and Geography, pp. 2982-3019. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

[37] Lee, Donghoon and Ken Wolpin. 2006. Intersectoral Labor Mobility and the Growth of
    the Service Sector. Econometrica 74: 1-46.


                                           27
[38] Luci, Angela. 2009. Female labour market participation and economic growth. In-
    ternational Journal of Innovation and Sustainable Development, Vol. 4, 2/3. (doi :
    10.1504/IJISD.2009.028065; ISSN 1740-8822).

[39] Lundberg, Shelly. 2010. The Sexual Division of Labour. In The Shape of the Divison
    of Labour: Nations, Industries and Households, edited by Robert M. Solow and Jean-
    Philippe Touffut, pp. 122-48. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

[40] Maddison, Angus. 2010. Statistics on World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP,
    1-2008 AD. Groningen: University of Groningen.

[41] Mitchell, Brian. 1998a. International Historical Statistics; Europe 1750-1993. 3rd edition,
    Macmillan ; Stockton, London : New York.

[42] Mitchell, Brian. 1998b. International Historical Statistics; The Americas 1750-1993. 3rd
    edition, Macmillan, Basingstoke, England.

[43] Mitchell, Brian. 1998c. International Historical Statistics; Africa, Asia & Oceania 1750-
    1993. 3rd edition, Macmillan ; Stockton, London : New York.

[44] Ngai L. Rachel and Cristopher Pissarides. 2008. Trends in Hours and Economic Growth.
    Review of Economic Dynamics, 11 (2): 429-443.

[45] Ngai L. Rachel and Barbara Petrongolo. 2012. Structural Transformation, Marketization
    and Female Employment. Manuscript, London School of Economics.

[46] Olivetti, Claudia and Barbara Petrongolo. 2011. Gender Gaps across Countries and
    Skills: Supply, Demand and the Industry Structure. NBER Working Paper 17349.

[47] Pencavel J. 1986. Labor Supply of Men. Chapter 1 in Handbook of Labor Economics,
    volume 1, pg. 3-102, edited by Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard.

[48] Rendall, Michelle. 2011. The Service Sector and Female Market Work: Europe vs. US.
    University of Zurich, mimeo.

[49] Rogerson, Richard. 2008. Structural Transformation and the Deterioration of European
    Labor Markets. Journal of Political Economy 166: 235-258.

[50] Ruggles, Steven and Alexander, J. Trent and Genadek, Katie and Goeken, Ronald and
    Schroeder, Matthew B. and Sobek, Matthew. 2010. Integrated Public Use Microdata
    Series: Version 5.0 [Machine-readable database], Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.




                                              28
         Table 1: GDP per capita and sectoral shares 1890-2000: Selected countries

                                  Employment Shares                            Valued Added Shares
Year    Log GDP       Agriculture     Manufacturing      Services   Agriculture    Manufacturing     Services
        per capita
(1)         (2)            (3)                 (4)         (5)          (6)              (7)            (8)
                                                       United States
1890       8.129          0.427               0.272       0.301        0.190           0.350           0.460
1950       9.165          0.109               0.340       0.551        0.068           0.357           0.575
2000      10.257          0.024               0.204       0.772        0.010           0.218           0.773
                                                         Belgium
1890      8.140           0.321               0.415       0.264        0.110           0.440           0.451
1947      8.476           0.140               0.517       0.343        0.082           0.415           0.503
2000      9.936           0.023               0.220       0.757        0.013           0.244           0.743
                                                          France
1886      7.713           0.470               0.257       0.273        0.273           0.390           0.337
1954      8.685           0.263               0.355       0.382        0.130           0.480           0.390
2000      9.924           0.039               0.212       0.749        0.028           0.229           0.743
                                                       Netherlands
1889       8.161          0.365               0.316       0.319        0.208           0.321           0.471
1947       8.527          0.187               0.356       0.458        0.130           0.370           0.500
2000      10.006          0.034               0.194       0.771        0.026           0.249           0.724
                                                          Spain
1887      7.369           0.694               0.160       0.147        0.336           0.280           0.384
1950      7.691           0.496               0.255       0.249        0.287           0.270           0.443
2000      9.656           0.063               0.294       0.642        0.044           0.292           0.664
                                                         Sweden
1890      7.478           0.581               0.234       0.184        0.304           0.271           0.424
1950      8.820           0.208               0.420       0.372        0.112           0.425           0.463
2000      9.938           0.032               0.285       0.683        0.012           0.306           0.681
                                                      United Kingdom
1891      8.288           0.157               0.436       0.407        0.090           0.410           0.500
1950      8.845           0.053               0.454       0.493        0.050           0.470           0.480
2000      9.921           0.017               0.221       0.762        0.010           0.275           0.715
Sources: GDP per capita in 1990 dollars (PPP adjusted) from Maddison (2008). Employment and value added shares from
Herrendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2013).




                                                         29
Table 2: Female labor force participation and economic development
         Sixteen developed economies, 1890-2005

                                                           Female                        Male
                                                (1)             (2)       (3)              (4)
      Log GDP per capita                    -1.178***      -1.030**     -0.846*          -0.192
                                             (0.251)        (0.388)     (0.460)         (0.478)

      Log GDP per capita squared            0.072***       0.064**      0.053*           0.013
                                             (0.014)       (0.023)      (0.026)         (0.027)

      Constant                              5.159***       4.431**      3.699*           1.661
                                             (1.107)       (1.637)      (1.971)         (2.074)

      N                                        240           240          240             230
      R2                                      0.449         0.518        0.725           0.784
      Country Effects                           No           No           Yes             Yes
      Year Effects                              No           Yes          Yes             Yes
      Sources: International Historical Statistics, Mitchell (1998 a,b,c) and International Labor
      Organization, see data appendix for a full description.
      Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country level. Years at
      5-year intervals. If multiple data points exist the values are averaged over the 5 year period.
      *** Significant at the 1% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.




                                                      30
Table 3: Female labor force participation, education gap and GDP per capita
            Full Sample, 1950-2005

                                                                          Females                                  Males
                                                 (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)          (6)
                                                                           15-64 years old
 Log GDP per capita                          -1.025***      -0.797***     -1.126***      -0.336*    -0.351**       -0.034
                                              (0.224)        (0.216)       (0.195)       (0.178)     (0.167)      (0.057)

 Log GDP per capita squared                  0.063***       0.049***       0.066***      0.020*      0.021**       0.004
                                              (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.012)      (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.003)

 Log of Male to Female Yrs School                                         -0.171***                   -0.010
                                                                           (0.036)                   (0.032)

 Constant                                    4.596***       3.592***       5.146***      1.264*      1.340**     1.027***
                                              (0.935)        (0.907)        (0.827)      (0.719)     (0.673)      (0.229)

 N                                               871           871            871           871        871          871
 R2                                             0.116         0.290          0.375         0.863      0.863        0.744
                                                                           45-59 years old
 Log GDP per capita                          -1.328***      -1.072***     -1.437***      -0.436**    -0.354*      0.110**
                                              (0.257)        (0.250)       (0.232)        (0.184)    (0.181)      (0.051)

 Log GDP per capita squared                  0.080***       0.064***       0.083***      0.025**     0.020*       -0.006*
                                              (0.015)        (0.015)        (0.014)      (0.011)     (0.011)      (0.003)

 Log of Male to Female Yrs School                                         -0.197***                   0.051
                                                                           (0.045)                   (0.054)

 Constant                                    5.930***       4.763***       6.488***      1.620**      1.208       0.523**
                                              (1.070)        (1.047)        (0.983)      (0.752)     (0.753)      (0.204)

 N                                               824           824            824           824        824          824
 R2                                             0.137         0.298          0.367         0.893      0.894        0.744
 Country Effects                                 No            No             No            Yes        Yes          Yes
 Year Effects                                    No            Yes            Yes           Yes        Yes          Yes
 Sources: International Labour Organization, see data appendix for a full description. Education data: Barro-Lee (2010).
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country level. Years are at 5-year intervals. If multiple
 data points exist the values are averaged over the 5-year period.
 *** Significant at the 1% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.




                                                            31
Table 4: Female labor force participation, education gap and GDP per capita
            Excludes early-OECD Countries, 1950-2005

                                                                        Females                                    Males
                                                 (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)
                                                                             15-64 years old
 Log GDP per capita                           -0.755**      -0.539*      -0.901***       -0.039      -0.057        0.023
                                               (0.321)      (0.288)       (0.263)       (0.231)     (0.217)       (0.068)

 Log GDP per capita squared                   0.045**        0.032*       0.051***       0.002       0.003         0.000
                                              (0.020)        (0.018)       (0.016)      (0.014)     (0.013)       (0.004)

 Log of Male to Female Yrs School                                        -0.172***                   -0.015
                                                                          (0.038)                   (0.032)

 Constant                                    3.544***       2.648**       4.320***       0.135       0.233       0.789***
                                              (1.287)       (1.175)        (1.081)      (0.910)     (0.850)       (0.270)

 N                                               669           669           669          669        669             669
 R2                                             0.052         0.260         0.355        0.879      0.879           0.770
                                                                             45-59 years old
 Log GDP per capita                          -1.026***      -0.754**     -1.150***       -0.150      -0.092        0.043
                                              (0.375)        (0.334)      (0.312)       (0.241)     (0.243)       (0.065)

 Log GDP per capita squared                   0.061**       0.043**       0.064***       0.008       0.004         -0.002
                                              (0.023)       (0.021)        (0.019)      (0.014)     (0.015)       (0.004)

 Log of Male to Female Yrs School                                        -0.195***                   0.050
                                                                          (0.047)                   (0.056)

 Constant                                    4.753***       3.585***      5.398***       0.550       0.240       0.796***
                                              (1.496)        (1.358)       (1.285)      (0.954)     (0.963)       (0.252)

 N                                               627           627           627          627        627             627
 R2                                             0.093         0.298         0.372        0.910      0.911           0.756
 Country Effects                                 No            No            No           Yes        Yes             Yes
 Year Effects                                    No            Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes             Yes
 Sources: International Labour Organization. See data appendix for a full description. Education data: Barro-Lee (2010).
 Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country level. Years are at 5-year intervals. If multiple
 data points exist the values are averaged over the 5-year period. Excluded OECD countries are: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
 Canada, Denmark, France, Finland, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxemborg, Netherlands, New Zealand,
 Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, nited Kingdom, United States.
 *** Significant at the 1% level. ** Significant at the 5% level. * Significant at the 10% level.




                                                            32
        Table 5: Clerical work and education, population aged 45-59


                                                           F/M Clerical Workers
                                                     (1)           (2)              (3)
Log of Male to Female Years School                -0.700***    -0.683***       -0.837***
                                                   (0.188)      (0.206)         (0.301)

Percent Women with Secondary Educ                 0.020***      0.025***          0.005
                                                   (0.005)       (0.005)         (0.006)

Constant                                          0.759***       0.368*         0.686***
                                                   (0.170)       (0.201)         (0.242)

N                                                    354           354              354
R2                                                  0.111         0.190            0.925
Country Effects                                      No            No              Yes
Year Effects                                         No            Yes             Yes
Sources: International Labor Organization. See data appendix for a full description.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country level.
Years are at 5-year intervals. If multiple data points exist the values are averaged over
the 5 year period.
***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.




                                             33
Table 6: Sectoral employment shares by gender and GDP per capita
        Sixteen developed economies, 1890-2005

                                                        (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                                               Agriculture
              Log GDP per capita                    -0.221***     -0.330***      -0.359***       -1.091**      -0.810*
                                                     (0.012)       (0.047)        (0.073)         (0.481)      (0.438)
              Female x Log GDP                       0.047**       0.047**        0.047**          -0.137       -0.137
                                                     (0.020)       (0.020)        (0.021)         (0.312)      (0.317)
              Log GDP per capita squared                                                            0.045       0.029
                                                                                                  (0.026)      (0.027)
              Female x Log GDP squared                                                             0.010        0.010
                                                                                                  (0.018)      (0.018)
              Female                                -0.494**       -0.494**      -0.494**          0.313        0.313
                                                     (0.198)        (0.202)       (0.205)         (1.362)      (1.384)
              Constant                              2.217***       3.053***      3.363***         6.255**      5.113**
                                                     (0.120)        (0.353)       (0.595)         (2.159)      (1.788)
              N                                        510            510           510              510         510
              R2                                      0.719          0.766         0.838            0.777       0.841
                                                                            Manufacturing
              Log GDP per capita                    0.049***      0.122***        0.265***      1.402***       0.844***
                                                     (0.014)       (0.039)         (0.045)       (0.315)        (0.214)
              Female x Log GDP                      -0.087***     -0.087***      -0.087***     -0.564***      -0.564***
                                                     (0.009)       (0.009)         (0.010)       (0.125)        (0.127)
              Log GDP per capita squared                                                       -0.074***       -0.035**
                                                                                                 (0.017)        (0.014)
              Female x Log GDP squared                                                          0.027***       0.027***
                                                                                                 (0.007)        (0.007)
              Female                                0.624***       0.624***       0.624***      2.718***       2.718***
                                                     (0.089)        (0.091)        (0.092)       (0.539)        (0.548)
              Constant                                -0.061       -0.630**      -1.857***     -6.081***      -4.253***
                                                     (0.129)        (0.293)        (0.373)       (1.428)        (0.848)
              N                                         510           510            510           510            510
              R2                                       0.546         0.669          0.844         0.713          0.851
                                                                                 Services
              Log GDP per capita                    0.172***       0.208***        0.094*          -0.311        -0.033
                                                     (0.008)        (0.034)       (0.047)         (0.255)       (0.301)
              Female x Log GDP                       0.040**        0.040**       0.040**        0.701**        0.701**
                                                     (0.017)        (0.018)       (0.018)         (0.266)       (0.271)
              Log GDP per capita squared                                                          0.030*          0.006
                                                                                                  (0.015)       (0.018)
              Female x Log GDP squared                                                           -0.037**      -0.037**
                                                                                                  (0.015)       (0.015)
              Female                                  -0.130        -0.130         -0.130        -3.031**      -3.031**
                                                     (0.172)       (0.176)        (0.179)         (1.155)       (1.173)
              Constant                              -1.156***     -1.423***        -0.506          0.826         0.140
                                                     (0.067)       (0.254)        (0.386)         (1.061)       (1.256)
              N                                         510          510             510             510           510
              R2                                       0.820        0.835           0.900           0.838         0.903
              Country Effects                           No            No            Yes            No            Yes
              Year Effects                              No            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
              Sources: International Historical Statistics, Mitchell (1998 a,b,c) and International Labor Organization.
              Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country level.
              Years are at 5-year intervals. If multiple data points exist the values are averaged over the 5-year period.
              ***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.


                                                                 34
Table 7: Sectoral employment shares by gender and GDP per capita
                                   Full Sample, 1950-2005

                                             (1)           (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)
                                                                    Agriculture
   Log GDP per capita                    -0.219***     -0.214***      -0.106***     -0.606***       -0.408**
                                          (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.024)        (0.123)        (0.183)
   Female x Log GDP                        0.008         0.008          0.008       -0.524***      -0.524***
                                          (0.012)       (0.012)        (0.013)        (0.175)        (0.182)
   Log GDP per capita squared                                                        0.024***        0.017*
                                                                                      (0.007)        (0.010)
   Female x Log GDP squared                                                         0.032***       0.032***
                                                                                      (0.010)        (0.011)
   Female                                  -0.123         -0.123        -0.123      2.076***       2.076***
                                          (0.116)        (0.117)       (0.122)        (0.713)        (0.744)
   Constant                              2.179***       2.164***      1.283***       3.787***      2.596***
                                          (0.066)        (0.069)       (0.170)        (0.528)        (0.801)
   N                                        1360           1360          1360          1360           1360
   R2                                       0.649         0.654         0.828          0.683          0.837
                                                                 Manufacturing
   Log GDP per capita                    0.099***      0.107***        0.095***      0.448***       0.688***
                                          (0.005)       (0.005)         (0.014)       (0.082)        (0.090)
   Female x Log GDP                      -0.073***     -0.073***      -0.073***       0.155*         0.155*
                                          (0.006)       (0.006)         (0.006)       (0.081)        (0.085)
   Log GDP per capita squared                                                       -0.020***      -0.035***
                                                                                      (0.005)        (0.005)
   Female x Log GDP squared                                                         -0.014***      -0.014***
                                                                                      (0.005)        (0.005)
   Female                                 0.509***      0.509***       0.509***        -0.434         -0.434
                                           (0.049)       (0.050)        (0.052)       (0.331)        (0.345)
   Constant                              -0.546***     -0.579***      -0.468***     -1.987***      -2.999***
                                           (0.043)       (0.045)        (0.101)       (0.341)        (0.392)
   N                                        1360          1360           1360           1360           1360
   R2                                       0.509         0.549          0.754          0.598         0.790
                                                                      Services
   Log GDP per capita                    0.120***       0.107***        0.011          0.159*        -0.280*
                                          (0.005)        (0.007)       (0.018)         (0.090)       (0.154)
   Female x Log GDP                      0.065***       0.065***      0.065***        0.369**        0.369**
                                          (0.011)        (0.011)       (0.011)         (0.163)       (0.170)
   Log GDP per capita squared                                                           -0.003        0.017*
                                                                                       (0.005)       (0.009)
   Female x Log GDP squared                                                            -0.018*       -0.018*
                                                                                       (0.010)       (0.010)
   Female                                -0.386***     -0.386***      -0.386***       -1.642**      -1.642**
                                          (0.100)       (0.100)        (0.104)         (0.662)       (0.691)
   Constant                              -0.633***     -0.585***        0.185         -0.800**      1.403**
                                          (0.047)       (0.054)        (0.137)         (0.376)       (0.669)
   N                                        1360          1360           1360            1360          1360
   R2                                      0.600         0.630          0.825            0.634        0.827
   Country Effects                           No            No            Yes            No            Yes
   Year Effects                              No            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes
   Sources: International Labor Organization, see data appendix for a full description.
   Notes: Robust standard errors in parenthesis are clustered at the country level.
   Years are at 5-year intervals. If multiple data points exist the values are averaged over the 5-year period.
   ***Significant at the 1% level. **Significant at the 5% level. *Significant at the 10% level.


                                                      35
Figure 1: Trends in female labor force participation, 1890-2005




                              36
Figure 2: Female labor force participation and economic development: 1890-2005




                                     37
Figure 3: The U-shaped female labor supply within and across countries



                Panel A: 1890-2005, Developed Economies




                     Panel B: 1950-2005, Full Sample




               Panel C: 1950-2005, Excludes OECD countries




                                   38
Figure 4: Sectoral employment shares by gender: Developed economies, 1890-2005

          All                       Females                    Males

                          Panel A: Agricultural Sector




                         Panel B: Manufacturing Sector




                            Panel C: Service Sector




                                      39
Figure 5: Sectoral employment shares by gender: Full sample, 1950-2005

      All                       Females                    Males

                      Panel A: Agricultural Sector




                     Panel B: Manufacturing Sector




                        Panel C: Service Sector




                                  40
                          Table A.1: Labor force participation by gender: Sixteen developed economies, 1890-2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                United
         Australia       Belgium        Canada        Denmark         Finland         France        Germany         Ireland         Italy   Netherlands   Norway   Portugal   Spain   Sweden             United States
                                                                                                                                                                                               Kingdom
                                                                                                       Panel A: Females
1890                      0.408          0.134                                                                                                0.271       0.355     0.455             0.276     0.400       0.186
1895                                                                                  0.443
1900       0.315          0.401          0.140          0.430          0.255          0.482                                         0.494     0.254       0.366     0.329     0.215   0.342     0.364       0.204
1905                                                                                  0.522
1910       0.272          0.412          0.165          0.400          0.453          0.515                          0.307          0.431     0.275       0.343     0.328     0.147   0.312     0.366       0.228
1920       0.251          0.282          0.177          0.344          0.451          0.537                                         0.390     0.268       0.317               0.148   0.359     0.347       0.233
1925                                                                                  0.475           0.472          0.329                                                                      0.387
1930                      0.311          0.197          0.364          0.597          0.472                                         0.260     0.273       0.300                       0.377     0.349       0.243
1935                                                                                  0.447           0.446          0.337          0.341
1940                                     0.207          0.476          0.614                          0.466                                                         0.242     0.116                         0.256
1945                      0.235                                                       0.470           0.339                                   0.232       0.270
1950                                     0.225          0.423          0.534                          0.394          0.315          0.277                 0.260     0.219     0.153   0.300     0.174       0.298
1955                                                                                  0.381
1960       0.289          0.255          0.297          0.365          0.485          0.365           0.411        0.297            0.246     0.226       0.238     0.170     0.177   0.311     0.376       0.351
1965       0.352                                        0.411                                         0.509        0.294                                                              0.373     0.419
1970       0.371          0.281          0.399          0.439          0.488          0.362           0.417        0.282            0.255     0.258       0.277     0.246     0.179   0.423     0.426       0.405
1975       0.438                         0.450          0.515          0.487          0.387           0.388        0.290            0.312     0.275                           0.279   0.521                 0.460
1980       0.456          0.364          0.504          0.563          0.538          0.416           0.405        0.297            0.326     0.310       0.542     0.448     0.265   0.591     0.445       0.500
1985       0.467                         0.550          0.605                         0.439           0.415        0.313            0.350     0.368       0.603     0.463     0.286   0.700     0.480       0.529
1990       0.520          0.383          0.574          0.610          0.565          0.466           0.468        0.371            0.343     0.448       0.550     0.499     0.350   0.604     0.524       0.567
1995       0.537          0.412          0.573          0.589          0.551          0.478           0.484        0.427            0.342     0.497       0.585     0.513     0.382   0.579     0.530       0.585
2000       0.554          0.433          0.601          0.602          0.567          0.489           0.496        0.484            0.366     0.549       0.605     0.540     0.419   0.586     0.543       0.586
2005       0.581          0.465          0.616          0.609          0.573          0.506           0.518        0.529            0.379     0.584       0.615     0.560     0.483   0.597     0.553       0.583
                                                                                                         Panel B: Males
 1890                     0.982          0.898                                                                                                            0.901                       0.776     0.981       0.874
 1895                                                                                 0.901
 1900      0.985          0.994          0.850                         0.691          0.920                                                   0.917       0.876                       0.875     0.970       0.873
 1905                                                                                 0.925
 1910      0.973          0.944          0.900          0.968          0.816          0.928                          0.866                    0.917       0.907                       0.879     0.961       0.863
 1920      0.975          0.849          0.892          0.887          0.691          0.933                                                   0.918       0.902               0.999   0.907     0.948       0.865
 1925                                                                                 0.919           0.931          0.898                                                                      0.920
 1930                     0.897          0.878          0.887          0.902          0.901                                         0.961     0.893       0.882                       0.889     0.925       0.841
 1935                                                                                 0.878           0.877          0.893          0.909
 1940                                    0.859          0.926          0.894                          0.849                                                         0.967     0.952                         0.802
 1945                     0.798                                                       0.874           0.753                                   0.884       0.866
 1950                                    0.870          0.876          0.899                          0.842          0.885          0.885                 0.876     0.878     0.916   0.858     0.438       0.842
 1955                                                                                 0.808
 1960      0.857          0.760          0.781          0.852          0.842          0.754           0.830          0.850          0.807     0.826       0.826     0.910     0.890   0.817     0.869       0.788
 1965      0.839                                        0.832                                         0.833          0.840                                                            0.750     0.838
 1970      0.803          0.717          0.764          0.785          0.743          0.730           0.793          0.820          0.727     0.755       0.749     0.868     0.802   0.700     0.813       0.747
 1975      0.793                         0.755          0.764          0.672          0.694           0.737          0.776          0.757     0.785                           0.753   0.728                 0.761
 1980      0.773          0.705          0.767          0.755          0.680          0.689           0.727          0.764          0.733     0.693       0.787     0.789     0.725   0.717     0.760       0.759
 1985      0.751                         0.768          0.752                         0.666           0.717          0.741          0.721     0.695       0.784     0.723     0.689   0.783     0.722       0.721
 1990      0.744          0.607          0.742          0.737          0.690          0.642           0.707          0.693          0.648     0.700       0.694     0.715     0.673   0.693     0.729       0.747
 1995      0.733          0.607          0.721          0.727          0.666          0.630           0.692          0.691          0.617     0.710       0.714     0.693     0.652   0.671     0.706       0.742
 2000      0.720          0.607          0.727          0.719          0.665          0.627           0.667          0.710          0.614     0.732       0.714     0.699     0.663   0.675     0.698       0.731
 2005      0.725          0.610          0.724          0.713          0.655          0.623           0.669          0.720          0.607     0.730       0.709     0.692     0.682   0.682     0.694       0.720

Sources: International Historical Statistics, Mitchell (1998 a,b,c) and International Labor Organization, see data appendix for details.




                                                                                                                          41
                      Table A.2: Labor force participation by gender: Full sample, 1950-2005
                           1950    1955    1960    1965    1970     1975         1980    1985    1990    1995    2000    2005
                                                                     Panel A: Females
Afghanistan                                                                      0.074           0.155   0.146   0.139   0.148
Albania                                                                                          0.576   0.571   0.559   0.557
Algeria                            0.386           0.029            0.036       0.061    0.07    0.112   0.125   0.132   0.147
Angola                                     0.076                                                  0.69   0.694    0.68   0.638
Argentina                                  0.232           0.265    0.29        0.299    0.319   0.461   0.478   0.516   0.561
Armenia                                                                                          0.653    0.65   0.634   0.562
Australia                                  0.289   0.352   0.371    0.438       0.528    0.531    0.62   0.643   0.663   0.693
Austria                    0.478            0.53           0.491                0.428    0.512   0.577   0.613   0.633   0.675
Azerbaijan                                                                                       0.591   0.605   0.633   0.656
Bahrain                                                    0.062                0.165    0.175   0.306   0.341   0.367   0.387
Bangladesh                                 0.181                    0.034       0.045    0.087    0.62   0.588   0.573   0.588
Belarus                                    0.664                                0.661             0.71   0.675   0.653    0.63
Belgium                                    0.255           0.281                0.364            0.489   0.532   0.564   0.605
Benin                                                               0.701       0.387    0.394   0.591   0.628   0.664   0.678
Bolivia                    0.602                                    0.229       0.232    0.244   0.532   0.594   0.616   0.638
Bosnia                                                                                           0.389   0.389   0.387   0.392
Botswana                                                                        0.447    0.642   0.696   0.712   0.727   0.741
Brazil                                     0.19            0.211     0.36       0.319    0.418   0.537   0.571    0.6    0.634
Bulgaria                           0.622           0.595            0.606                0.771   0.661   0.632   0.591   0.613
Burkina Faso                                                        0.028                0.753   0.795   0.795   0.795   0.796
Burundi                                                                         0.948     0.89    0.91   0.882   0.862    0.85
Cambodia                                   0.582                                                 0.812   0.801    0.79   0.808
Cameroon                                                            0.483       0.514    0.508   0.587   0.626   0.636   0.647
Canada                     0.249           0.297           0.445    0.507       0.549    0.634   0.681   0.685    0.72   0.738
Cape Verde                                 0.932                                0.224            0.458   0.484   0.509   0.534
Central African Republic                                            0.532                        0.703    0.71   0.715   0.722
Chad                                                                            0.253            0.648   0.653   0.652   0.652
Chile                      0.285           0.227           0.231                 0.28    0.322   0.371   0.386   0.395   0.451
China                                                                           0.706            0.795    0.79   0.774   0.757
Colombia                   0.206                   0.203            0.239        0.24    0.429   0.338   0.435   0.558   0.555
Comoros                                                                         0.276            0.283   0.299   0.317    0.34
Congo, Republic of                                                  0.562                0.493   0.616   0.645   0.672   0.691
Costa Rica                                         0.184            0.211       0.294    0.292   0.362    0.4     0.44   0.485
Croatia                                                                                          0.552   0.558   0.569    0.59
Cuba                               0.192                   0.199                0.366    0.405   0.406   0.426   0.436   0.478
Czech Republic                                                                                   0.637   0.637    0.63   0.617
Czechoslovakia             0.467           0.579           0.642                0.736            0.729
Denmark                    0.423           0.416   0.476   0.523    0.539        0.59    0.744   0.769   0.742   0.752   0.766
Djibouti                                                                                         0.294   0.316   0.338    0.36
Dominican Republic                          0.11           0.268                 0.29             0.47   0.485   0.509    0.54
Ecuador                                    0.176                    0.171        0.27            0.433   0.486   0.571   0.572
Egypt                                      0.052   0.058            0.057       0.078    0.152   0.247   0.215   0.211   0.238
El Salvador                                0.189           0.245                0.372            0.438   0.456   0.476   0.491
Equatorial Guinea                                                                        0.441   0.829   0.828   0.824    0.82
Estonia                                                                                          0.718   0.663   0.651   0.693
Ethiopia                                                            0.569       0.572    0.599   0.751   0.743   0.777   0.809
Finland                                    0.485           0.488    0.487       0.599     0.72    0.71   0.699   0.723   0.735
France                                     0.365           0.362    0.387       0.433    0.545   0.587   0.612    0.63   0.653
Gabon                                               0.5                                          0.555   0.551   0.555   0.564
Gambia                                                                                    0.7    0.701   0.709   0.718   0.724
Georgia                                                                                          0.608   0.615   0.593   0.587
Germany                    0.394           0.411   0.509   0.483    0.388       0.427    0.524   0.601   0.623   0.648    0.69
Ghana                                      0.567           0.636                                 0.714   0.729    0.72   0.683
Greece                     0.178            0.39           0.259                0.295    0.401   0.427   0.476   0.518   0.557
Guatemala                                          0.13             0.142       0.141     0.21    0.42   0.428   0.437   0.491
Guinea                                                                                   0.474   0.656    0.65    0.65   0.658
Guinea-Bissau              0.951                                                0.026            0.617   0.624   0.663   0.685
Haiti                      0.831                           0.703                0.557    0.586   0.586   0.587    0.59   0.606
Honduras                                                            0.165       0.176    0.187   0.357   0.425   0.425   0.423
Hungary                                    0.429            0.48                0.617            0.559   0.505   0.529    0.55
India                                      0.429           0.187                0.329            0.369   0.367   0.371   0.353
Indonesia                                  0.312            0.37    0.458       0.421    0.472   0.514   0.522   0.517   0.527
Iran                               0.094           0.122   0.079    0.134       0.115     0.09   0.099   0.106           0.182
Iraq                               0.032                            0.158                0.105   0.119   0.128   0.138   0.147
Ireland                                    0.327   0.328   0.317     0.29       0.348    0.358   0.442   0.505   0.569   0.621
Israel                                                     0.341    0.336       0.383    0.414   0.491   0.535   0.568   0.595
Italy                      0.277           0.246           0.299    0.312       0.353    0.431    0.43   0.439   0.482   0.508
Jamaica                                    0.498           0.365    0.666       0.595     0.48   0.732   0.688   0.635   0.632
Japan                      0.502   0.505   0.509   0.531   0.509    0.501        0.49    0.544    0.58   0.593   0.599   0.617
Jordan                                     0.044                    0.093       0.067            0.106   0.128   0.127   0.148
Kazakhstan                                                                                       0.703   0.714   0.723   0.734
Kenya                                                                                            0.687   0.653   0.621    0.61
Korea, Rep.                                0.294   0.314   0.384    0.467       0.433    0.427    0.5    0.517    0.53   0.544
Kuwait                                             0.089    0.1     0.149       0.207    0.277   0.377   0.429   0.464   0.451
Kyrgyzstan                                                                                       0.644    0.63    0.6    0.589
Laos                                                                                                     0.846
Latvia                                                                                           0.715   0.641   0.639   0.683




                                                               42
             Table A.2 (ctd.): Labor force participation by gender: Full sample, 1950-2005
                           1950    1955    1960    1965    1970       1975         1980       1985    1990    1995    2000    2005
                                                                    Panel A: Females (ctd.)
Lebanon                                                              0.154                             0.19   0.205   0.219    0.24
Lesotho                                                              0.352                            0.684   0.694   0.666   0.611
Liberia                                    0.442                     0.248                    0.466   0.572   0.585   0.592    0.59
Libya                                              0.041             0.065                            0.204   0.253   0.301    0.32
Lithuania                                                                                             0.691   0.668   0.669   0.656
Macedonia                                                                                             0.457   0.454   0.438   0.476
Madagascar                                                           0.733                            0.855   0.858    0.86   0.858
Malawi                                                               0.621                    0.801   0.757   0.757   0.782   0.832
Malaysia                           0.299   0.497           0.371     0.434         0.416              0.451   0.446   0.467   0.464
Mali                                                                 0.173                            0.393   0.389   0.378   0.377
Mauritania                                                            0.04                            0.196   0.217    0.25    0.27
Mauritius                  0.212           0.175           0.206                              0.335    0.41   0.432   0.445   0.458
Mexico                                     0.198           0.185                   0.267              0.369   0.407   0.414   0.451
Mongolia                                                                                              0.571   0.583   0.586   0.575
Morocco                                    0.088           0.126                   0.176              0.278   0.303   0.283   0.283
Mozambique                 0.081                            0.32                   0.865              0.864   0.877   0.884   0.875
Namibia                                                                                               0.503   0.499   0.531   0.589
Nepal                                      0.596           0.343                   0.452              0.829   0.841   0.843   0.832
Netherlands                                0.226           0.258     0.327         0.315      0.368   0.548   0.612   0.677   0.722
New Zealand                0.284   0.297   0.277   0.262   0.338     0.366         0.414      0.627   0.636   0.667   0.686   0.714
Nicaragua                                          0.221   0.206     0.319                    0.364   0.358   0.368   0.421    0.47
Niger                                                                0.072                            0.273   0.341   0.395   0.398
Nigeria                                            0.277                                      0.37    0.404   0.431   0.462   0.478
Norway                     0.288           0.238           0.277                   0.608      0.68    0.698   0.741   0.756   0.759
Oman                                                                                                  0.192   0.217   0.248   0.276
Pakistan                                                   0.086     0.071         0.084      0.103   0.144   0.146    0.17   0.216
Panama                     0.242           0.247           0.303                   0.334      0.379   0.429   0.472   0.499   0.519
Paraguay                                   0.264           0.243                   0.231              0.562   0.535   0.551   0.581
Peru                                       0.232           0.209                   0.302      0.483   0.483   0.587   0.621   0.657
Philippines                                0.272            0.35     0.243         0.468      0.487   0.493   0.509   0.521   0.503
Poland                     0.582           0.619           0.665                    0.66              0.622    0.59   0.583    0.57
Portugal                   0.219            0.17           0.275                    0.46      0.463   0.598   0.616   0.654   0.687
Puerto Rico                                0.253           0.261     0.273         0.298      0.278   0.368   0.401   0.424   0.447
Qatar                                                                                         0.281   0.451   0.425   0.423   0.498
Romania                            0.693           0.696             0.681                             0.61   0.643   0.596   0.559
Russia                                                                                                0.696   0.645   0.664   0.682
Rwanda                                                                             0.941              0.891   0.879    0.88   0.877
Sao Tome and Principe                                                              0.398              0.398   0.401   0.419   0.446
Saudi Arabia                                                                                          0.155   0.167   0.171   0.185
Senegal                                                    0.587                              0.62    0.637   0.647   0.655   0.663
Serbia/Montenegro/Kosovo                                                                              0.493   0.515   0.538   0.555
Seychelles                                 0.539           0.418      0.51         0.478      0.558    0.57   0.591
Sierra Leone                                       0.45                                                0.67   0.681   0.676   0.679
Singapore                          0.224                   0.311     0.364         0.438      0.489   0.553   0.561   0.586   0.606
Slovak Republic                                                                                       0.673    0.62   0.632    0.61
Slovenia                                                                                              0.575   0.633   0.634   0.668
Somalia                                                              0.375                            0.367   0.374   0.382   0.388
South Africa                               0.264           0.387                   0.399      0.445    0.38   0.438   0.477   0.494
Spain                      0.153           0.177           0.204      0.33         0.318      0.351   0.434   0.484   0.535   0.617
Sri Lanka                          0.303           0.235   0.325                   0.299      0.368   0.391   0.404   0.392   0.392
Sudan                              0.413                             0.216                     0.31   0.271   0.295   0.306   0.316
Swaziland                                           0.5              0.282                    0.303   0.433   0.437    0.44   0.444
Sweden                                     0.371   0.443   0.514     0.559         0.722      0.793   0.789   0.755   0.757   0.768
Switzerland                0.371           0.396           0.481                   0.514              0.691   0.708   0.734   0.756
Syria                                      0.079           0.086     0.152         0.103      0.127   0.211   0.234   0.201   0.154
Tajikistan                                                                                            0.626   0.624   0.615   0.606
Tanzania                                           0.712                           0.837               0.89   0.891   0.895   0.903
Thailand                                   0.814           0.734     0.437         0.736      0.762   0.744   0.707   0.705   0.705
Togo                                                                               0.527              0.704   0.752   0.793    0.82
Total Former USSR                          0.563           0.646                   0.738              0.707
Trinidad and Tobago                        0.306           0.256                    0.35      0.391   0.467   0.514   0.538   0.594
Tunisia                            0.354           0.058             0.203         0.194      0.231    0.23   0.251   0.259   0.268
Turkey                              0.72   0.654   0.567   0.509     0.474         0.462      0.443   0.337   0.315   0.278   0.264
Turkmenistan                                                                                          0.503    0.51    0.51   0.498
Uganda                                                                                                0.835   0.828   0.814   0.776
Ukraine                                    0.562                                   0.632              0.678   0.649   0.623    0.62
United Arab Emirates                                                 0.102         0.163               0.28   0.328   0.355   0.406
United Kingdom                             0.446   0.501   0.519                   0.559       0.48   0.665   0.672   0.684   0.693
United States              0.33            0.351           0.405      0.46         0.532      0.627   0.676   0.696   0.691   0.682
Uruguay                                            0.271             0.293                    0.476   0.555   0.609   0.642   0.652
Uzbekistan                                                                                            0.501   0.506    0.51   0.508
Venezuela                                  0.202           0.226      0.3          0.295      0.307   0.396   0.479   0.554   0.539
Vietnam                                                                                               0.811   0.803   0.794   0.783
Yemen                                                                                                 0.172   0.206   0.236    0.25
Yugoslavia                                 0.426           0.408      0.4          0.423
Zambia                                                     0.282     0.313         0.355      0.321   0.744   0.753   0.748   0.738
Zimbabwe                                                                           0.481      0.662   0.681   0.671   0.772   0.843




                                                               43
              Table A.2 (ctd.): Labor force participation by gender: Full sample, 1950-2005
                           1950    1955    1960    1965    1970        1975        1980   1985    1990    1995    2000    2005
                                                                        Panel B: Males
Afghanistan                                                                       0.882           0.830   0.830   0.822   0.820
Albania                                                                                           0.783   0.786   0.776   0.770
Algeria                            0.881           0.826               0.781      0.806   0.720   0.789   0.807   0.785   0.760
Angola                                     0.893                                                  0.765   0.761   0.765   0.778
Argentina                                  0.843           0.810       0.781      0.786   0.865   0.832   0.817   0.806   0.821
Armenia                                                                                           0.799   0.795   0.784   0.745
Australia                                  0.857   0.839   0.803       0.793      0.855   0.821   0.841   0.833   0.822   0.828
Austria                    0.926           0.902           0.863                  0.747   0.811   0.804   0.803   0.795   0.804
Azerbaijan                                                                                        0.744   0.752   0.747   0.720
Bahrain                                                    0.833                  0.846   0.736   0.890   0.883   0.866   0.860
Bangladesh                                 0.930                       0.902      0.841   0.886   0.895   0.886   0.876   0.871
Belarus                                    0.877                                  0.818           0.804   0.761   0.723   0.698
Belgium                                    0.760           0.717                  0.705           0.714   0.723   0.731   0.737
Benin                                                                  0.923      0.860   0.841   0.891   0.849   0.797   0.787
Bolivia                    0.925                                       0.861      0.866   0.846   0.833   0.832   0.827   0.825
Bosnia                                                                                            0.588   0.638   0.650   0.667
Botswana                                                                          0.806   0.790   0.813   0.812   0.814   0.822
Brazil                                     0.903           0.836       0.873      0.860   0.852   0.887   0.865   0.853   0.856
Bulgaria                           0.879           0.768               0.703              0.854   0.716   0.696   0.675   0.710
Burkina Faso                                                           0.892              0.919   0.917   0.913   0.912   0.911
Burundi                                                                           0.940   0.883   0.899   0.868   0.842   0.826
Cambodia                                   0.866                                                  0.875   0.869   0.859   0.876
Cameroon                                                               0.816      0.803   0.789   0.790   0.771   0.768   0.771
Canada                     0.940           0.781           0.825       0.820      0.813   0.849   0.832   0.816   0.826   0.823
Cape Verde                                 0.957                                  0.632           0.876   0.870   0.862   0.860
Central African Republic                                               0.711                      0.873   0.867   0.862   0.857
Chad                                                                              0.910           0.807   0.802   0.800   0.801
Chile                      0.898           0.851           0.826                  0.739   0.763   0.815   0.809   0.784   0.784
China                                                                             0.865           0.889   0.882   0.868   0.857
Colombia                   0.945                   0.875               0.789      0.807   0.815   0.800   0.826   0.845   0.816
Comoros                                                                           0.819           0.800   0.791   0.791   0.804
Congo, Republic of                                                     0.818              0.696   0.736   0.726   0.726   0.731
Costa Rica                                         0.930               0.831      0.871   0.846   0.869   0.866   0.850   0.844
Croatia                                                                                           0.751   0.732   0.716   0.713
Cuba                               0.882                   0.828                  0.778   0.722   0.792   0.790   0.765   0.768
Czech Republic                                                                                    0.803   0.802   0.787   0.781
Czechoslovakia             0.810           0.859           0.813                  0.843           0.817
Denmark                    0.876           0.931   0.913   0.878       0.785      0.777   0.856   0.856   0.852   0.840   0.839
Djibouti                                                                                          0.681   0.683   0.685   0.688
Dominican Republic                         0.912           0.818                  0.777           0.857   0.843   0.835   0.837
Ecuador                                    0.937                       0.866      0.831           0.858   0.857   0.870   0.867
Egypt                                      0.890   0.811               0.791      0.752   0.782   0.749   0.748   0.766   0.779
El Salvador                                0.923           0.906                  0.836           0.852   0.837   0.809   0.817
Equatorial Guinea                                                                         0.926   0.948   0.956   0.949   0.942
Estonia                                                                                           0.812   0.779   0.746   0.768
Ethiopia                                                               0.901      0.898   0.882   0.919   0.922   0.921   0.914
Finland                                    0.842           0.743       0.672      0.730   0.800   0.783   0.766   0.774   0.771
France                                     0.754           0.730       0.694      0.708   0.767   0.749   0.748   0.751   0.749
Gabon                                              0.686                                          0.726   0.703   0.678   0.663
Gambia                                                                                    0.863   0.849   0.838   0.831   0.832
Georgia                                                                                           0.772   0.775   0.768   0.766
Germany                    0.842           0.830   0.833   0.875       0.737      0.751   0.819   0.806   0.799   0.793   0.819
Ghana                                      0.890           0.835                                  0.733   0.756   0.754   0.719
Greece                     0.883           0.847           0.728                  0.716   0.747   0.763   0.772   0.778   0.790
Guatemala                                          0.920               0.880      0.866   0.878   0.888   0.879   0.875   0.899
Guinea                                                                                    0.824   0.796   0.796   0.795   0.795
Guinea-Bissau              0.951                                                  0.885           0.797   0.800   0.795   0.794
Haiti                      0.950                           0.896                  0.828   0.809   0.767   0.723   0.695   0.704
Honduras                                                               0.881      0.877   0.882   0.878   0.897   0.876   0.849
Hungary                                    0.870           0.754                  0.837           0.713   0.671   0.672   0.681
India                                      0.902           0.856                  0.868           0.867   0.857   0.854   0.846
Indonesia                                  0.889           0.824       0.864      0.835   0.823   0.833   0.851   0.869   0.867
Iran                               0.935           0.865   0.796       0.832      0.775   0.810   0.799   0.748           0.724
Iraq                               0.896                               0.802              0.753   0.738   0.727   0.716   0.714
Ireland                                    0.911   0.904   0.886       0.776      0.849   0.812   0.774   0.770   0.790   0.804
Israel                                                     0.749       0.706      0.698   0.683   0.685   0.678   0.667   0.679
Italy                      0.885           0.807           0.816       0.757      0.778   0.844   0.755   0.733   0.743   0.744
Jamaica                                    0.905           0.807       0.910      0.809   0.741   0.846   0.829   0.810   0.789
Japan                      0.862   0.850   0.850   0.856   0.843       0.869      0.816   0.837   0.839   0.852   0.849   0.849
Jordan                                     0.780                       0.721      0.770           0.697   0.713   0.706   0.696
Kazakhstan                                                                                        0.820   0.814   0.805   0.803
Kenya                                                                                             0.788   0.754   0.720   0.709
Korea, Rep.                                0.750   0.726   0.748       0.763      0.718   0.687   0.762   0.770   0.764   0.760
Kuwait                                             0.893   0.874       0.825      0.867   0.812   0.810   0.842   0.845   0.841
Kyrgyzstan                                                                                        0.782   0.782   0.778   0.810
Laos                                                                                                      0.852
Latvia                                                                                            0.816   0.766   0.738   0.768




                                                                  44
               Table A.2 (ctd.): Labor force participation by gender: Full sample, 1950-2005
                              1950           1955           1960            1965    1970         1975          1980     1985    1990    1995    2000    2005
                                                                                                Panel B: Males (ctd.)
Lebanon                                                                                         0.738                           0.733   0.742   0.747   0.750
Lesotho                                                                                         0.788                           0.838   0.827   0.791   0.751
Liberia                                                     0.833                               0.700                   0.662   0.636   0.622   0.620   0.633
Libya                                                                       0.802               0.780                           0.748   0.749   0.763   0.787
Lithuania                                                                                                                       0.810   0.788   0.744   0.715
Macedonia                                                                                                                       0.685   0.758   0.679   0.714
Madagascar                                                                                      0.920                           0.894   0.899   0.903   0.898
Malawi                                                                                          0.817                   0.854   0.786   0.783   0.831   0.823
Malaysia                                     0.874          0.901                   0.792       0.817         0.806             0.829   0.833   0.825   0.801
Mali                                                                                            0.929                           0.671   0.672   0.684   0.700
Mauritania                                                                                      0.946                           0.786   0.788   0.792   0.798
Mauritius                     0.852                         0.811                   0.832                               0.834   0.852   0.850   0.840   0.806
Mexico                                                      0.927                   0.813                     0.797             0.866   0.859   0.847   0.842
Mongolia                                                                                                                        0.674   0.681   0.676   0.671
Morocco                                                     0.874                   0.800                     0.812             0.832   0.833   0.815   0.800
Mozambique                    0.979                                                 0.970                     0.882             0.804   0.807   0.829   0.829
Namibia                                                                                                                         0.661   0.646   0.674   0.708
Nepal                                                       0.943                   0.878                     0.877             0.919   0.918   0.908   0.893
Netherlands                                                 0.826                   0.755       0.892         0.716     0.695   0.794   0.812   0.843   0.847
New Zealand                   0.913          0.919          0.833           0.864   0.812       0.795         0.823     0.864   0.830   0.836   0.835   0.845
Nicaragua                                                                   0.911   0.795       0.787                   0.815   0.854   0.856   0.835   0.820
Niger                                                                                           0.937                           0.922   0.901   0.896   0.914
Nigeria                                                                     0.880                                       0.791   0.744   0.702   0.643   0.622
Norway                        0.936                         0.826                   0.749                     0.845     0.852   0.812   0.838   0.830   0.819
Oman                                                                                                                            0.825   0.809   0.789   0.789
Pakistan                                                                            0.869       0.871         0.860     0.857   0.864   0.855   0.860   0.865
Panama                        0.917                         0.871                   0.861                     0.786     0.825   0.835   0.856   0.850   0.857
Paraguay                                                    0.942                   0.915                     0.880             0.931   0.911   0.883   0.882
Peru                                                        0.886                   0.816                     0.791     0.762   0.806   0.844   0.837   0.855
Philippines                                                 0.824                   0.794       0.767         0.814     0.809   0.841   0.846   0.839   0.807
Poland                        0.870                         0.886                   0.824                     0.817             0.759   0.718   0.700   0.706
Portugal                      0.878                         0.910                   0.913                     0.805     0.723   0.805   0.779   0.792   0.792
Puerto Rico                                                 0.843                   0.610       0.638         0.629     0.580   0.682   0.691   0.677   0.666
Qatar                                                                                                                   0.934   0.945   0.945   0.932   0.940
Romania                                      0.942                          0.877               0.832                           0.763   0.772   0.725   0.705
Russia                                                                                                                          0.799   0.746   0.747   0.764
Rwanda                                                                                                        0.945             0.896   0.886   0.853   0.852
Sao Tome and Principe                                                                                         0.832             0.800   0.774   0.774   0.788
Saudi Arabia                                                                                                                    0.821   0.765   0.758   0.758
Senegal                                                                             0.920                               0.898   0.904   0.900   0.897   0.897
Serbia/Montenegro/Kosovo                                                                                                        0.721   0.724   0.731   0.726
Seychelles                                                  0.880                   0.867       0.849         0.837     0.780   0.788   0.735
Sierra Leone                                                                0.861                                               0.674   0.651   0.659   0.689
Singapore                                    0.891                                  0.848       0.788         0.815     0.836   0.844   0.839   0.838   0.828
Slovak Republic                                                                                                                 0.798   0.769   0.767   0.762
Slovenia                                                                                                                        0.667   0.726   0.727   0.752
Somalia                                                                                         0.927                           0.797   0.795   0.797   0.793
South Africa                                                0.950                   0.914                     0.822     0.836   0.656   0.640   0.630   0.653
Spain                         0.916                         0.890                   0.879       0.848         0.827     0.797   0.785   0.775   0.795   0.816
Sri Lanka                                    0.842                          0.821   0.842                     0.788     0.798   0.813   0.809   0.809   0.813
Sudan                                        0.970                                              0.906                   0.852   0.770   0.759   0.761   0.766
Swaziland                                                                   0.832               0.588                   0.670   0.747   0.737   0.724   0.717
Sweden                                                      0.920           0.839   0.800       0.767         0.830     0.858   0.829   0.801   0.801   0.816
Switzerland                   0.936                         0.931                   0.918                     0.899             0.908   0.899   0.886   0.878
Syria                                                       0.838                   0.790       0.759         0.776     0.770   0.833   0.832   0.810   0.771
Tajikistan                                                                                                                      0.790   0.790   0.779   0.772
Tanzania                                                                    0.860                             0.828             0.918   0.915   0.914   0.912
Thailand                                                    0.895                   0.877       0.745         0.864     0.875   0.885   0.855   0.852   0.850
Togo                                                                                                          0.804             0.847   0.836   0.825   0.819
Total Former USSR                                           0.854                   0.827                     0.825             0.813
Trinidad and Tobago                                         0.863                   0.816                     0.796     0.803   0.771   0.809   0.808   0.819
Tunisia                                      0.807                          0.863               0.866         0.803     0.825   0.788   0.772   0.745   0.731
Turkey                                       0.954          0.938           0.919   0.847       0.854         0.846     0.832   0.833   0.802   0.750   0.748
Turkmenistan                                                                                                                    0.774   0.762   0.776   0.781
Uganda                                                                                                                          0.825   0.829   0.827   0.802
Ukraine                                                     0.850                                             0.800             0.770   0.742   0.708   0.723
United Arab Emirates                                                                            0.933         0.949             0.919   0.920   0.918   0.917
United Kingdom                                              0.957           0.927   0.914                     0.879     0.722   0.856   0.833   0.824   0.820
United States                 0.900                         0.788                   0.747       0.761         0.790     0.806   0.838   0.831   0.816   0.801
Uruguay                                                                     0.812               0.784                   0.893   0.867   0.865   0.850   0.855
Uzbekistan                                                                                                                      0.756   0.751   0.754   0.764
Venezuela                                                   0.895                   0.803       0.809         0.797     0.807   0.828   0.850   0.853   0.833
Vietnam                                                                                                                         0.884   0.872   0.860   0.847
Yemen                                                                                                                           0.757   0.744   0.731   0.733
Yugoslavia                                                  0.872                   0.782       0.758         0.770
Zambia                                                                              0.846       0.848         0.842     0.879   0.861   0.856   0.859   0.862
Zimbabwe                                                                                                      0.800     0.771   0.803   0.802   0.867   0.907

Sources: International Labor Organization, see data appendix for details.




                                                                                           45
                                  Table A.3: Sectoral shares by gender: Sixteen developed economies, 1890-2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                United   United
         Australia      Belgium         Canada        Denmark         Finland        France        Germany         Ireland          Italy   Netherlands   Norway   Portugal   Spain   Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                               Kingdom   States

                                                                                                                    Panel A: Females
       Sector: Agriculture
1890                      0.320          0.061          0.488                         0.433          0.528                                    0.210       0.363     0.591             0.886     0.018
1900       0.113          0.267          0.040          0.423          0.632          0.406          0.561                         0.606      0.186       0.263     0.602     0.603   0.655     0.018    0.191
1910       0.041          0.203          0.044          0.305          0.799          0.420                         0.125          0.581      0.208       0.189     0.481     0.396   0.458     0.022    0.191
1920       0.022          0.188          0.037          0.176          0.773          0.446          0.436          0.364          0.594      0.143       0.194               0.318   0.330     0.054    0.110
1930       0.035          0.143          0.046          0.257          0.729          0.402          0.407          0.307          0.430      0.144       0.130                       0.271     0.012
1940       0.036          0.076          0.024          0.186          0.651          0.414          0.442          0.248                     0.182       0.119     0.343     0.235   0.061              0.043
1950       0.039                         0.024          0.173          0.461          0.277          0.354          0.211          0.414                  0.082     0.331     0.247   0.047     0.017    0.038
1960       0.046          0.046          0.030          0.068          0.319          0.196          0.178          0.132          0.291      0.044       0.040     0.177     0.405   0.060     0.013    0.024
1970       0.045          0.029          0.032          0.065          0.161          0.114          0.108          0.079          0.207      0.035       0.084     0.224     0.213   0.043     0.013    0.018
1980       0.042          0.020          0.031          0.040          0.094          0.140          0.067          0.048          0.137      0.031       0.053     0.297     0.155   0.030     0.012    0.016
1990       0.037          0.017          0.025          0.027          0.059          0.084          0.035          0.030          0.083      0.029       0.034     0.146     0.092   0.019     0.011    0.014
2000       0.029          0.013          0.018          0.017          0.033          0.023          0.019          0.018          0.044      0.023       0.018     0.126     0.045   0.011     0.008    0.011
       Sector: Manufacturing
1890                      0.317          0.313          0.287                         0.270          0.268                                    0.161       0.208     0.362             0.080     0.445
1900       0.220          0.353          0.316          0.189          0.123          0.272          0.237                         0.259      0.172       0.241     0.306     0.130   0.099     0.456    0.148
1910       0.282          0.367          0.271          0.183          0.083          0.324                         0.331          0.270      0.180       0.218     0.223     0.192   0.151     0.460    0.165
1920       0.261          0.398          0.217          0.168          0.092          0.247          0.255          0.099          0.237      0.210       0.207               0.278   0.201     0.459    0.230
1930       0.238          0.361          0.158          0.139          0.100          0.246          0.240          0.106          0.290      0.194       0.190                       0.208     0.382
1940       0.297          0.396          0.224          0.182          0.134          0.212          0.231          0.107                     0.172       0.238     0.213     0.279   0.249              0.229
1950       0.282                         0.242          0.216          0.211          0.261          0.263          0.200          0.280                  0.261     0.240     0.252   0.366     0.394    0.252
1960       0.256          0.302          0.193          0.254          0.220          0.266          0.332          0.229          0.312      0.228       0.222     0.292     0.255   0.256     0.344    0.231
1970       0.204          0.256          0.165          0.201          0.230          0.257          0.333          0.239          0.316      0.167       0.165     0.332     0.265   0.191     0.274    0.204
1980       0.158          0.167          0.146          0.165          0.211          0.406          0.286          0.211          0.261      0.124       0.130     0.256     0.210   0.151     0.203    0.179
1990       0.122          0.135          0.135          0.162          0.162          0.160          0.230          0.186          0.224      0.107       0.109     0.250     0.170   0.125     0.143    0.143
2000       0.093          0.113          0.113          0.138          0.123          0.114          0.167          0.131          0.192      0.088       0.083     0.212     0.129   0.099     0.106    0.107
       Sector: Services
1890                      0.363          0.626          0.225                         0.297          0.204                                    0.628       0.429     0.047             0.035     0.537
1900       0.667          0.379          0.644          0.389          0.245          0.323          0.203                         0.135      0.643       0.496     0.093     0.266   0.246     0.526    0.661
1910       0.676          0.430          0.685          0.512          0.119          0.256                         0.544          0.149      0.612       0.593     0.296     0.412   0.391     0.518    0.643
1920       0.717          0.414          0.746          0.656          0.135          0.306          0.309          0.537          0.169      0.647       0.599               0.405   0.468     0.487    0.660
1930       0.727          0.496          0.796          0.603          0.171          0.352          0.354          0.586          0.280      0.662       0.679                       0.521     0.606
1940       0.668          0.528          0.752          0.631          0.215          0.374          0.326          0.644                     0.645       0.642     0.444     0.486   0.690              0.728
1950       0.679                         0.734          0.611          0.328          0.462          0.383          0.589          0.306                  0.657     0.428     0.501   0.587     0.589    0.709
1960       0.698          0.652          0.777          0.678          0.462          0.538          0.490          0.639          0.397      0.728       0.739     0.531     0.339   0.684     0.643    0.744
1970       0.751          0.715          0.803          0.734          0.609          0.629          0.559          0.682          0.476      0.798       0.750     0.444     0.522   0.766     0.713    0.778
1980       0.800          0.813          0.823          0.795          0.694          0.454          0.647          0.741          0.603      0.846       0.816     0.447     0.634   0.819     0.786    0.806
1990       0.841          0.848          0.840          0.811          0.778          0.756          0.735          0.784          0.693      0.864       0.858     0.604     0.737   0.856     0.846    0.842
2000       0.878          0.875          0.869          0.845          0.844          0.863          0.814          0.851          0.764      0.889       0.899     0.662     0.825   0.890     0.886    0.882
                                                                                                                     Panel B: Males
       Sector: Agriculture
1890                      0.321          0.602          0.504                         0.457          0.361                                    0.367       0.566     0.681             0.705     0.164
1900       0.388          0.273          0.548          0.499          0.697          0.429          0.286                         0.587      0.352       0.491     0.669     0.724   0.576     0.130    0.444
1910       0.300          0.245          0.422          0.487          0.777          0.403                         0.616          0.545      0.311       0.490     0.610     0.712   0.492     0.122    0.338
1920       0.285          0.228          0.408          0.425          0.724          0.370          0.235          0.596          0.548      0.268       0.438               0.631   0.447     0.219    0.291
1930       0.272          0.183          0.442          0.401          0.676          0.330          0.225          0.577          0.493      0.229       0.440                       0.404     0.081
1940       0.205          0.140          0.332          0.341          0.595          0.327          0.237          0.568                     0.204       0.357     0.567     0.558   0.312              0.227
1950       0.163                         0.214          0.281          0.470          0.262          0.213          0.466          0.425                  0.316     0.539     0.543   0.217     0.070    0.154
1960       0.143          0.074          0.137          0.211          0.380          0.202          0.088          0.401          0.256      0.126       0.242     0.490     0.427   0.159     0.048    0.078
1970       0.087          0.049          0.093          0.121          0.189          0.136          0.058          0.293          0.167      0.072       0.121     0.343     0.261   0.091     0.036    0.054
1980       0.075          0.038          0.069          0.095          0.134          0.130          0.046          0.210          0.117      0.063       0.095     0.202     0.185   0.072     0.034    0.046
1990       0.064          0.033          0.046          0.074          0.100          0.126          0.036          0.173          0.078      0.051       0.076     0.117     0.121   0.049     0.029    0.041
2000       0.052          0.023          0.042          0.045          0.067          0.049          0.030          0.105          0.055      0.042       0.051     0.108     0.071   0.033     0.021    0.029
       Sector: Manufacturing
1890                      0.415          0.218          0.292                         0.292          0.436                                    0.347       0.242     0.191             0.213     0.568
1900       0.276          0.458          0.252          0.273          0.160          0.305          0.490                         0.238      0.366       0.302     0.193     0.143   0.270     0.582    0.251
1910       0.361          0.495          0.298          0.279          0.141          0.336                         0.224          0.267      0.379       0.281     0.217     0.159   0.312     0.577    0.318
1920       0.367          0.509          0.298          0.317          0.169          0.350          0.507          0.169          0.249      0.406       0.323               0.211   0.363     0.433    0.355
1930       0.380          0.518          0.241          0.334          0.199          0.361          0.495          0.176          0.299      0.424       0.294                       0.375     0.500
1940       0.404          0.535          0.308          0.375          0.251          0.350          0.475          0.174                     0.373       0.367     0.220     0.235   0.428              0.374
1950       0.443                         0.404          0.399          0.330          0.418          0.503          0.263          0.335                  0.400     0.247     0.256   0.514     0.536    0.392
1960       0.375          0.520          0.398          0.445          0.378          0.439          0.572          0.286          0.442      0.480       0.409     0.289     0.318   0.529     0.538    0.419
1970       0.415          0.485          0.381          0.443          0.451          0.471          0.558          0.344          0.469      0.444       0.445     0.315     0.416   0.498     0.510    0.400
1980       0.371          0.405          0.356          0.391          0.439          0.624          0.508          0.370          0.401      0.377       0.395     0.415     0.421   0.444     0.445    0.381
1990       0.333          0.374          0.366          0.374          0.411          0.359          0.490          0.354          0.375      0.338       0.351     0.404     0.410   0.403     0.381    0.345
2000       0.294          0.351          0.316          0.347          0.376          0.330          0.416          0.374          0.381      0.298       0.313     0.420     0.406   0.342     0.341    0.310
       Sector: Services
1890                      0.264          0.180          0.205                         0.251          0.203                                    0.286       0.192     0.128             0.082     0.268
1900       0.336          0.269          0.200          0.228          0.143          0.266          0.224                         0.176      0.282       0.208     0.138     0.133   0.154     0.287    0.305
1910       0.339          0.260          0.281          0.234          0.082          0.261                         0.160          0.187      0.310       0.229     0.173     0.130   0.196     0.301    0.344
1920       0.348          0.263          0.295          0.257          0.107          0.280          0.257          0.235          0.203      0.326       0.240               0.158   0.190     0.348    0.354
1930       0.348          0.299          0.317          0.265          0.125          0.310          0.280          0.248          0.207      0.347       0.266                       0.221     0.419
1940       0.390          0.325          0.360          0.284          0.154          0.323          0.288          0.259                     0.423       0.276     0.212     0.207   0.260              0.399
1950       0.394                         0.382          0.321          0.200          0.320          0.284          0.272          0.240                  0.284     0.214     0.201   0.270     0.394    0.454
1960       0.482          0.407          0.465          0.344          0.242          0.359          0.340          0.313          0.302      0.394       0.348     0.221     0.255   0.312     0.414    0.503
1970       0.498          0.466          0.527          0.436          0.360          0.392          0.384          0.362          0.364      0.484       0.434     0.343     0.323   0.411     0.454    0.546
1980       0.554          0.557          0.575          0.514          0.427          0.245          0.446          0.420          0.482      0.559       0.510     0.382     0.394   0.484     0.520    0.573
1990       0.603          0.593          0.588          0.552          0.489          0.515          0.474          0.473          0.546      0.611       0.573     0.479     0.469   0.548     0.590    0.615
2000       0.654          0.626          0.642          0.608          0.557          0.621          0.554          0.521          0.564      0.660       0.637     0.472     0.523   0.625     0.638    0.661
Sources: International Historical Statistics, Mitchell (1998 a,b,c) and International Labor Organization, see data appendix for details.




                                                                                                                         46
                                             Table A.4: Sectoral shares by gender: Full sample, 1950-2000
                                         1950                            1960                            1970                       1980                           1990                            2000
                           Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing Agriculture Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing
                                                                                                                Panel A: Females
Algeria                      0.902             0.018         0.240             0.165         0.051            0.194         0.037        0.162                                         0.215             0.278
Argentina                                                    0.052             0.270         0.042            0.208         0.031        0.182         0.051             0.133         0.004             0.104
Australia                    0.039             0.282         0.046             0.256         0.045            0.204         0.042        0.158         0.037             0.122         0.029             0.093
Austria                      0.441             0.220         0.303             0.274         0.181            0.275         0.114        0.234         0.079             0.198         0.056             0.136
Bahrain                                                      0.002             0.551         0.001            0.041         0.008        0.087         0.002             0.072
Bangladesh                                                   0.918             0.046         0.726            0.044         0.400        0.338         0.887             0.091         0.659             0.157
Belgium                                                      0.046             0.302         0.029            0.256         0.020        0.167         0.017             0.135         0.013             0.113
Bolivia                      0.743             0.112                                         0.272            0.185                                    0.235             0.107         0.379             0.094
Botswana                                                     0.951             0.007                                        0.615        0.031         0.157             0.190         0.128             0.163
Brazil                                                       0.290             0.301         0.209            0.106         0.154        0.149         0.193             0.110         0.155             0.114
Bulgaria                                                     0.631             0.268         0.265            0.369         0.170        0.406         0.129             0.356         0.071             0.285
Burundi                                                                                                                     0.979        0.010         0.977             0.007
Cameroon                                                                                     0.921            0.026         0.920        0.026
Canada                       0.024             0.242         0.030             0.193         0.032            0.165         0.031        0.146         0.025             0.135         0.018             0.113
Cape Verde                                                   0.191             0.020                                        0.298        0.219         0.317             0.175
Central African Republic                                                                     0.953            0.004                                    0.876             0.004
Chile                        0.080             0.259         0.047             0.208         0.028            0.224         0.036        0.131         0.055             0.149         0.050             0.121
Colombia                     0.136             0.257         0.117             0.205         0.072            0.219         0.008        0.238         0.007             0.248         0.081             0.173
Costa Rica                                                   0.055             0.177         0.042            0.172         0.053        0.228         0.062             0.231         0.048             0.151
Croatia                                                                                                                                                0.145             0.350         0.132             0.190
Cuba                         0.057             0.198                                         0.082             0.221        0.106        0.216
Czech Republic                                                                                                                                         0.095             0.373         0.033             0.273
Czechoslovakia                                               0.301             0.372         0.163             0.405        0.117        0.405         0.099             0.368
Denmark                      0.173             0.216         0.068             0.254         0.065             0.201        0.040        0.165         0.027             0.162         0.017             0.138
Dominican Republic                                           0.102             0.138         0.445             0.114        0.110        0.164         0.037             0.236
Ecuador                      0.294             0.365         0.250             0.338         0.132             0.227        0.130        0.171         0.088             0.154         0.056             0.131
Egypt                                                        0.407             0.075         0.214             0.143        0.246        0.139         0.491             0.098         0.354             0.147
El Salvador                                                  0.103             0.243         0.103             0.168        0.197        0.204         0.090             0.234         0.042             0.224
Estonia                                                                                                                                                                                0.041             0.223
Ethiopia                                                                                                                    0.876        0.017         0.876             0.017         0.736             0.078
Finland                                                      0.319             0.220         0.161             0.230        0.094        0.211         0.059             0.162         0.033             0.123
France                       0.277             0.261         0.196             0.266         0.082             0.254        0.140        0.406         0.084             0.160         0.023             0.114
Germany                                                      0.178             0.332         0.108             0.333        0.067        0.286         0.035             0.230         0.019             0.167
Ghana                                                        0.583             0.106         0.544             0.155        0.560        0.143                                         0.523             0.137
Greece                       0.449             0.259         0.687             0.140         0.516             0.182        0.370        0.187         0.290             0.182         0.153             0.115
Guatemala                                                    0.123             0.218         0.074             0.227        0.124        0.221         0.153             0.196
Haiti                        0.822             0.058                                         0.619             0.077        0.524        0.090         0.513             0.096
Honduras                                                     0.052             0.188         0.075             0.278                                   0.082             0.248         0.104             0.251
Hungary                                                      0.383             0.307         0.218             0.393        0.186        0.352         0.147             0.306         0.031             0.228
India                        0.891             0.042         0.833             0.092         0.848             0.071        0.841        0.086         0.812             0.086
Indonesia                                                    0.689             0.083         0.657             0.097        0.551        0.117         0.495             0.140         0.447             0.152
Iran                         0.252             0.492         0.227             0.571         0.282             0.512        0.280        0.243         0.157             0.317         0.336             0.285
Iraq                         0.303             0.260                                         0.676             0.109        0.174        0.138         0.257             0.079
Ireland                      0.211             0.200         0.132             0.229         0.079             0.239        0.048        0.211         0.030             0.186         0.018             0.131
Israel                                                       0.103             0.188         0.059             0.190        0.033        0.161         0.021             0.155         0.007             0.109
Italy                        0.414             0.280         0.291             0.312         0.207             0.316        0.137        0.261         0.083             0.224         0.044             0.192
Jamaica                      0.329             0.164         0.180             0.211         0.181             0.163        0.191        0.100         0.131             0.130         0.086             0.079
Japan                        0.560             0.157         0.397             0.215         0.214             0.271        0.120        0.279         0.074             0.264         0.050             0.197
Jordan                                                       0.337             0.249                                        0.012        0.074
Kazakhstan                                                                                                                                             0.181             0.243         0.330             0.088
Korea, Rep.                                                  0.665             0.087         0.550             0.168        0.345        0.245         0.180             0.263         0.111             0.176
Kuwait                                                       0.001             0.053         0.001             0.037        0.001        0.024         0.001             0.019
Latvia                                                                                                                                                                                 0.099             0.169
Liberia                                                      0.939             0.009         0.886             0.010        0.859        0.008
Libya                                                        0.189             0.503         0.388             0.064
Lithuania                                                                                                                                              0.133             0.335         0.125             0.202
Malawi                                                                                       0.955             0.017        0.957        0.012                                         0.919             0.012
Malaysia                     0.771             0.073         0.736             0.074         0.680             0.094        0.386        0.202         0.222             0.278         0.122             0.256
Mauritius                    0.522             0.106         0.403             0.075         0.372             0.110        0.182        0.456         0.168             0.493         0.082             0.281
Mexico                                                       0.329             0.137         0.121             0.221        0.166        0.254         0.100             0.188         0.066             0.201
Moldova                                                                                                                                                                                0.421             0.110
Morocco                                                      0.433             0.248                                        0.357        0.339         0.032             0.483         0.567             0.188
Mozambique                   0.951             0.010                                         0.940             0.016        0.970        0.008
Namibia                                                      0.586             0.019                                                                   0.700             0.106
Nepal                                                        0.975             0.013         0.955             0.004        0.971        0.002         0.911             0.013
Netherlands                                                  0.044             0.228         0.035             0.167        0.031        0.124         0.029             0.107         0.023             0.088
New Zealand                  0.052             0.245         0.049             0.245         0.051             0.231        0.074        0.196         0.070             0.134         0.057             0.111
Nicaragua                                                    0.151             0.186         0.120             0.190                                                                   0.082             0.176
Niger                                                        0.976             0.000         0.704             0.158
Norway                       0.082             0.261         0.040             0.222         0.084             0.165        0.053        0.130         0.034             0.109         0.018             0.083
Oman                                                                                                                                                   0.017             0.035         0.031             0.108
Pakistan                     0.769             0.076         0.713             0.127         0.663             0.114        0.611        0.094         0.675             0.129         0.683             0.139
Panama                       0.178             0.135         0.077             0.106         0.081             0.122        0.047        0.117         0.033             0.114         0.035             0.087
Paraguay                                                     0.227             0.304         0.137             0.287        0.159        0.245         0.007             0.158         0.142             0.101
Peru                                                         0.330             0.183         0.193             0.189        0.246        0.135         0.051             0.167         0.019             0.121




                                                                                                          47
                                     Table A.4 (ctd.): Sectoral shares by gender: Full sample, 1950-2000
                                         1950                            1960                            1970                         1980                         1990                            2000
                           Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing Agriculture Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing
                                                                                                              Panel B: Females (ctd.)
Philippines                                                  0.388             0.215         0.344             0.188         0.363         0.143       0.309             0.133         0.252             0.119
Poland                       0.690             0.138         0.589             0.170         0.428             0.255         0.326         0.287       0.251             0.229         0.157             0.185
Portugal                     0.331             0.240         0.177             0.292         0.224             0.332         0.297         0.256       0.146             0.250         0.126             0.212
Puerto Rico                                                  0.032             0.344         0.015             0.306         0.002         0.257       0.004             0.201         0.003             0.144
Qatar                                                                                                                        0.000         0.021       0.000             0.019         0.000             0.038
Romania                                                      0.724             0.119         0.505             0.265                                   0.316             0.384         0.347             0.246
Russia                                                                                                                                                                                 0.079             0.203
Rwanda                                                                                                                       0.980       0.006         0.961             0.005
Seychelles                                                                                   0.199             0.100         0.075       0.079
Sierra Leone                                                 0.897             0.020                                                                                                   0.711             0.024
Singapore                    0.165             0.170         0.428             0.223         0.026             0.362         0.008       0.376         0.001             0.303         0.003             0.187
Slovak Republic                                                                                                                                        0.108             0.422         0.035             0.257
Slovenia                                                                                                                                               0.142             0.359         0.095             0.265
South Africa                                                 0.173             0.089         0.307             0.105         0.128       0.169         0.100             0.144         0.065             0.127
Spain                        0.247             0.252         0.405             0.255         0.213             0.265         0.155       0.210         0.092             0.170         0.045             0.129
Sri Lanka                                                    0.658             0.104         0.657             0.133         0.560       0.174         0.404             0.253         0.437             0.247
Sudan                        0.827             0.133                                         0.888             0.034         0.871       0.045
Sweden                       0.047             0.366         0.060             0.256         0.043             0.191         0.030       0.151         0.019             0.125         0.011             0.099
Switzerland                                                  0.030             0.371         0.052             0.324         0.047       0.227         0.039             0.166         0.031             0.129
Syria                                                        0.780             0.050         0.638             0.133         0.506       0.147         0.444             0.096         0.263             0.074
Thailand                     0.923             0.013         0.876             0.029         0.763             0.073         0.699       0.088         0.579             0.145         0.448             0.177
Trinidad and Tobago                                          0.165             0.163         0.145             0.237         0.069       0.215         0.050             0.176         0.021             0.168
Tunisia                      0.901             0.050         0.138             0.429         0.271             0.496         0.298       0.478         0.217             0.443
Turkey                                                       0.959             0.015         0.898             0.048         0.873       0.046         0.749             0.099         0.581             0.135
Ukraine                                                                                                                                                0.224             0.459         0.186             0.229
United Arab Emirates                                                                         0.004             0.058         0.001       0.067         0.001             0.137         0.001             0.059
United Kingdom                                               0.013             0.344         0.013             0.274         0.012       0.203         0.011             0.143         0.008             0.106
United States                0.038             0.252         0.024             0.231         0.018             0.204         0.016       0.179         0.014             0.143         0.011             0.107
Uruguay                                                      0.028             0.292         0.036             0.239         0.022       0.218         0.020             0.195         0.024             0.132
Venezuela                                                    0.066             0.200         0.042             0.181         0.023       0.181         0.017             0.153         0.018             0.118
Yemen                                                                                        0.872             0.036                                   0.875             0.030
Yugoslavia                                                   0.703             0.142         0.539             0.195         0.365       0.248
Zambia                                                                                       0.385             0.196         0.716       0.036
                                                                                                                  Panel B: Males
Algeria                      0.750             0.109         0.605             0.147         0.329             0.331         0.264       0.336                                         0.203             0.253
Argentina                                                    0.239             0.384         0.202             0.357         0.166       0.396         0.145             0.322         0.013             0.323
Australia                    0.163             0.443         0.143             0.375         0.087             0.415         0.075       0.371         0.064             0.333         0.052             0.294
Austria                      0.253             0.474         0.181             0.508         0.120             0.504         0.082       0.503         0.063             0.482         0.051             0.398
Bahrain                                                      0.105             0.411         0.071             0.363         0.034       0.408         0.029             0.328
Bangladesh                                                   0.853             0.049         0.793             0.050         0.631       0.107         0.570             0.165         0.458             0.136
Belgium                                                      0.074             0.520         0.049             0.485         0.038       0.405         0.033             0.374         0.023             0.351
Bolivia                      0.544             0.315                                         0.542             0.206                                   0.273             0.287         0.372             0.263
Botswana                                                     0.874             0.050                                         0.532       0.182         0.249             0.329         0.219             0.281
Brazil                                                       0.566             0.236         0.518             0.204         0.345       0.298         0.285             0.275         0.233             0.270
Bulgaria                                                     0.402             0.462         0.211             0.479         0.160       0.521         0.156             0.435         0.113             0.370
Burundi                                                                                                                      0.879       0.037         0.889             0.036
Cameroon                                                                                     0.706             0.096         0.709       0.095
Canada                       0.214             0.404         0.137             0.398         0.093             0.381         0.069       0.356         0.046             0.366         0.042             0.316
Cape Verde                                                   0.690             0.097                                         0.348       0.371         0.305             0.382
Central African Republic                                                                     0.755             0.073                                   0.748             0.061
Chile                        0.390             0.320         0.368             0.328         0.271             0.353         0.274       0.251         0.225             0.317         0.180             0.299
Colombia                     0.657             0.167         0.583             0.194         0.480             0.214         0.018       0.338         0.017             0.350         0.310             0.204
Costa Rica                                                   0.585             0.192         0.469             0.219         0.371       0.280         0.311             0.268         0.224             0.258
Croatia                                                                                                                                                0.163             0.477         0.132             0.355
Cuba                         0.471             0.211                                         0.354             0.276         0.289       0.320
Czech Republic                                                                                                                                         0.142             0.545         0.054             0.474
Czechoslovakia                                               0.214             0.542         0.166             0.548         0.145       0.570         0.154             0.537
Denmark                      0.281             0.399         0.211             0.445         0.121             0.443         0.095       0.391         0.074             0.374         0.045             0.347
Dominican Republic                                           0.730             0.120         0.595             0.141         0.386       0.266         0.222             0.276
Ecuador                      0.650             0.184         0.651             0.177         0.567             0.170         0.411       0.219         0.242             0.234         0.117             0.273
Egypt                                                        0.581             0.151         0.497             0.189         0.431       0.224         0.328             0.251         0.272             0.249
El Salvador                                                  0.717             0.159         0.661             0.135         0.529       0.214         0.359             0.269         0.316             0.248
Estonia                                                                                                                                                                                0.088             0.410
Ethiopia                                                                                                                     0.893       0.022         0.893             0.022         0.852             0.046
Finland                                                      0.380             0.378         0.189             0.451         0.134       0.439         0.100             0.411         0.067             0.376
France                       0.262             0.418         0.202             0.439         0.111             0.462         0.130       0.624         0.126             0.359         0.049             0.330
Germany                                                      0.088             0.572         0.058             0.558         0.046       0.508         0.036             0.490         0.030             0.416
Ghana                                                        0.638             0.180         0.592             0.162         0.664       0.113                                         0.551             0.170
Greece                       0.527             0.195         0.495             0.226         0.315             0.322         0.245       0.345         0.204             0.333         0.133             0.287
Guatemala                                                    0.736             0.127         0.670             0.178         0.637       0.166         0.574             0.202
Haiti                        0.887             0.056                                         0.840             0.068         0.786       0.086         0.779             0.088
Honduras                                                     0.794             0.095         0.711             0.133                                   0.643             0.146         0.496             0.208
Hungary                                                      0.365             0.415         0.260             0.471         0.241       0.444         0.210             0.430         0.079             0.392
India                        0.717             0.107         0.694             0.126         0.699             0.122         0.659       0.150         0.633             0.148
Indonesia                                                    0.726             0.074         0.658             0.092         0.566       0.116         0.484             0.167         0.435             0.198
Iran                         0.616             0.176         0.508             0.230         0.448             0.267         0.303       0.263         0.255             0.293         0.216             0.307
Iraq                         0.558             0.168                                         0.238             0.246         0.132       0.198         0.232             0.121




                                                                                                          48
                                       Table A.4 (ctd.): Sectoral shares by gender: Full sample, 1950-2000



                                          1950                             1960                            1970                       1980                           1990                            2000
                            Agriculture     Manufacturing    Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing Agriculture Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing   Agriculture     Manufacturing
                                                                                                                Panel B: Males (ctd.)
Ireland                        0.466            0.263           0.401            0.286         0.293            0.344         0.210        0.370         0.173             0.354         0.105             0.374
Israel                                                          0.143            0.421         0.086            0.414         0.070        0.391         0.049             0.383         0.029             0.314
Italy                          0.425            0.335           0.256            0.442         0.167            0.469         0.117        0.401         0.078             0.375         0.055             0.381
Jamaica                        0.639            0.196           0.522            0.267         0.408            0.335         0.420        0.246         0.330             0.293         0.260             0.278
Japan                          0.375            0.339           0.245            0.374         0.126            0.402         0.083        0.391         0.058             0.393         0.045             0.366
Jordan                                                          0.440            0.264                                        0.121        0.272
Kazakhstan                                                                                                                                               0.287             0.381         0.357             0.204
Korea, Rep.                                                     0.595            0.140         0.440             0.244        0.277        0.336         0.141             0.387         0.087             0.335
Kuwait                                                          0.012            0.355         0.024             0.312        0.022        0.355         0.017             0.330
Latvia                                                                                                                                                                                   0.153             0.334
Liberia                                                         0.745            0.130         0.710             0.103        0.671        0.090
Libya                                                           0.432            0.202         0.225             0.272
Lithuania                                                                                                                                                0.232             0.467         0.185             0.344
Malawi                                                                                         0.781             0.099        0.784        0.085                                         0.750             0.077
Malaysia                       0.531            0.149           0.528            0.118         0.499             0.157        0.332        0.226         0.246             0.295         0.191             0.323
Mauritius                      0.427            0.268           0.376            0.309         0.320             0.282        0.224        0.309         0.189             0.335         0.105             0.338
Mexico                                                          0.593            0.203         0.486             0.250        0.459        0.271         0.319             0.259         0.229             0.284
Moldova                                                                                                                                                                                  0.440             0.184
Morocco                                                         0.672            0.115                                        0.448        0.250         0.044             0.385         0.381             0.220
Mozambique                     0.819            0.072                                          0.671             0.167        0.720        0.139
Namibia                                                         0.627            0.217                                                                   0.549             0.250
Nepal                                                           0.925            0.026         0.905             0.013        0.906        0.008         0.763             0.037
Netherlands                                                     0.126            0.480         0.072             0.444        0.063        0.377         0.051             0.338         0.042             0.298
New Zealand                    0.211            0.387           0.170            0.420         0.148             0.391        0.134        0.367         0.126             0.322         0.103             0.315
Nicaragua                                                       0.710            0.156         0.562             0.200                                                                   0.405             0.209
Niger                                                           0.974            0.007         0.919             0.028
Norway                         0.316            0.400           0.242            0.409         0.121             0.445        0.095        0.395         0.076             0.351         0.051             0.313
Oman                                                                                                                                                     0.081             0.227         0.080             0.207
Pakistan                       0.704            0.114           0.598            0.164         0.588             0.141        0.741        0.066         0.443             0.201         0.391             0.237
Panama                         0.689            0.114           0.622            0.145         0.534             0.173        0.385        0.215         0.342             0.199         0.217             0.231
Paraguay                                                        0.658            0.158         0.626             0.159        0.545        0.241         0.038             0.362         0.350             0.231
Peru                                                            0.571            0.201         0.495             0.206        0.434        0.196         0.142             0.276         0.048             0.274
Philippines                                                     0.706            0.114         0.631             0.147        0.587        0.149         0.522             0.174         0.454             0.173
Poland                         0.483            0.306           0.388            0.384         0.313             0.447        0.281        0.460         0.252             0.425         0.169             0.392
Portugal                       0.539            0.247           0.490            0.289         0.343             0.315        0.202        0.415         0.117             0.404         0.108             0.420
Puerto Rico                                                     0.302            0.329         0.110             0.358        0.081        0.286         0.055             0.284         0.036             0.293
Qatar                                                                                                                         0.035        0.356         0.043             0.368         0.030             0.519
Romania                                                         0.446            0.361         0.256             0.516                                   0.228             0.506         0.326             0.329
Russia                                                                                                                                                                                   0.127             0.336
Rwanda                                                                                                                        0.880        0.051         0.872             0.041
Seychelles                                                                                     0.275             0.372        0.132        0.308
Sierra Leone                                                    0.703            0.174                                                                                                   0.661             0.096
Singapore                      0.068            0.218           0.705            0.119         0.030             0.301        0.013        0.351         0.004             0.355         0.007             0.329
Slovak Republic                                                                                                                                          0.164             0.555         0.078             0.463
Slovenia                                                                                                                                                 0.135             0.496         0.094             0.448
South Africa                                                    0.366            0.362         0.309             0.388        0.176        0.456         0.154             0.416         0.106             0.345
Spain                          0.543            0.256           0.427            0.318         0.261             0.416        0.185        0.421         0.121             0.410         0.071             0.406
Sri Lanka                                                       0.530            0.147         0.516             0.141        0.493        0.186         0.374             0.222         0.355             0.220
Sudan                          0.886            0.027                                          0.655             0.088        0.665        0.097
Sweden                         0.217            0.514           0.159            0.529         0.091             0.498        0.072        0.444         0.049             0.403         0.033             0.342
Switzerland                                                     0.147            0.563         0.090             0.531        0.069        0.460         0.053             0.386         0.050             0.341
Syria                                                           0.499            0.211         0.428             0.243        0.264        0.340         0.208             0.291         0.181             0.314
Thailand                       0.843            0.038           0.803            0.057         0.718             0.100        0.663        0.128         0.563             0.192         0.477             0.205
Trinidad and Tobago                                             0.228            0.401         0.180             0.431        0.110        0.459         0.131             0.385         0.078             0.411
Tunisia                        0.680            0.131           0.479            0.194         0.418             0.268        0.326        0.358         0.249             0.335
Turkey                                                          0.645            0.175         0.560             0.169        0.440        0.218         0.333             0.268         0.249             0.272
Ukraine                                                                                                                                                  0.284             0.504         0.240             0.389
United Arab Emirates                                                                           0.048             0.438        0.048        0.398         0.090             0.350         0.056             0.437
United Kingdom                                                  0.048            0.538         0.036             0.510        0.034        0.445         0.029             0.381         0.021             0.341
United States                  0.154            0.392           0.078            0.419         0.054             0.400        0.046        0.381         0.041             0.345         0.029             0.310
Uruguay                                                         0.252            0.331         0.231             0.304        0.136        0.318         0.081             0.343         0.091             0.309
Venezuela                                                       0.403            0.228         0.257             0.298        0.197        0.315         0.168             0.306         0.134             0.302
Yemen                                                                                          0.447             0.123                                   0.460             0.132
Yugoslavia                                                      0.551            0.288         0.407             0.321        0.276        0.390
Zambia                                                                                         0.318             0.319        0.480        0.189
Sources: International Labor Organization, see data appendix for details.




                                                                                                            49
