                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CULTURE, ENTREPRENEURSHIP, AND GROWTH

                                           Matthias Doepke
                                           Fabrizio Zilibotti

                                        Working Paper 19141
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19141


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




Manuscript in preparation for the Handbook of Economic Growth. Financial support from the National
Science Foundation (grant SES-0820409, Doepke) and from the European Research Council (ERC
Advanced Grant IPCDP-229883, Zilibotti) is gratefully acknowledged. Veronika Selezneva provided
excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Matthias Doepke and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Culture, Entrepreneurship, and Growth
Matthias Doepke and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 19141
June 2013
JEL No. J20,O10,O40

                                              ABSTRACT

We discuss the two-way link between culture and economic growth. We present a model of endogenous
technical change where growth is driven by the innovative activity of entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship
is risky and requires investments that affect the steepness of the lifetime consumption profile. As a
consequence, the occupational choice of entrepreneurship hinges on risk tolerance and patience. Parents
expecting their children to become entrepreneurs have an incentive to instill these two values in their
children. Cultural transmission is Beckerian, i.e., parents are driven by the desire to maximize their
children's happiness. We also consider, in an extension, a paternalistic motive for preference transmission.
The growth rate of the economy depends on the fraction of the population choosing an entrepreneurial
career. How many entrepreneurs there are in a society hinges, in turn, on parental investments in children's
patience and risk tolerance. There can be multiple balanced-growth paths, where in faster-growing
countries more people exhibit an "entrepreneurial spirit." We discuss applications of models of endogenous
preferences to the analysis of socio-economic transformations, such as the British Industrial Revolution.
We also discuss empirical studies documenting the importance of culture and preference heterogeneity
for economic growth.


Matthias Doepke
Northwestern University
Department of Economics
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
doepke@northwestern.edu

Fabrizio Zilibotti
Department of Economics
University of Zurich
Mühlebachstrasse 86
CH-8008 Zürich
Switzerland
fabrizio.zilibotti@econ.uzh.ch
1 Introduction

The relationship between economic development and culture—broadly defined
as the set of preferences, values, and beliefs that are at least partially learned—
has attracted increasing attention in the economic literature over the last decade.

The notion that accounting for cultural heterogeneity is important for explain-
ing individual behavior and economic success was a familiar one to classical
economists. For instance, Smith (1776) described members of different social
classes of his time as distinct types of human beings driven by different motives:
“A merchant is accustomed to employ his money chiefly in profitable projects; whereas
a mere country gentleman is accustomed to employ it chiefly in expense. The one often
sees his money go from him and return to him again with a profit: the other, when once
he parts with it, very seldom expects to see any more of it.” (p. 432)

A century later, Karl Marx postulated that culture is the effect, rather than the
cause, of the structure of production relations. In his view, culture, religion, and
ideology (the “superstructure”) are mere reflections of the material interests of
the class that controls the means of production. Marx’ materialism was disputed
by Max Weber, who argued, in contrast to Marx, that cultural and spiritual fac-
tors are independent drivers of socio-economic transformations. For Weber, the
emergence of a “spirit of capitalism” with the ensuing emphasis on the virtue of
entrepreneurial success was a major engine of the industrial revolution, not just
a mere reflection of it. Weber did not fully reverse Marx’ perspective, but rather
acknowledged that the causation can run both ways.1 For instance, he held the
view that Protestant Asceticism had been an engine of economic transformation,
but “was in turn influenced in its development and its character by the totality
of social conditions, especially economic.” (Weber 1905, p. 183)

In contrast to the thinking of Smith, Marx, and Weber, the marginalist revolution
in economics in the late nineteenth century sidelined cultural factors. Accord-
ing to the neoclassical paradigm, economics should focus on optimal individ-
ual choice and efficient resource allocation, while treating preferences and tech-
   1
    “It is, of course, not my aim to substitute for a one-sided materialistic an equally one-sided
spiritualistic causal interpretation of culture and of history” (Weber 1905, p. 183).


                                                1
nology as exogenous primitives. Consistent with this paradigm, until recently
economists have regarded preference formation, and culture more broadly, as
issues lying outside the realm of economics. Over time, however, as economic
imperialism has broken into new territories, exogenous preferences and technol-
ogy have become straitjackets. The erosion of the neoclassical tenets began from
technology. It is by now widely recognized, following the intuition of Schum-
peter (1942), that technology cannot be viewed as exogenous if one wants to un-
derstand the mechanics of the growth process of industrial as well as developing
economies. Rather, the efforts and risk-taking behavior of a particular group
of individuals that aims to change the set of technological constraints, namely
inventors and entrepreneurs, are the engines of economic growth. This observa-
tion motivated the development of the neo-Schumpeterian endogenous technical
change paradigm throughout the 1990s (see, e.g., Aghion and Howitt 1992).

Recently, the paradigm shift has extended to the realm of preferences. The avail-
ability of large data sets such as the World Value Survey has revealed that there
is a great deal of heterogeneity in values and preferences across both individu-
als (see, e.g., Guiso and Paiella 2008 and Beauchamp, Cesarini, and Johannes-
son 2011), and world regions (see, e.g., Inglehart et al. 2000). Preference het-
erogeneity has also become a salient issue in mainstream macroeconomics. For
instance, Krusell and Smith, Jr. (1998), Coen-Pirani (2004), De Nardi (2004), Guve-
nen (2006), Hendricks (2007), and Cozzi (2011) have argued that individual vari-
ation in preferences is necessary for calibrated macroeconomic models with in-
complete markets to reproduce the large wealth inequality observed in the data.

Preference heterogeneity as such is not in conflict with the neoclassical paradigm.
Traditionally, extra-economic factors have served as the motivations for error
terms in regressions and individual or regional fixed effects. However, treat-
ing preferences and culture as exogenous factors in growth and development
theory is problematic if, on the one hand, cultural factors respond to changes
in the economic and institutional environment (see Alesina and Glaeser 2004
and Alesina and Giuliano 2009), and, on the other hand, culture and preferences
have an important feedback on institutions and economic performance (see Greif
1994, Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2006, Roland and Gorodnichenko 2010, and


                                        2
Tabellini 2010).

Motivated by these observations, a growing number of studies incorporate en-
dogenous cultural change into economic models.2 A particularly important link
is the one connecting preferences, culture, and innovation (see Mokyr 2011). In
many recent models of endogenous technical change, innovation and economic
growth ultimately are determined by policy and preference parameters, such as
the time discount rate and risk aversion. Yet, there is a lack of studies of the
joint determination of preferences and technology. A key issue is the extent to
which different societies differ in terms of the average propensity of their citi-
zens to carry out entrepreneurial or innovative activities. This is the focus of the
investigation of this chapter.

To this aim, we present a model of endogenous technical change where growth is
driven by the innovative activity of entrepreneurs. The focal point of the analysis
is the occupational choice between being a worker and being an entrepreneur in
an economy with capital market imperfections. Entrepreneurs face more risk and
make investments that force them to defer consumption. As a consequence, the
occupational choice hinges on patience and risk tolerance. These preference traits
are distributed heterogeneously in the population and subject to the influence of
family upbringing. Cultural transmission is driven by the desire of parents to
maximize their children’s happiness, conditional on the expectations they hold
about the children’s future occupation. Parents expecting their children to be-
come entrepreneurs have stronger incentives to raise them to be patient and risk
tolerant.

At the aggregate level, the growth rate of the economy depends on the frac-
tion of entrepreneurs in the population, since this determines the rate of tech-
nological innovation. The theory identifies a self-reinforcing mechanism linking
preferences and growth: In a highly entrepreneurial society, a large proportion
of the population is patient and risk tolerant. These preferences sustain high
human capital investment and risky innovation, leading to a high growth rate
   2
     The recent literature in behavioral economics has proposed a psychological foundation for
endogenous preferences. Fehr and Hoff (2011) argues that individual preferences are susceptible
to institutional, familiar and social influences due to their intrinsic psychological properties.



                                               3
and incentives for entrepreneurial preferences to develop in the next genera-
tion, too. Societies with identical primitives may end up in different balanced
growth paths characterized by different degrees of entrepreneurial culture, in-
novativeness, and growth. In addition, changes in institutions or policies can
feed back into the evolution of culture and preferences, giving rise to potentially
long-lasting effects on economic growth and development.

This chapter is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a model of endoge-
nous technical change with an occupational choice, where entrepreneurship is
the driver of innovation. Sections 3 and 4 endogenize culture and preference
transmission analyzing, respectively, the endogenous accumulation of patience
and risk tolerance. While in Sections 3 and 4 the cultural transmission of prefer-
ences hinges on an altruistic Beckerian motive, Section 5 considers an alternative
model incorporating parental paternalism. Section 6 reviews the existing theo-
retical and empirical literature. Section 7 concludes. Proofs of propositions and
lemmas are deferred to the mathematical appendix.



2 A Framework for Analyzing the Interaction of Cul-
     tural Preferences, Entrepreneurship, and Growth

In this section, we develop a dynamic model where culture and economic growth
are jointly determined in equilibrium. The underlying process of technical change
is related to the model of Romer (1990), where growth takes the form of an ex-
panding variety of inputs. However, unlike Romer we assume that innovation
is driven by a specific group of people, namely entrepreneurs, whose economic
lives (for example, in terms of risk and lifetime consumption profiles) are distinct
from those of ordinary workers. Cultural preferences determine people’s propen-
sity to entrepreneurship, and conversely the return to entrepreneurship affects
parents’ incentives for forming their children’s preferences. In other words, there
is a two-way interaction between culture and growth. In this section, we develop
the general setup, turning to specific dimensions of endogenous preferences fur-
ther below.


                                         4
2.1 A Model of Endogenous Innovation

Consider an endogenous growth model where innovation takes the form of an
increasing variety of intermediate inputs. New inputs are created by people in
a specific occupation, namely entrepreneurs (as in Klasing 2012). Innovative ac-
tivity has two key features: it involves investments and deferred rewards (as
in Doepke and Zilibotti 2008), and it may also involve risk (as in Doepke and
Zilibotti 2012 and Klasing 2012). In addition, financial markets are incomplete:
agents can neither borrow to smooth consumption over the life cycle, nor hedge
the entrepreneurial risk.3 Since entrepreneurs and regular workers face different
consumption profiles (across both time and states of nature), the choice between
these two occupations hinges on heterogeneous cultural preferences.

The measure of the intermediate input varieties invented before the start of pe-
riod t is denoted by Nt . Time is discrete. Final output at time t is produced using
the production function:
                             Z     Nt                  Z    Nt+1            
                         1                    α                         α
                    Yt =                 x̄t (i) di +               xt (i) di Q1−α ,
                         α      0                           Nt


where Q is a fixed factor (e.g., land or unskilled labor) that will be normalized
to unity, x̄t (i) is the supply of intermediates i that were invented up until time
t, and xt (i) is the supply of new varieties i invented during period t. Follow-
ing Matsuyama (1999), we assume that old varieties with i ∈ [0, Nt ] are sold in
competitive markets, whereas new varieties i ∈ (Nt , Nt+1 ] are supplied monopo-
listically by their inventors. Put differently, inventors enjoy patent protection for
only one period.

Innovation (i.e., the introduction of Nt+1 − Nt new varieties) is carried out by
entrepreneurs. The return to entrepreneurial effort is assumed to be stochastic.
In particular, entrepreneurs do not know in advance how successful they will
be at inventing new varieties. With probability κ > 0 an entrepreneur will be
   3
    While these assumptions are stark, models with moral hazard typically imply imperfect con-
sumption smoothing or risk sharing. Empirically, we observe that entrepreneurs can neither
borrow without constraints to finance their investments, nor separate their personal economic
success from the fate of their enterprises. Thus, our stylized model captures some important
features of the real world that are well-understood outcomes of models of imperfect information.

                                                   5
able to run (1 + ν) Nt projects, whereas with probability 1 − κ she will manage
             κ
               
only 1 − ν 1−κ   Nt projects, where ν ≥ 0. In the aggregate, κ is the fraction of
successful entrepreneurs. Intermediate-good production is instead carried out
by workers using a linear technology that is not subject to uncertainty.

In order for the equilibrium to feature balanced growth, we assume that a knowl-
edge spillover increases the productivity of both workers and entrepreneurs as
knowledge accumulates. More precisely, productivity is indexed by Nt , and thus
grows at the equilibrium rate of innovation. Given these assumptions, the labor
market clearing condition at time t is given by:

                                Nt XtW = Nt x̄t + (Nt+1 − Nt ) xt ,

where the left-hand side is the labor supply by workers in efficiency units, and
the right-hand side is the labor demand given the production of intermediates x̄t
and xt .4 The corresponding market-clearing condition for entrepreneurs is:
                                                                 
                                                      Nt+1 − Nt
                                     Nt XtE   =                       ,
                                                          ξ

where XtE is the number of entrepreneurs, and the parameter ξ captures the
average productivity per efficiency unit of entrepreneurial input in innovation.
Hence, an efficiency unit of the entrepreneurial input produces measure ξ of new
varieties. Denoting the growth rate of technology by gt ≡ (Nt+1 − Nt )/Nt allows
us to simplify the two market-clearing conditions as follows:

                                          XtW = x̄t + gt xt ,                                          (1)
                                                gt
                                          XtE = .                                                      (2)
                                                 ξ

We now turn to the goods-market equilibrium. The representative competitive
    4
      Note that the market clearing expression is written under the assumption that all old varieties
i ∈ [0, Nt ] are supplied at the same level, x̄t , and that all new varieties i ∈ (Nt , Nt+1 ] are supplied
at the same, level xt . We show later that this the case in equilibrium.




                                                      6
final-good producer maximizes profits by solving:
                   Z Nt                                 Z Nt+1                           
                   1              α                                     α
         max              [x̄t (i) − p̄t (i)x̄t (i)] di +        [xt (i) − pt (i)xt (i)] di   ,
       x̄(i),x(i)  α  0                                    Nt


where p̄t (i) and pt (i) are the prices of old and new intermediates, respectively.5
The first-order conditions for the maximization problem imply:

                                                   1                         1
                            x̄t (i) = p̄t (i) α−1 and xt (i) = pt (i) α−1 .                       (3)


Next, we consider the intermediate-goods producers. Let wtW denote the market
wage of workers, and let ωtW = wtW /Nt denote the wage per efficiency unit of
labor. The maximization problem for the competitive producers of old interme-
diates with i ∈ [0, Nt ] can then be written as:
                                                               
                                    max            p̄t (i) − ωtW x̄t (i) ,
                                     x̄t (i)


so that we have p̄t (i) = ωtW and, hence:
                                                                  1
                                                                α−1
                                               x̄t (i) = ωtW           .                          (4)

The producers of new goods (i.e., the firms run by entrepreneurs) are monop-
olists that maximize profits subject to the demand function (3). More formally,
they solve:
                                                                  
                                    max                pt (i) − ωtW xt (i)
                                  xt (i),pt (i)

subject to (3). The solution to this problem yields:

                                               ωtW
                                      pt (i) =      ≡ pt ,                                        (5)
                                                α
                                                W  α−11
                                                 ωt
                                      xt (i) =             ≡ xt ,                                 (6)
                                                  α
   5
    The fixed factor Q = 1 is owned by firms, so that profits correspond to the return to the fixed
factor. For simplicity, we assume that firms are held by “capitalist” dynasties that are distinct from
the workers and entrepreneurs, although allowing for trade in firm shares would not change our
results.


                                                           7
and the realized profit per variety is:
                                                                                      α
                                                                                     1−α
                                                                              α
                           Πt = pt −     ωtW       xt = (1 − α)                             .
                                                                              ωtW

We can now solve for the equilibrium return to labor and entrepreneurship as
functions of the aggregate supply of regular and entrepreneurial labor. First,
combining (1), (4), and (6) yields:

                                                                              1
                                                                             α−1
                                                1                    ωtW
                                XtW = ωt      W α−1
                                                       + gt                          .
                                                                       α

Using (2) to eliminate gt , and rearranging terms, yields the following expression
for the workers’ normalized wage:

                                          1
                                               !1−α                             1
                                                                                         !1−α
                                1 + gt α 1−α                      1 + α 1−α ξXtE
                      ωtW =                            =                                            .
                                   XtW                                 XtW

Next, denote by wtE the expected profit of entrepreneurs, and let ωtE = wtE /Nt .6
Then, the following expression for the return to entrepreneurship obtains:
                                                                           1
                                                                                         !α
                                                                      α   1−α   ξXtW
                         ωtE = ξΠt = ξ 1−α (1 − α)                              1               .
                                                                  1 + α 1−α ξXtE

Finally, let ηt ≡ wtE /wtW denote the expected entrepreneurial premium. Taking
the ratio between the expressions of the two returns obtained above yields:
                                                              α
                                              (1 − α) α 1−α ξXtW
                                     ηt =                 1                     .                       (7)
                                                1 + α 1−α ξXtE

Innovation and growth are ultimately pinned down by the share of the popu-
lation choosing entrepreneurship. The occupational choice, in turn, hinges on
both technological variables and the endogenous distribution of individual pref-
erences. We therefore turn, next, to the structure of preferences in the economy.
   6
       Recall that theentrepreneurial
                                      return is stochastic. Each entrepreneur earns (1 + ν) wtE with
                         κ
probability κ and 1 − ν 1−κ wtE with probability 1 − κ.


                                                      8
2.2 Demographics and Structure of Preferences

The model economy is populated by overlapping generations of altruistic people
who live for two periods. Every person has one child, and a measure one of
people is born each period. The lifetime utility Vt of a person born at time t is
given by:
                             Vt = χU(c1,t ) + βU(c2,t ) + zVt+1 ,                             (8)

where c1,t is consumption when young, c2,t is consumption when old, and Vt+1
is the lifetime utility of the person’s child. Preferences are pinned down by
the shape of the period utility function U(·) and by the weights χ, β, and z at-
tached to young-age consumption, old-age consumption, and the utility of the
child, respectively. Below, we endogenize the determination (via intergenera-
tional transmission) of specific preference parameters. More specifically, we as-
sume that people can shape certain aspects of their children’s preferences, but
cannot change their own preferences. Economic decisions within a generation
are taken therefore for fixed preference parameters. This feature allows us to
discuss economic choices and preference transmission separately.

People have one unit of time in each period. When young, they make a career
choice between being workers or being entrepreneurs. Workers supply one unit
of labor to the labor market in each period. Entrepreneurs supply a fraction ψ
of their time to the labor market when young, and use the remainder 1 − ψ for
human capital investment.7 When old, entrepreneurs use all their time for inno-
vating, with a return to innovation as described in Section 2.1 above.

As generations overlap, at time t labor is supplied by the people born in periods
t − 1 and t. Let λt denote the fraction of entrepreneurs in the generation born at
time t. Then, aggregate labor supply at time t is given by:

                              XtW = 1 − λt + λt ψ + 1 − λt−1 ,                                (9)

namely, it is the sum of labor supply by young workers, young entrepreneurs,
   7
    Other ways of modeling the cost of becoming an entrepreneur would yield similar results as
long as the cost results in lower utility at young age, and therefore has the characteristic of an
investment.


                                                9
and old workers. The supply of entrepreneurial input is given by the labor sup-
ply of old entrepreneurs:
                                       XtE = λt−1 .                                    (10)

Equations (2) and (10) imply that the growth rate of the economy is given by
gt = λt−1 ξ.



2.3 Balanced Growth Path for Fixed Preferences

To establish a benchmark, we first analyze balanced growth paths for the case
of fixed preferences. That is, parents do not affect their children’s preferences,
and the preference parameters χ, β, and z, as well as the U(·) function are fixed.
For simplicity, we focus initially on the case where entrepreneurship is not risky,
ν = 0. In a balanced growth path, the growth rates of output and consumption
are constant, as is the fraction of the population comprised of entrepreneurs. This
balanced growth path requires that preferences feature a constant intertemporal
elasticity of substitution, so that period utility is given by:

                                               c1−σ
                                      U(c) =        .
                                               1−σ

We restrict attention to the case 0 ≤ σ < 1, because the analysis of the economy
with endogenous preferences will require utility to be positive (although this can
be generalized, see Doepke and Zilibotti 2008). We also impose the following
restriction:
                                     (1 + ξ)1−σ z < 1,

which guarantees that discounted utility is well defined.

Given that with fixed preferences everyone’s preferences are the same, the key
condition for a balanced growth path with a positive growth rate is that the en-
trepreneurial premium, η, makes people just indifferent between being workers
and being entrepreneurs.8 The indifference condition for people born at time t
   8
   The analysis here applies to interior balanced growth paths where positive proportions of
agents choose either occupation, worker or entrepreneur. More discussion is provided below.



                                            10
can be written as:
                                                     
         χu wtW + βu wt+1
                      W
                            + zVt+1 = χu ψwtW + βu wt+1
                                                    E
                                                          + zVt+1 ,

where the left-hand side is the utility of workers and the right-hand side is the
utility of entrepreneurs. Note that the utility derived from children is identical
for both occupations, and therefore does not feature in the indifference condi-
tion. In a balanced growth path, wages and entrepreneurial returns are given by
wtW = Nt ω W and wtE = Nt ω E , respectively, where ω W and ω E are constants and
Nt grows at the constant rate g. Canceling common terms allows us to rewrite
the indifference condition in this form involving only variables that are constant
in the balanced growth path:
             1−σ
          ωW         ((1 + g)ω W )1−σ    (ψω W )1−σ    ((1 + g)ω E )1−σ
        χ         +β                  =χ            +β                  .           (11)
          1−σ             1−σ              1−σ              1−σ

Condition (11) can be further simplified by dividing both sides of the equality by
(ω W )1−σ , and rewriting it in terms of the entrepreneurial premium η = ω E /ω W :

                     χ + β(1 + g)1−σ = χ(ψ)1−σ + β((1 + g)η)1−σ .                   (12)

Next, consider the expression for the entrepreneurial premium, (7). Plugging in
the balanced-growth levels of X W and X E from (9) and (10), we can express the
premium as a function of the fraction of entrepreneurs, λ:

                                          α      2 − (2 − ψ)λ
                           η = (1 − α) α 1−α ξ          1       .                   (13)
                                                 1 + α 1−α ξλ

Combining (12) and (13), recalling that g = λξ, and rearranging terms yields:
                                                                   !1−σ      
                                          α    2 − (2 − ψ)λ
  χ 1 − (ψ)1−σ = β(1 + λξ)1−σ  (1 − α) α 1−α ξ         1                  − 1 .   (14)
                                                 1 + α 1−α ξλ

Here the left-hand side is the (normalized) cost of becoming an entrepreneur in
terms of forgone utility when young, and the right-hand side is the (normalized)
benefit in terms of higher utility when old. Equation (14) pins down the equilib-

                                          11
rium fraction of entrepreneurs, λ, which in turn determines the entrepreneurial
premium and the rate of economic growth.

Depending on parameters, there can be corner solutions with λ = 0 or λ = 1,
i.e., there aren’t any entrepreneurs or all old agents are entrepreneurs. In addi-
tion, the balanced growth path need not be unique. The reason is that on the
one hand an increase in the fraction of entrepreneurs lowers the entrepreneurial
premium (making entrepreneurship less attractive), but on the other hand it also
increases the growth rate (making entrepreneurship, where higher rewards occur
later in life, relatively more attractive). To provide a sharp contrast with the case
of endogenous preferences, we will focus on parameter configurations where the
balanced growth path for fixed preferences is both interior and unique.


Assumption 1 The parameters α, ξ, and ψ satisfy:
                                                              α
                                     α           (1 − α) α 1−α ξψ
                      2 (1 − α) α   1−α   ξ>1>            1         .
                                                   1 + α 1−α ξ

Proposition 1 Under Assumption 1, there exists a χ̄(α, ξ, ψ) > 0 such that for all
χ < χ̄(α, ξ, ψ) a unique interior balanced growth equilibrium exists, i.e., there is a
unique λ ∈ (0, 1) that satisfies equation (14).



3 Endogenous Culture I: Weber and the Transmission
     of Patience

The balanced-growth analysis in the previous section shows that the growth rate
in our economy is determined by both technology parameters (such as the effi-
ciency of the innovation technology ξ) and preference parameters (such as the
time discount factor β). Despite this fact, when using similar growth models to
address variations in economic growth across time and space, the literature has
typically focused on variations in technology as the driving force. Unlike tech-
nology, preferences usually are assumed to be exogenous. Deviating from this


                                            12
practice, we now endogenize preferences, and analyze the interaction of prefer-
ence formation with technology, occupational choice, and ultimately economic
growth.



3.1 Endogenizing Patience

We start by focusing on patience, parameterized by the time discount factor β.
Since risk is not important for the analysis in this section, we abstract from un-
certainty and assume that ν = 0. Adult agents in period t are endowed with a
predetermined discount factor, βt , but they can affect the discount factor of their
children, βt+1 . For example, in their children’s upbringing parents can emphasize
the appreciation of future rewards. Given that we assume σ < 1, a higher β al-
ways yields higher utility. However, investing in children’s patience is costly, so
parents face a tradeoff. More precisely, denoting by lt the effort a parent of gen-
eration t spends on raising her child’s patience, the parent’s discounted utility
is:
                               1−σ
                              ct,1      c1−σ
                                         t,2
                       χ(lt )      + βt      + zVt+1 (βt+1 (lt )),
                              1−σ       1−σ
where χ is a strictly decreasing, strictly concave, and differentiable function, and
effort is bounded by 0 ≤ lt ≤ 1. The structure of preferences is still of the form
given in (8), although χ and β are now endogenous variables rather than given
parameters. The child’s patience is given by:

                            βt+1 (lt ) = (1 − δ)βt + f (lt ),                   (15)

where f is an increasing, non-negative, and strictly concave function, and δ satis-
fies 0 < δ ≤ 1. Notice that if δ < 1 there is some direct persistence in preferences
across generations, which captures children’s imitation of their parents and other
transmission channels that do not require direct parental effort. In addition to
this direct transmission, the function f (lt ) captures the return to parental effort
in terms of increasing the child’s patience.




                                           13
3.2 Transmission of Patience in the Balanced Growth Path

We now characterize balanced growth paths with endogenous patience. People
face a twofold decision problem. First, when young they choose whether to be
workers or become entrepreneurs. This decision hinges only on returns within
the person’s lifetime, and much of the previous analysis for fixed preferences still
applies. Second, people choose the investment lt in instilling patience in their
children.

We proceed by analyzing the individual decision problem under the assumption
that a balanced growth path has already been reached, so that the entrepreneurial
premium is constant, and wages and profits grow at the constant rate g. The de-
cision problem can be analyzed recursively, with the discount factor β serving as
the state variable of a dynasty. In principle, the state of technology Nt is a second
state variable, because growth in Nt scales up all wages and returns. However,
due to the homothetic utility function, in a balanced growth path utility at time t
can be expressed as:
                                                 1−σ
                                           Nt w0W
                         Vt (βt , Nt ) =               v(βt ),
                                            N0
where v is a value function that does not depend on Nt and is scaled so that it
gives utility conditional on the worker’s wage being equal to one. This value
function, in turn, satisfies the following set of Bellman equations:
                                     
                           v(β) = max v W (β), v E (β) ,                        (16)

where:
                         
         v W (β) = max χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v(β ′) ,              (17)
                   0≤l≤1
                         
         v (β) = max χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v(β ′ ) .
           E
                                                                                (18)
                  0≤l≤1


The maximization in (17) and (18) is subject to the law of motion for patience
across generations:
                               β ′ = (1 − δ)β + f (l).                          (19)

The Bellman equations (17) and (18) represent the utilities conditional on choos-

                                         14
ing to be a worker or an entrepreneur, respectively, and (16) captures the optimal
choice between these two careers.

Given our assumptions on f and l, there is a maximum level of patience, βmax ,
that can be attained. The decision problem is therefore a dynamic programming
problem with a single state variable in the interval [0, βmax ], and can be analyzed
using standard techniques. The following proposition summarizes the properties
of the value function and the associated policy functions for investing in patience
and for choosing an occupation.

Proposition 2 The system of Bellman equations (16)–(18) has a unique solution. The
value function v is increasing and convex in β. The optimal occupational choice is either
to be a worker for any β, or there exists a β̄ such that impatient people with β < β̄ strictly
prefer to be workers, patient people with β > β̄ strictly prefer to be entrepreneurs, and
people with β = β̄ are indifferent. The optimal investment in patience l = l (β) is
non-decreasing in β.

The proof of the proposition is contained in the mathematical appendix. The con-
vexity of the value function follows from two features of the decision problem:
the discount factor enters utility linearly, and there is a complementarity between
being patient and being an entrepreneur.

To gain intuition, consider the decision problem without the occupational choice,
i.e., assume that all members of a dynasty are forced to be either workers or en-
trepreneurs regardless of their patience. If we vary the discount factor β of the
initial generation, while holding constant the investment choices l of all genera-
tions, the utility of the initial generation is a linear increasing function of β. This
is because initial utility is a linear function of present and future discount factors,
and the initial discount factor, in turn, has a linear effect on future discount fac-
tors through the term 1−δ in the law of motion (19). In addition, if the occupation
of all generations is held constant, it is in fact optimal to choose a constant l for
all β, because the marginal return to investing in patience depends only on the
choice of occupation, and not on β.
Now consider the full model with a choice between the two occupations. The ca-
reer with the steeper income profile, namely entrepreneurship, is more attractive

                                             15
when β is high. As we increase β, each time either a current or future mem-
ber of the dynasty switches from being a worker to being an entrepreneur, the
value function also becomes steeper in β. The optimal l increases at each step,
because the cost of providing patience declines with the steepness of the income
profile, while the marginal benefit increases. Since there are only two possible
occupations, the value function is piecewise linear, where the linear segments
correspond to ranges of β for which the optimally chosen present and future
occupations are constant. At each kink of the value function, some member of
the dynasty is indifferent between being a worker and an entrepreneur. Since
the choice of l depends on the chosen occupation, there may be multiple optimal
choices l at a β where the value function has a kink, whereas in between kinks the
optimal choice of l is unique. The following proposition summarizes our results
regarding the optimal choice of income profiles and investment in patience.


Proposition 3 The state space [0, βmax ] can be subdivided into (at most) countably many
closed intervals [β, β] such that over the interior of any range [β, β] the occupational
choice of each member of the dynasty (i.e., parent, child, grandchild and so on) is con-
stant and unique (though possibly different across generations), and l (β) is constant
and single-valued. The value function v (β) is piecewise linear, where each interval [β, β]
corresponds to a linear segment. Each kink in the value function corresponds to a switch,
from being a worker to being an entrepreneur, by a present or future member of the dy-
nasty. At a kink, the optimal choices of occupation and l corresponding to both adjoining
intervals are optimal (thus, the optimal policy functions are not single-valued at a kink).


The proposition implies that the optimal policy correspondence l (β) is a non-
decreasing step-function, which takes multiple values only at a step. Proposition
3 allows us to the characterize the equilibrium law of motion for patience. Since
the policy correspondence l (β) is monotone, the dynamics of β are monotone as
well and converge to a steady state from any initial condition.


Proposition 4 The law of motion of β is described by the following difference equation:

                           β ′ = g(β) = (1 − δ) β + f (l (β)) ,

                                            16
where l (β) is a non-decreasing step-function (as described in Proposition 3). Given an
initial condition β0 , patience in the dynasty converges to a constant β where parents and
children choose the same profession.


Notice that while the discount factor of a dynasty always converges, the steady
state does not have to be unique even for a given β0 . For example, if the ini-
tial generation is indifferent between the two occupations, the steady state can
depend on which one is chosen.

Given the optimal occupational choices of parents and children, the optimal choice
of l has to satisfy first-order conditions. This allows us to characterize more
sharply the decisions on patience and their interaction with occupational choices.
We have already established that both patience β and occupation converge within
a dynasty. Thus, the population ultimately divides into worker dynasties and en-
trepreneur dynasties, and these two types face different incentives for investing
in patience. Consider the case in which the solutions for l are interior. For work-
ers, the first-order condition characterizing the optimal effort lW for investing in
patience is given by:

                              ′   W  z(1 + g)2(1−σ) f ′ (lW )
                          −χ (l ) =                           .                      (20)
                                    1 − z(1 + g)1−σ (1 − δ)

The corresponding condition for entrepreneurial dynasties is given by:

                                          z(1 + g)2(1−σ) η 1−σ f ′ (lE )
                       −χ′ (lE )ψ 1−σ =                                  .           (21)
                                           1 − z(1 + g)1−σ (1 − δ)

In both equations, the left-hand side is strictly increasing in l, and the right-hand
side is strictly decreasing. Moreover, for a given l the left-hand side is smaller
for entrepreneurial dynasties, and the right-hand side is larger. Therefore, in the
balanced growth path we must have lE > lW : The returns to being patient are
higher for entrepreneurs because of their steeper income profile, inducing them
to invest more in patience. In the balanced growth path, we therefore also have




                                              17
β E > β W , where:

                                          f (lW )
                                     βW =          ,
                                             δ
                                          f (lE )
                                     βE =         .
                                             δ

These findings line up with Max Weber’s (1905) view of entrepreneurs as future-
oriented individuals who possess a “spirit of capitalism.” However, in our theory
differences in patience are not just a determinant of occupational choice (as in
Weber), but also a consequence of it: Entrepreneurial dynasties develop patience
because of the complementarity between this preference trait and their occupa-
tion. In contrast, Weber focused on religion as a key determinant of values and
preferences across social groups.



             7



           6.5



             6

             0.4     0.5       0.6          0.7        0.8   0.9     1
                                             β


           0.6


           0.4


           0.2


             0
             0.4     0.5       0.6          0.7        0.8   0.9     1
                                             β


Figure 1: Example of Value Function (Upper Panel) and Policy Function for l
(Lower Panel)

Figure 1 provides an example of the characteristics of the value and policy func-


                                          18
tions analyzed in Propositions 2 and 3.9 In the example the value function has
two linear segments. Below the threshold of β = 0.65, the optimal choice is to
become a worker, and investment in patience in this range is such that all subse-
quent generations are workers too. Thus, investment in patience is constant over
this range, as displayed in the lower panel. Above the threshold, the optimal
choice for both the current and future generations is to become entrepreneurs.
Consequently, investment in patience is constant over this range as well, but
considerably higher compared to worker dynasties. The value function has a
kink at β = 0.65 and becomes steeper, because the return to patience is higher
for entrepreneurs given their steeper lifetime income profiles. The differential
investment results in a substantial gap in patience across occupations in the bal-
anced growth path, with a discount factor β W = 0.55 for workers and β E = 0.95
for entrepreneurs.



3.3 Multiplicity of Balanced Growth Paths with Endogenous Pa-
       tience

Given the preceding analysis, it is clear that there is no balanced growth path
in which all dynasties have identical preferences, and in which there are positive
fractions of both entrepreneurs and workers. The reason is that the entrepreneurs
have a steeper income profile, given the need to acquire skills when young and
the entrepreneurial return that is received when old. This steeper income profile
implies that parents of entrepreneurs have a higher incentive to invest in patience
compared to parents of workers. Moreover, in any given period the population
will sort such that the more patient individuals become entrepreneurs and the
less patient become workers. Finally, because of persistence of patience within
dynasties, occupations also will be persistent within dynasties.

Hence, a balanced growth path has the property that the two groups are char-
acterized by different preferences, patient entrepreneurs and impatient workers.
Given the patience gap between these groups, at least one of them will strictly
   9
     The parametrization is as in the balanced-growth computations in Section 3.3 with the equi-
librium fraction of entrepreneurs given by λ = 0.35.


                                              19
prefer their own occupation over the alternative, both for themselves and for
their children. In fact, generically there exists a continuum of balanced growth
path where both workers and entrepreneurs strictly prefer their own occupation,
and where the fraction of entrepreneurs, the entrepreneurial premium, and the
equilibrium growth rate vary across growth paths. For given parameters, the bal-
anced growth path that is reached depends on initial conditions. More generally,
the multiplicity of balanced growth paths opens up the possibility of history de-
pendence and a persistent impact of policies or institutions on the performance
of an economy.

To illustrate these results, we focus on the case where preferences are not per-
sistent, δ = 1. We would like to characterize the set of balanced growth paths
in terms of the growth rate g, the entrepreneurial premium η, and the patience
levels β W and β E of workers and entrepreneurs. From (20) and (21), we know
that the investments in patience lW and lE by workers and entrepreneurs have to
satisfy:

                          −χ′ (lW ) = z(1 + g)2(1−σ) f ′ (lW ),
                     −χ′ (lE )ψ 1−σ = z(1 + g)2(1−σ) η 1−σ f ′ (lE ),

and we have β W = f (lW ) and β E = f (lE ). Here focusing on the δ = 1 case implies
that the choice of future patience depends only on today’s occupational choice,
but not directly on the current patience.

The balanced-growth values of the value functions (17) and (18) are:

                            χ(lW ) + β (1 + g)1−σ
                       vW =                       ,
                              1 − z (1 + g)1−σ
                         E  χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ
                        v =                                .
                                   1 − z (1 + g)1−σ

In the balanced growth path, each group has to prefer their own occupation over
the alternative, for the present generation and future descendants. In particular,
there are four constraints to consider. The first is that a person with patience β E
prefers entrepreneurship for all members of the dynasty over everyone being a


                                           20
worker:
                  v E ≥ χ(lW ) + β E (1 + g)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v W .                     (22)

The right-hand side has two components, because the first generation still has
patience β E , with all following generations in the deviation would have patience
β W . The second constraint is that entrepreneurship for all generations is pre-
ferred to the first generation being an entrepreneur, but all following generations
switching to being workers. This constraint can be written as:

                                                                                        
 v E ≥ χ(lEW )ψ 1−σ + β E ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lW ) + β EW (1 + g)1−σ
                                                               + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v W . (23)

Here lEW and β EW are the investment and patience level that are optimal given
that path of occupational choices, characterized by:

                      −χ′ (lEW )ψ 1−σ = z(1 + g)2(1−σ) f ′ (lEW )

and β EW = f (lEW ). The parallel constraints for worker dynasties with patience
β W are given by:

                    χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β W ((1 + g) η)1−σ + v E ≤ v W                        (24)

and:

                                                                                 
 χ(lW E ) + β W (1 + g)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β W E ((1 + g) η)1−σ
                                                        + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v E ≤ v W , (25)

where lW E and β W E are characterized by:

                      −χ′ (lW E ) = z(1 + g)2(1−σ) η 1−σ f ′ (lW E )

and β W E = f (lW E ). It can now be shown that a continuum of balanced growth
paths exists. Because of the gap in balanced-growth preferences, when one oc-
cupational group is just indifferent between their occupation and the alternative,
the other group strictly prefers their own occupation. It is therefore possible to

                                           21
raise the return of the indifferent group in some range so that both groups strictly
prefer to stay in their own occupation. The potentially binding constraints are
given by (23) and (25). The following lemma contains the main result underlying
the multiplicity of balanced growth paths.


Lemma 1 When the entrepreneurial premium η in the balanced growth path is such that
(23) holds as an equality, then (22), (24), and (25) hold as strict inequalities.


Building on this lemma, we can now establish the main result:


Proposition 5 If there exists a balanced growth with path a fraction of entrepreneurs λ
such that 0 < λ < 1, there exists a continuum of additional balanced growth paths with
different fractions of entrepreneurs and thus different growth rates.


That is, there are multiple balanced growth paths unless the only feasible bal-
anced growth path features a corner solution with all agents choosing the same
profession.

We have focused on the δ = 1 case for analytical convenience. When there is
direct persistence in patience across generations (δ < 1), the forces generating
multiple balanced growth paths are strengthened even more, and generally a
wider range of rates of entrepreneurship and economic growth can be long-run
outcomes. Figure 2 illustrates this with a computed example. The parameter
values used are as follows: z = 0.5, σ = 0.5, ξ = 3, α = 0.3, ψ = 0.5. The cost
function for investing in patience is given by χ(l) = 1 − l, and the law of motion
for patience is parameterized as:

                             β ′ = (1 − δ)β + δ β̃ + θ1 lθ2 ,

where we set β̃ = 0.5 and θ2 = 0.8. We computed outcomes for a variety of values
of the persistence parameter δ. For δ = 1, we set θ1 = 1, and for lower δ the value
of θ1 is adjusted, to hold the impact of investing in patience on utility constant
in the balanced growth path (so that changing δ does not lead to a level shift in
patience).

                                           22
           0.6



           0.5



           0.4
       λ




           0.3



           0.2



           0.1
             0.5        0.6        0.7         0.8        0.9          1
                                          δ

            Figure 2: Range of Balanced Growth Paths for Different δ

For these parameters, Figure 2 plots the range for λ (the fraction of entrepreneurs
in the population) that can be supported as a balanced growth path. At δ = 1 (no
direct persistence in patience across generations), the balanced-growth level of λ
varies between 0.29 and 0.39, which corresponds to growth rates (per generation)
between g = 0.87 and g = 1.27, or, if a generation is interpreted to last 25 years,
between 2.5 and 3.3 percent per year. As we lower δ and make patience more
persistent, the range of balanced growth paths widens. At δ = 0.5, λ can vary
between 0.15 and 0.51 in the balanced growth path, which corresponds to annual
growth rates between 1.5 and 3.8 percent per year.

Figure 3 demonstrates what the law of motion for patience looks like in the bal-
anced growth path for different values of λ. In all panels, the persistence of pa-
tience is set to δ = 0.8. In the top panel, we set λ = 0.26, which is close to
the lowest fraction of entrepreneurs that can be sustained in a balanced growth
path. In this growth path, the return to entrepreneurship is high. The law of


                                         23
            1



           0.5                                                  λ=0.26

             0.4     0.5      0.6    0.7        0.8   0.9      1         1.1

            1



           0.5                                                  λ=0.35

             0.4     0.5      0.6    0.7        0.8   0.9      1         1.1

            1        λ=0.43


           0.5
             0.4     0.5      0.6    0.7        0.8   0.9      1         1.1


Figure 3: Laws of Motion for β in Balanced Growth Paths for δ = 0.8 and Different
Values of λ

motion for patience intersects the 45-degree line twice, where the lower intersec-
tion corresponds to the long-run patience of workers and the higher intersection
corresponds to entrepreneurs. Given high returns to entrepreneurship, dynasties
that start out with patience that is only a little higher than the long-run patience
of workers ultimately converge to entrepreneurship. The law of motion has three
linear segments, where the bottom one corresponds to worker dynasties and the
top one to entrepreneur dynasties. The (small) middle segment pertains to dy-
nasties where the current generation consists of workers who invest sufficiently
in patience for all following generations to switch to entrepreneurship. In the
middle panel, we set λ = 0.35. Here the law of motion has only two segments.
All dynasties are either workers or entrepreneurs forever; there are no transitions
between the occupations. The bottom panel for λ = 0.43 corresponds to a low re-
turn to entrepreneurship. The law of motion is a mirror image of the top panel.
There are three segments, where the middle segment now corresponds to dynas-


                                           24
ties where the current generation consists of entrepreneurs, but all subsequent
ones will be workers. Comparing across the levels of λ, it is apparent that as we
move to higher levels of λ the long-run levels of patience (i.e., the intersections
with the 45-degree line) increase both for workers and for entrepreneurs. This is
because a higher λ implies a higher growth rate, which results in steeper income
profiles for both professions, and thus more investment in patience.



3.4 Implications of Multiplicity of Balanced Growth Paths

Taken at face value, our finding of multiplicity of balanced growth paths implies
that different economies, although characterized by identical technological pa-
rameters, can experience permanently different growth rates, driven by cultural
differences across their populations. Of course, cultural differences themselves
are endogenous in our theory. From this perspective, the theory suggests the
possibility of path dependence, that is, a country’s success at entrepreneurship
and innovation may depend on the cultural and economic makeup of the coun-
try at the onset of modern economic growth. This theme is explored in more
detail in Doepke and Zilibotti (2008), where we explicitly model the transition of
an economy with endogenous preferences from a stagnant, pre-industrial econ-
omy to capital-driven growth. In that paper, the distribution of preferences at the
onset of modern growth depends on the nature of pre-industrial occupations in
terms of lifetime income profiles and the distribution of land ownership. Com-
bining the approach of Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) with the theory outlined here
would lead to the prediction that the nature of the pre-industrial economy can
have long-term repercussions for economic development.

Another implication of multiplicity of balanced growth paths is that policies or
institutions that affect preferences can have a long-term impact on economic
growth. Consider a country that imposes high taxes on entrepreneurs or discour-
ages entrepreneurship through other means, as in the centrally planned economies
of Eastern Europe during the twentieth century. Over time, such policies would
shift the culture of the population towards being less future-oriented with a lower
propensity for entrepreneurship. Consider now the transition of the economy


                                        25
when the political constraints on entrepreneurship are removed. We would ex-
pect to observe a small class of entrepreneurs gaining high returns, but lower
rates of entrepreneurship and a lower rate of economic growth compared to a
country undergoing a similar transition from more favorable initial cultural con-
ditions.

The model can also be extended to allow for open economies. The simplest case
is that of a world economy in which trade across borders is frictionless, so that
all goods are traded at the same price, and workers and entrepreneurs get the
same returns regardless of where they live. In such an environment, initial cross-
country differences would manifest themselves in permanent differences in rates
of entrepreneurship and innovation across countries, even though ultimately all
countries would benefit from innovation (and experience the same growth rates)
because of integrated markets.



3.5 The Model with Financial Markets

In the sections above, we showed that workers and entrepreneurs face different
incentives for investing in patience, because entrepreneurs face a steeper income
profile. However, the difference in the income profile would not matter if people
could use financial markets to smooth consumption. A steep income profile di-
rectly translates into a steep utility profile only if financial markets are absent or
incomplete.

To illustrate this point, consider the opposite extreme of perfect financial mar-
kets, i.e., people can borrow and lend at a fixed interest rate R subject to a life-
time budget constraint. For simplicity, we abstract from financial bequests. The
only occupations that are chosen in equilibrium are now those that maximize the
present value of income, y1 + y2 /R. Therefore, the lifetime returns of being a
worker and being an entrepreneur have to be equalized:

                          W     (1 + g)ω W     W  (1 + g)ω E
                      ω       +            = ψω +            ,
                                    R                 R



                                           26
which implies that:

                                  (1 − ψ) R     (1 − ψ) R
                        η =1+               =1+           .
                                    1+g           1 + λξ

The equilibrium condition (13) continues to hold, hence:

                                          α     2 − (2 − ψ)λ
                          η = (1 − α) α 1−α ξ            1              .
                                                1 + α 1−α ξλ

Combining these equations yields a relationship between the proportion of en-
trepreneurs, λ (or, alternatively, the growth rate), and the market interest rate:

                        (1 − ψ) R              α 2ξ − (2 − ψ)g
                   1+             = (1 − α) α 1−α         1    .                (26)
                          1+g                      1 + α 1−α g

Since workers and entrepreneurs have the same lifetime income, it is sufficient to
consider the individual saving decision of one group, e.g., the workers:
                              1−σ                     
                       ωW − s        β Rs + ω W (1 + g) .1−σ
                   max             +
                    s    1−σ         χ        1−σ

The solution yields a standard Euler equation:
                                                             σ1
                              Rs + ω W (1 + g)         β
                                               =         R          .
                                  ωW − s               χ

Hence,

                                      1+g+R
                         cY    = ωW         σ1 ,
                                     R + R βχ
                                      1
                                     β σ W 1+g+R
                         cO    =   R       ω         σ1 .
                                     χ
                                             R + R βχ

Given this solution to the saving problem, the optimal investment in patience is




                                          27
given by:
                                                                                 !1−σ
                                                          
                                                          W 1−σ      1+g+R
             l(β, g) =    argmax0≤l≤1                 ω                       1
                                                                  R+(R χ(l)
                                                                         β
                                                                             )σ
                                                     1−σ                              
                                              β          σ                  1−σ      ′
                             χ (l) + β       χ(l)
                                                  R             + z (1 + g)       v(β )


The policy function, l(β, g) determines the equilibrium law of motion of β, and
hence the steady state value of β. This is a function of g and R.

So far we have found two equilibrium conditions for three endogenous variables,
g, β, and R. The model is closed by an asset market clearing condition that pins
down the interest rate. We assume that the the young cannot borrow from the
old, since the latter cannot obtain repayment within their lifetime. Hence, all bor-
rowing and lending takes place between workers and entrepreneurs of a given
cohort. The market clearing condition then yields sW + sE = 0, or:
             1                  1
            β σ                  β σ
          R      − (1 + g) + ψ R       − η (1 + g) = 0
            χ                    χ
                                      1
                                     β σ
                                   R      (1 + ψ) = (1 + g) (1 + η) .
                                     χ

This is the third of the conditions that jointly pin down g, β, and R in the balanced
growth path.

The next proposition summarizes our main findings for the model with a perfect
market for borrowing and lending.

Proposition 6 When a perfect market exists for borrowing and lending within gener-
ations, the only occupations that are chosen in equilibrium are those that maximize the
present value of income. The set of optimal occupations is independent of patience β.
If both occupations yield the same present value of income, investment in patience l is
independent of which occupation is chosen.

The intuition for this result is simple: with perfect borrowing and lending, ev-
ery adult will choose the income profile that yields the highest present value of

                                                   28
income, regardless of patience.10 The proposition shows that at least some de-
gree of financial market imperfection is necessary for occupational choice and
investments in patience to be interlinked.

A positive implication of this finding is that the degree of discount-factor het-
erogeneity in a population depends on the development of financial markets. In
an economy where financial markets are absent, workers and entrepreneurs face
very different incentives for investing in patience, and consequently the gap in
patience across occupations is large in the balanced growth path. In contrast, in
a modern economy with deeper financial markets we would expect to observe
smaller cultural differences across occupations.



4 Endogenous Culture II: Knight and the Transmis-
       sion of Risk Tolerance

In our economic environment, entrepreneurs face not only a steeper income pro-
file than workers; they also face risk, provided that ν > 0. As a result, risk
preferences too should be relevant for explaining entrepreneurship, in line with
Frank Knight’s characterization of risk-taking entrepreneurs (see Knight 1921,
and more recently Kihlstrom and Laffont 1979 and Vereshchagina and Hopen-
hayn 2009). In this section, we provide a formal analysis of this possibility.



4.1 Endogenizing Risk Preferences

To facilitate our analysis of endogenous risk preferences, we focus on a period
utility function with mean-variance preferences. That is, the period utility func-
tion evaluating (potentially stochastic) consumption c is given by:
                                                     p
                                 U(c) = E(c) − σ         V ar(c),                             (27)
  10
     In the model of the previous section, general equilibrium forces ensure that there exist equi-
libria with positive growth where both occupations yield the same present value of income.



                                                29
where E(c) is expected consumption and V ar(c) is the variance of consumption,
and σ is a measure of risk aversion. The specific functional form is chosen to be
consistent with balanced growth.11 The utility function implies that people are
always better off with a lower risk aversion, i.e., a higher risk tolerance. However,
as in our analysis of patience, there is a cost of investing in children’s preferences.
The effort that a parent of generation t spends on raising the child’s risk tolerance
is denoted by lt . Total utility is then given by:
                     q                           q           
  χ(lt ) E(ct,1 ) − σt V ar(ct,1 ) + β E(ct,2 ) − σt V ar(ct,2 ) + zVt+1 (σt+1 (lt ))


where χ is a strictly decreasing, strictly concave, and differentiable function, and
effort is bounded by 0 ≤ lt ≤ 1. The child’s risk preferences are given by:

                           σt+1 (lt ) = (1 − δ)βt + δσmax − f (lt ),                         (28)

where f is an increasing and strictly concave function with f (0) = 0, and δ satis-
fies 0 < δ ≤ 1. Here σmax denotes the level of risk aversion exhibited by a dynasty
that never invests in risk tolerance. If δ < 1 there is some direct persistence in
preferences across generations.

Let w W denote the workers’ wage, and η the ratio of the expected return of en-
trepreneurs to this wage. To simplify the analysis, we assume that the risk of en-
trepreneurship takes the form that with probability κ, the entrepreneur is success-
ful and earns a positive return, whereas with probability 1 − κ the entrepreneur
fails and earns zero. That is, in the notation of Section 2.1 we have:

                                                1−κ
                                          ν=        ,
                                                 κ

so that if successful the earnings are:

                                                      ηw W
                                    (1 + ν)ηw W =          ,
                                                       κ

whereas with probability 1 − κ entrepreneurial output is zero. The mean return
  11
   While this utility function is not of the expected-utility form, the main results carry over to
expected utility as well. For an analysis of the usual CRRA case see Doepke and Zilibotti (2012).

                                               30
is then ηw W , and the variance of the return is given by:
                                                   2
                        E       ηw W                                        2
                 V ar(c ) = κ        − ηw W              + (1 − κ) ηw W
                                 κ
                            1−κ        2
                          =        ηw W .
                              κ

Thus, the old-age felicity of an entrepreneur is given by:
                                                                  r         !
                               p                                      1−κ
                  E(cE ) − σ       V ar(cE ) = ηw W      1−σ                    .
                                                                       κ


4.2 Transmission of Risk Preferences in the Balanced Growth
      Path

We now consider balanced growth paths. People choose both a career, and whether
and how much to invest in their child’s risk tolerance. We analyze the individ-
ual decision problem under the assumption that the economy is in a balanced
growth path, so the entrepreneurial premium is constant, and wages and profits
grow at the constant rate g. The decision problem admits a recursive represen-
tation with the risk aversion parameter, σ, serving as the state variable of the
dynasty. As in our analysis of endogenous patience, the state of technology Nt is
in principle a second state variable. However, the linear homogeneity of utility
in expected consumption allows us to express the value function at time t in a
multiplicatively separable form:

                                                 Nt w0W
                               Vt (σt , Nt ) =          v(σt ),
                                                  N0

where v(σt ) = Vt (σt , 1) satisfies the following set of Bellman equations:
               
     v(σ) = max v W (σ), v E (σ) ,                                                  (29)
   v W (σ) = max {χ(l) + β (1 + g) + z (1 + g) v(σ ′ )} ,                           (30)
             0≤l≤1
                   (                           r          !                    )
                                                 1   −  κ
   v E (σ) = max χ(l)ψ + β (1 + g) η 1 − σ                  + z (1 + g) v(σ ′ ) ,   (31)
             0≤l≤1                                   κ


                                             31
the maximizations in (30) and (31) being subject to:

                              σ ′ = (1 − δ)σ + δσmax − f (l).                           (32)

Here, v W and v E are the present-value utilities conditional on choosing to be a
worker or an entrepreneur, respectively, and v yields the optimal occupational
choice.

Since l is bounded and δ > 0, there is a lower bound σmin for feasible levels of risk
aversion. Note that, depending on f and δ, σmin could be negative, correspond-
ing to risk loving individuals who would choose a risky lottery over a safe one
with the same expected return. For a given growth rate g and average return to
entrepreneurship η, the decision problem is a standard dynamic programming
problem with a single state variable in the interval [σmin , σmax ]. The following
propositions summarize the properties of the value function and the associated
optimal policy functions.


Proposition 7 The system of Bellman equations (29)–(31) has a unique solution. The
value function v is decreasing and convex in σ. The optimal occupational choice is either
to be a worker for any σ, or to be an entrepreneur for any σ, or there exists a σ̄ such
that people with high risk aversion, σ > σ̄, strictly prefer to be workers; people with
low risk aversion, σ < σ̄, strictly prefer to be entrepreneurs; and people with σ = σ̄ are
indifferent. The optimal investment in risk tolerance l = l (σ) is non-increasing in σ.


Proposition 8 The state space [σmin , σmax ] can be subdivided into (at most) countably
many closed intervals [σ, σ] such that over the interior of any range [σ, σ] the occupa-
tional choice of each member of the dynasty (i.e., parent, child, grandchild and so on) is
constant and unique (though possibly different across generations), and l (σ) is constant
and single-valued. The value function v (σ) is piecewise linear, where each interval [σ, σ]
corresponds to a linear segment. Each kink in the value function corresponds to a switch
from being a worker to being an entrepreneur by a present or future member of the dy-
nasty. At a kink, the optimal choices of occupation and l corresponding to both adjoining
intervals are optimal (thus, the optimal policy functions are not single-valued at a kink).
If there is an interval [σ, σ] such that over this interval all present and future members of

                                             32
the dynasty are workers, the value function v (σ) is constant over this interval, and there
is no investment in risk tolerance: l(σ) = 0.


The proofs of the propositions (omitted) are analogous to the proofs of Proposi-
tions 2 and 3 above. The final part of Proposition 8 arises because workers do
not face any risk, so that in all-worker dynasties utility is independent of risk
preferences, and the return on investing in risk tolerance is zero.

The next proposition characterizes the dynamics of risk aversion within dynas-
ties.


Proposition 9 The law of motion of σ is described by the following difference equation:

                      σ ′ = g(σ) = (1 − δ) σ + δσmax − f (l (σ)) ,

where l (σ) is a non-increasing step-function (as described in Proposition 8). Given an
initial condition σ0 , risk aversion in the dynasty converges to a constant σ where parents
and children choose the same profession. If the dynasty ends up as a worker dynasty, the
limit for risk aversion is given by σ = σmax .


The proof (omitted) is analogous to the proof of Proposition 4.

We have already established that in worker dynasties the return to investing in
risk tolerance is zero, so that these dynasties do not invest in risk tolerance and
hence we have lW = 0 and σ W = σmax . For entrepreneurs, in contrast, the return
to investing in risk tolerance is positive. If their choice of investment is interior,
the investment lE is characterized by a first-order condition:
                                                      q
                                                          1−κ ′ E
                                       z(1 + g)2 βη        κ
                                                             f (l )
                             ′   E
                         −χ (l )ψ =                                                   (33)
                                         1 − z(1 + g)(1 − δ)

Here the left-hand side is strictly increasing in l, and the right-hand side is strictly
decreasing. The optimal parental investment in risk tolerance is increasing in the
entrepreneurial premium η, the growth rate g, and the entrepreneurial risk 1 − κ.


                                            33
Parallel to our analysis of endogenous patience, the gap in risk preferences be-
tween workers and entrepreneurs leads to a multiplicity of balanced growth
paths. There can be long-run differences in growth rates across countries, where
faster-growing countries are characterized by a larger group of entrepreneurial
individuals with low risk aversion. As in the discussion of Section 3.4, the mul-
tiplicity of balanced growth paths can give rise to path dependence, to persis-
tent effects of institutions and policies that affect risk taking, and (in an open-
economy context) to specialization of certain groups or countries in innovative
and risk-taking activities. Also, the development of financial markets once again
interacts with endogenous culture and growth, as discussed Section 3.5 for the
patience case. For example, for a given distribution of preferences better risk-
sharing institutions (e.g., through insurance markets or tax and transfer policies)
can make entrepreneurship more attractive to individuals with high risk aver-
sion, and thereby lead to faster economic growth. However, there is also a down-
side to the provision of more insurance. In the limit with perfect risk sharing
there would be no incentive to invest in risk tolerance, and consequently over
time the population would end up more risk averse compared to a country where
less insurance is available. Consider now the arrival of a new technology that in-
volves some uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. The population in the well-insured
country would be less likely to pick up such new opportunities, and thus might
fall back over time compared to a less well-insured, but more risk tolerant and
innovative country.



5 Paternalistic Motives for Preference Transmission

Up to this point, in our model of preference transmission parents are motivated
solely by altruism, i.e., they evaluate the welfare of the children using the same
utility function that drives the children’s choices. However, preference transmis-
sion could be driven also by paternalistic motives. This is the case when there
are potential disagreements between parents and children about optimal choices,
and parents use preference transmission as a tool to influence their children’s
choices.


                                        34
The paternalistic motive is especially salient in the relationship between parents
and adolescent children. It is common for parents to desire to control the ten-
dency of adolescents to take risks parents disapprove of, such as reckless driving,
the use of drugs or alcohol, or risky sexual behavior.12



5.1 Allowing for Conflict between Parents and Children

To analyze how paternalistic motives affect preference transmission, we extend
the model by allowing children to make an additional choice in young age, de-
noted by x, that depends on risk preferences. For simplicity, we assume this
choice to be orthogonal to the adult occupational choice, i.e., x does not affect the
relative return of the adult occupations or the child’s ability to enter either occu-
pation. The environment is a simplified version of Doepke and Zilibotti (2012),
where we propose a general theory of parenting style related to paternalism.

Children choose from a set of feasible lotteries so as to maximize the felicity func-
tion Uy (x, σ), whereas their parents evaluate the choice with a different felicity
function, U(x, σ), where σ denotes the adult’s risk aversion parameter. As a con-
crete example, let the choice of the lottery x result in a random consumption
process c(x), and consider parental preferences given by:
                                                    p
                          U (x, σ) = E(c(x)) − σ        V ar(c(x))

as in (27), whereas the child’s preferences are given by:
                                                   p
                      Uy (x, σ) = E(c(x)) − (σ − ξ) V ar(c(x)).

That is, children have intrinsically lower risk aversion (which is consistent with
empirical evidence), where ξ > 0 captures the gap in risk aversion between the
young and the old. For a given σ, children would choose riskier lotteries x than
what their parents would prefer.
  12
    There is well-documented evidence that children are especially prone to risk-taking. For
instance, in a series of laboratory experiments carried out in New Mexico, Harbaugh, Krause,
and Vesterlund (2002) find that 70-75% of children in age 5–8 chose fair gambles with varying
odds over a certain outcome, while only 43-53% of the adults did.

                                             35
We denote by x (σ) optimal choice from the children’s standpoint. This choice is
given by:
                                 x (σ) = argmax {Uy (x, σ)} .
                                              x

This choice is static, because the choice of x does not have dynamic consequences.
Assuming the choice set to be continuous and differentiable implies:

                                    ∂Uy (x(σ), σ) /∂x = 0.

We now turn to the parents’ decision problem. The utility of adult workers and
entrepreneurs can be written as:

       v W (σ) = max {χ(l) + β (1 + g) + z (1 + g) W (σ ′ , σ)} ,
                 0≤l≤1
                       (                           r          !                        )
                                                     1 −    κ
       v E (σ) = max χ(l)ψ + β (1 + g) η 1 − σ                  + z (1 + g) W (σ ′ , σ) ,
                 0≤l≤1                                 κ

where W (σ ′ , σ) captures the utility that the parents derive from their children.
This function is given by:13
                                                       
                   W (σ ′ , σ) = U (x(σ ′ ), σ) + β max v W (σ ′ ) , v E (σ ′ ) .

Notice that x(σ ′ ) is written as a function of σ ′ . This is because the parent cannot
control x directly, but must take as given the child’s decision based on the child’s
preference parameter σ ′ . The choice σ ′ is constrained by the law of motion:

                                σ ′ = (1 − δ)σ + δσmax − f (l).
  13
    In Doepke and Zilibotti (2012), we consider a formulation with partial paternalism, where
the W function takes the form:
                                                                              
             W (σ ′ , σ) = qUy (x(σ ′ ), σ ′ ) + (1 − q)U (x(σ ′ ), σ) + β max v W (σ ′E (σ ′ ) .




                                                  36
5.2 Optimal Preference Transmission with Paternalistic Motives

Consider a parent who anticipates her child to become an entrepreneur, and as-
sume, for simplicity, δ = 1. If the optimal l is interior, the following first-order
condition obtains:
                                                              
             ′ E
                                  ∂U (x(σ ′ ), σ) ∂x     ∂v E        
            χ l ψ = z (1 + g)                        ′
                                                       +β       f ′ lE .
                                   |    ∂x{z       ∂σ}     ∂σ
                                     paternalistic motive


Relative to the model of Section 4, a new term appears in the first-order condition
which captures the paternalistic motive. This terms vanishes whenever there is
no disagreement between parents and children, i.e., when U = Uy and σ = σ ′ ,
because in this case we have:

                                 ∂U (x(σ ′ ), σ)
                                                 = 0,
                                     ∂x

i.e., the envelope theorem applies. Likewise, the paternalistic motive would also
be mute if a fixed choice of x were imposed on the child, because this would im-
ply ∂x/∂σ ′ = 0. In contrast, paternalism does affect the parent’s decision problem
whenever three conditions all are satisfied: There is disagreement between par-
ent and child regarding the choice of x; the child is free to choose x; and the
child’s choice depends on the endogenous preference parameter σ ′ . In this case,
it is valuable for the parent to distort the child’s preferences in order to induce
the child to choose an x that is more to the parent’s liking. Alternatively, if the
option were available, the parent would impose restrictions on the ability of the
child to choose freely. When forming a child’s preferences, parents realize that
reducing the child’s risk tolerance comes at the expense of the child’s future util-
ity, implying a tradeoff for the altruistic parents. Thus, in general the parent will
strike a compromise, and accept that the child chooses an x that is different from
the parents’ most preferred option.
The discussion above assumes that the parental choice of σ ′ (via l) does not af-
fect the child’s occupational choice. However, if the paternalistic motive is suf-
ficiently strong, the occupational choice of the child may be affected. More for-
mally, if σ̂ denotes the risk aversion parameter such that v W (σ̂) = v E (σ̂), it is

                                          37
possible that absent the paternalistic motive the parent would choose σ ′ < σ̂,
inducing the child to become an entrepreneur, whereas the paternalistic motive
induces a choice σ ′ > σ̂, implying that the child will choose to be a worker. This
scenario is more likely if ξ (i.e., the child’s intrinsic risk-loving bias) is large, and
if the set of feasible lotteries x among which the child can choose includes choices
the parent would strongly disapprove of. In practice, this choice set would de-
pend on various features of the environment in which the adolescent grows up.
For instance, adolescents living in areas infested by juvenile gangs are more
exposed to risky choices than are children in safe middle-class neighborhoods,
where risky choices are limited to more innocuous transgressions. An implica-
tion of this analysis, which we explore in more detail in Doepke and Zilibotti
(2012), is that families living in areas exposed to acute juvenile risk will empha-
size values that are less conducive to an entrepreneurial spirit. When integrated
into the general equilibrium model of Section 2.1, the theory bears the prediction
that countries where juvenile risk is more severe will have a smaller equilibrium
proportion of entrepreneurs as well as larger risk premia.



6 Literature Review

6.1 Cultural Transmission, Human Capital, and Non-cognitive
      Skills

The theory presented in the previous sections provides a two-way link between
the economic environment and preferences. A pioneering contribution to this
literature is Becker and Mulligan (1997), which formalizes a model where peo-
ple choose their own preferences rather than those of their children. In Mulligan
(1997) parents choose their own level of altruism towards their children. Along
similar lines, in Haaparanta and Puhakka (2004) agents invest in their own pa-
tience and in health. Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) (discussed in more detail below)
provides the first theory where altruistic parents shape their children’s prefer-
ences in order to “best prepare” them for the economic environment in which
they will operate.

                                           38
In these studies, as in our model above (except in the extension of Section 5),
parents evaluate their children’s wellbeing using their children’s preferences.
Namely, parents choose their investments in preference optimally by maximiz-
ing their children’s utility. There is no explicit desire of parents to preserve their
own culture or to instill values that they regard as intrinsically good or moral.
In particular, parents may choose to teach their children preferences that differ
from their own. In contrast, a number of recent studies postulate that cultural
transmission hinges on a form of “imperfect empathy” (see Bisin and Verdier
2001, Hauk and Saez-Marti 2002, Gradstein 2007, Klasing 2012, Saez-Marti and
Sjoegren 2008, Tabellini 2008, and Saez-Marti and Zenou 2011). According to this
approach, parents use their own preferences to evaluate the children’s utility, and
are driven by a desire to make the children’s values similar to their own. The two
approaches and their differences are reviewed in more detail by Saez-Marti and
Zilibotti (2008).14

In the Beckerian approach, parents transmit traits to their children that are sup-
posed to make them fit for success. Thus, investment in preference transmission
resembles a standard human capital investment. From this perspective, pref-
erences are closely related to what the recent labor literature has labeled ”non-
cognitive skills”. These skills determine how well people can focus on long-term
tasks, behave in social interactions, and exert self-restraint, and include patience,
perseverance, and self-discipline, among others. Recent empirical studies em-
phasize the importance of such human assets for economic success (see Heck-
man, Stixrud, and Urzua 2006 and Segal 2013).

Within the realm of non-cognitive skills, we emphasize the role of patience and
of the propensity to take risks. The importance of patience for economic success
has been documented by experimental studies. A longitudinal study by Mischel,
Shoda, and Rodriguez (1992) finds that individuals who were more patient as
children were subsequently more likely to acquire formal education, to choose
market-oriented occupations, and to earn higher income. More recently, Sutter
et al. (2013) find that measures of time preferences of young people aged 10–
  14
    Our analysis in Section 5.2 and in Doepke and Zilibotti (2012) provides a bridge between
these two approaches. Our analysis proposes an explicit microfoundation of the child-adult pref-
erence conflict, whereas in the existing literature imperfect empathy is postulated as a primitive.


                                                39
18 elicited through experiments predict saving behavior, smoking and alcohol
abuse, BMI, and conduct at school. Reyes-Garcia et al. (2007) studies the effect
of patience on economic outcomes among the Tsimanes, an Amazonian tribal so-
ciety that only recently transitioned from self-sufficiency to a market economy.
They find that individuals who were already more patient in the pre-market en-
vironment (when patience was a latent attribute with no effect on individual
success) acquired on average more education and engaged more often in en-
trepreneurial activity when the society introduced markets.15

The importance of the propensity to take risk for entrepreneurship has been
emphasized, among others, by Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979). Several studies
point to robust evidence that risk tolerant people are more likely to become en-
trepreneurs; see, e.g., van Praag and Cramer (2001), Cramer et al. (2002), and Kan
and Tsai (2006).

The evidence discussed above leaves open the extent to which extent patience
and risk tolerance hinge on parental effort or on the influence of the environment,
as opposed to being genetically inherited. The long-standing debate among an-
thropologists and population geneticists on the role of nature versus nurture has
reached no clear conclusion.16 Both genes and culture appear to be important,
likely in a non-linear interactive fashion. The recent economic literature has
explored, in different contexts, both the evolutionary selection and the cultural
transmission mechanisms. For instance, recent studies focusing on economic de-
velopment from a very long-run perspective have emphasized the importance of
Darwinian evolution of preferences and of genetic diversity for the process of de-
velopment (see, e.g., Galor and Michalopoulos 2012 and Ashraf and Galor 2013).
We view the selection and investment in preference approaches to endogenous
preference formation as complementary, because they operate on different time
horizons.17
  15
      These results are consistent with other studies on developing countries.
  16
      See, e.g., Cavalli-Sforza and Feldman (1981), Bowles and Gintis (2002) and Richerson and
Boyd (2005).
   17
      Earlier articles emphasizing the evolutionary selection of preferences include Galor and
Moav (2002) and Clark and Hamilton (2006). A recent paper by Baudin (2010) incorporates the
interaction of evolutionary forces and cultural transmission in a Beckerian model of endogenous
fertility.



                                              40
There is direct evidence that non-cognitive skills are influenced by social factors
and family upbringing at a shorter time horizon. Heckman (2000) and Carneiro
and Heckman (2003) review the evidence from a large number of programs tar-
geting disadvantaged children. They show that most programs were successful
in permanently raising the treated children’s non-cognitive skills. These chil-
dren were more motivated to learn, less likely to engage in crime, and altogether
more future-oriented than children of non-treated families. Similar conclusions
are reached by studies in child development psychology such as Shonkoff and
Philips (2000) and Taylor, McGue, and Iacono (2000).

Some studies focus explicitly on preference parameters of economic models. For
example, Knowles and Postlewaite (2004) provide evidence of cultural trans-
mission of patience. Using the PSID, they find that parental savings behavior
is highly correlated with the education and savings choices of their children’s
households, after controlling for standard individual characteristics. Moreover,
the correlation is stronger between mothers and children than between fathers
and children. Since mothers tend to be more actively involved than fathers in
the child-rearing process, this observation suggests that there is cultural trans-
mission in patience and propensities to save. In the same vein, Dohmen et al.
(2012) document that trust and risk attitudes are strongly correlated between
parents and children in the German Socio-Economic Panel. Using the same data
set, Zumbuehl, Dohmen, and Pfann (2013) find that parents who invest more in
child-rearing efforts are more similar to their children in terms of attitudes to-
wards risk. All these studies concur on the importance of the transmission of
non-cognitive skills within families.



6.2 Investments in Patience and the Spirit of Capitalism

Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) is closely related to the model discussed in this chap-
ter. The authors propose a dynamic dynastic model rooted in the Beckerian tra-
dition where parents invest in their children’s patience and work ethic (modeled
as the inverse of the marginal utility of leisure).18 Preferences are treated as a
  18
       Doepke and Zilibotti (2005) develops a simplified model that focuses only on patience.


                                                 41
human-capital-like state variable: parents take their own preferences as given,
but can invest in those of their children. The focus of the theory is on the interac-
tion of this accumulation process with the choice of an occupation and savings.

The authors show that the endogenous accumulation of “patience capital” can
lead to the stratification of a society into social classes, characterized by differ-
ent preferences and occupational choices. This occurs even if all individuals ini-
tially are identical. In the presence of such endogenous differences in preferences,
episodes of technological change can trigger drastic changes in the income dis-
tribution, including the leapfrogging of a lower class over the existing elite. The
theory is applied to the changes in the distribution of income and wealth that
occurred during and after the Industrial Revolution in Britain. Before the onset
of industrialization, wealth and political power were associated with the pos-
session of land. Over the nineteenth century, a new class of entrepreneurs and
businessmen emerged as the economic elite, replacing the landed elite.

From a theoretical standpoint, the focal point of Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) is an
association between occupations and consumption profiles, similar to the model
presented in this chapter. In some professions, lifetime earnings are relatively
flat, while in others, in particular those requiring the acquisition of skills, high
returns are achieved only late in life. These differences affect the incentive of al-
truistic parents for investing in their children’s patience capital: the steeper the
consumption profile faced by their children, the stronger the incentive for par-
ents to teach them to be patient. The converse is also true: patient agents have a
higher propensity to choose professions entailing steep earnings and consump-
tion profiles.

In the historical application they consider, the pre-industrial middle class had
accumulated patience capital, and consequently was better prepared to exploit
the new economic opportunities than was the existing elite. The differences in
patience, in turn, had their roots in the nature of pre-industrial professions. For
centuries, artisans, craftsmen, and merchants were used to sacrificing consump-
tion and leisure in their youth to acquire skills. Consequently, middle-class par-
ents had the strongest incentive to instill into their children patience and work
ethic, that is, a “spirit of capitalism” in Weberian terms. In contrast, the landed

                                         42
elite had accumulated little patience, but a strong appreciation for leisure. The
preference profile of the elite arises because the traditional aristocratic sources of
income were mostly rents, which neither grew steeply over time, nor hinged on
labor effort.

Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) differs from the model presented in this chapter in-
sofar as it abstracts from innovation. In that model, cultural differences that were
formed in pre-industrial times explain why different classes responded differ-
ently to the new technological opportunities arising at the outset of the Industrial
Revolution. However, technology is exogenous, whereas in this chapter cultural
transmission is linked explicitly to a theory of endogenous technical change.19
The theory discussed in this chapter rationalizes why some individuals become
entrepreneurs and innovators, and how this affects the speed of technical change
and long-run growth.20

An implication shared by both Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) and the model pre-
sented in this chapter is that cultural transmission makes dynasties facing steeper
income profiles more patient. This prediction is consistent with the evidence
from a field experiment conducted on Danish households by Harrison, Lau, and
Williams (2002). Using monetary rewards, they show that highly educated adults
have time discount rates (which are inversely related to the discount factor) as
low as two-thirds of those of less educated agents. Since spending time on edu-
cation typically steepens people’s income profile, this finding is in line with the
prediction of the theory. A positive correlation between steep income profiles
and patience has also been documented at the macro level (see Carroll and Sum-
mers 1991 and Becker and Mulligan 1997). The former documents that in both
Japan and the United States consumption-age profiles are steeper when economic
growth is high. The latter paper shows that consumption grows faster for richer
families and adult consumption grows faster for children of the rich.
  19
      In addition, the model discussed here considers the cultural transmission of risk aversion as
well as the possibility of paternalism. Neither feature is covered in Doepke and Zilibotti (2008).
Conversely, in that paper we consider the interaction between patience and work ethic, a dimen-
sion from which we abstract here.
   20
      In this regard, our analysis is related to Klasing (2012). However, she uses a different growth
model (related to Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti 2006) and a different cultural transmission
mechanism (related to Bisin and Verdier 2001).


                                                 43
6.3 Religious Beliefs and Human Capital

Another set of papers studies culture as a system of beliefs affecting people’s
choices, and ultimately economic development. Significant attention has been
paid to religion. Barro and McCleary (2003) shows that economic growth is
higher in countries with a more widespread belief in hell and heaven. Guiso,
Sapienza, and Zingales (2003) comes to similar conclusions. Cavalcanti, Parente,
and Zhao (2007) develops a theoretical model with the possibility of beliefs in
rewards in afterlife. They argue that the model can quantitatively explain cross-
country differences in the takeoff from pre-industrial stagnation to growth.

Some influential recent studies point to a close connection between the transmis-
sion of religious beliefs and human capital investment. In particular, Botticini
and Eckstein (2005, 2006, and 2007) examine the cultural roots of the economic
success of the Jewish population through a theory of specialization in trade-
related activities. They conclude that the key factor was not the system of beliefs
of the Jewish religion per se. Rather, it is the extent to which religious beliefs
led to human capital accumulation. They document that a religious reform in-
troduced in the second century B.C. caused an increase in literacy rates among
Jewish farmers, which, in turn, led to increasing specialization into occupations
with a high return to literacy, such as artisanship, trade, and finance. High lit-
eracy also led to increased migration into towns, where occupations that reward
literacy are concentrated. In a similar vein, Becker and Woessmann (2009) docu-
ments that in nineteenth-century Prussia, Protestant counties were more prosper-
ous than Catholic ones, but the effect was entirely due to differences in literacy
and education. They conclude that the main channel of the effect of religion on
economic performance is human capital.21
  21
     The finding that the main channel through which Protestantism led to higher economic pros-
perity was higher literacy and human capital is interpreted by Becker and Woessmann (2009) as
evidence against Max Weber’s hypothesis that Protestant work ethic had a causal effect of eco-
nomic success. The distinction is, to some extent, semantic. Their findings are consistent with the
broader interpretation of Weber provided by Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) who abstract from reli-
gion, but argue that the cultural transmission of patience induces the middle class to undertake
human capital investments. In this perspective, one can interpret religious beliefs (e.g., Protes-
tantism) as a complementary driver of patience and work ethic. To the extent to which patience
is a constituent of the spirit of capitalism, the evidence of Becker and Woessmann (2009) would
be actually consistent with a broad interpretation of Max Weber’s theory.

                                                44
In the literature discussed so far, religious beliefs are exogenous. In contrast,
in Fernández-Villaverde, Greenwood, and Guner (2013) social norms and be-
liefs mediated by religious institutions are instead endogenous. They construct
a theory where altruistic parents socialize children about sex, instilling a stigma
against pre-marital sex in order to reduce the risk of out-of-wedlock births. Re-
ligious beliefs and institutions operate as enforcement mechanisms. Similar to
Doepke and Zilibotti (2008), cultural transmission responds to changes in the
underlying environment. In particular, when modern contraceptives reduce the
risk associated with pre-marital sex, they reduce the need for altruistic parents
and religious authorities to inculcate sexual mores. The equilibrium effect of
technology on culture yields the surprising implication that the number of out-
of-wedlock births initially grows significantly in response to new contraceptive
technology, due to the higher cultural tolerance for pre-marital sex.

While Doepke and Zilibotti (2008) and Fernández-Villaverde, Greenwood, and
Guner (2013) emphasize the process of cultural transmission, Fernández (2013)
and Fogli and Veldkamp (2011) describe culture as a process of Bayesian learn-
ing from public and private signals. Those papers explain the sharp increase in
female labor supply during the twentieth century.22 Doepke and Tertilt (2009)
focuses an an earlier period and provides a theory of the expansion of women’s
rights in the nineteenth century. The authors argue that rising demand for hu-
man capital changed cultural attitudes regarding the proper role of women in
society, and ultimately triggered political reform.23
   22
      The learning process can be related to the observation of different family models. Fernández,
Fogli, and Olivetti (2004) show that the increase in female labor force participation over time was
associated with a growing share of men who grew up in families where mothers worked. They
test their hypothesis using differences in mobilization rates of men across states during World
War II as a source of variation in female labor supply. They show that higher male mobilization
rates led to a higher fraction of women working not only for the generation directly affected by
the war, but also for the next generation.
   23
      Doepke, Tertilt, and Voena (2012) provides a more extensive discussion of the relationship
between cultural and economic explanations for the historical expansion of women’s rights.




                                                45
6.4 Beliefs and Social Norms

Many recent studies link culture and beliefs with the process of development
through the effects these have on institutions. For instance, Aghion et al. (2010)
and Aghion, Algan, and Cahuc (2011) argue that trust determines the demand
for regulation, especially in labor markets.24 Heterogenous beliefs about the ef-
fect of redistributive policies are the focus of Piketty (1995). A number of papers
also consider the feedback effect from institutions to culture. For instance, Has-
sler et al. (2005) argue that a generous unemployment benefits system induces
low geographic mobility of workers in response to labor market shocks. Low
mobility, in turn, increases over time the attachment of workers to their location
(modeled as a preference trait), sustaining a high demand of social insurance. A
similar argument is developed by Michau (2013), who incorporates his theory in
a model of cultural transmission. Lindbeck and Nyberg (2006) argue that public
transfers weaken parents’ incentives to instill a work ethic in their children. The
relationship between trust, efficiency and size of the welfare state is emphasized
by Algan, Cahuc, and Sangnier (2013).25

Culture, trust and beliefs have also been argued to have first-order effects on
institutional stability and on the ability of societies to foster economic coopera-
tion among its citizens. Rohner, Thoenig, and Zilibotti (2013) constructs a theory
where persistent civil conflicts are driven by the endogenous dynamics of inter-
ethnic trade and inter-ethnic beliefs about the nature and intentions of other eth-
nic groups. Inter-ethnic trade hinges on reciprocal trust. The theory predicts that
civil wars are persistent (as in Acemoglu, Ticchi, and Vindigni 2010), and that so-
cieties can plunge into a vicious cycle of recurrent conflicts, low trust, and scant
inter-ethnic trade (a “war trap”) even though there are no fundamental reasons
for the lack of cooperation. Long-run outcomes are path dependent: economies
with identical fundamentals may end up in either good or bad equilibria de-
  24
     For a recent survey of the relationship between trust and economic performance, see Algan
and Cahuc (2013).
  25
     A related argument is provided by the politico-economic theory of Song, Storesletten, and
Zilibotti (2012) arguing that in countries characterized by inefficient public provision voters are
more prone to support high public debt. Although debt crowds out future public expenditure,
this is a smaller concern to (young) voters in countries whose governments are inefficient.



                                                46
pending on the realization of stochastic shocks that cement or undermine cohe-
sion and inter-group cooperation.26 Rohner, Thoenig, and Zilibotti (2013) also
provides evidence that the onset and incidence of civil wars are affected signifi-
cantly by a lagged measure of trust from the World Values Survey. There is also
evidence of the opposite channel, i.e., exposure to civil conflict affecting prefer-
ences and trust. Using data from a field experiment in rural Burundi, Voors et al.
(2012) documents that exposure to violence encourages risk-taking but reduces
patience, hence depressing saving and investments. Rohner, Thoenig, and Zili-
botti (2012) documents survey evidence from the civil conflicts in Uganda that
war destroys trust, strengthens ethnic identity, and harms future growth in eth-
nically divided communities.

In the empirical literature beliefs and social norms are often difficult to disentan-
gle from the effects of the local economic and institutional environment. Study-
ing the behavior of immigrants and expatriates has proven useful to achieve iden-
tification. A noteworthy example is Giuliano (2007), which shows that second-
generation southern European male immigrants in the United States behave sim-
ilarly to their counterparts in their country of origin, and live with their parents
much longer than young Americans do. Similarly, Fernández and Fogli (2006,
2009) document that the country of origin explains fertility and work behavior of
second-generation American women. Fisman and Miguel (2007) finds that diplo-
mats from more corrupted countries tend to incur significantly more parking vi-
olations in the United States (diplomats are generally immune, so fines are not
enforced). Bruegger, Lalive, and Zweimueller (2009) compares unemployment
across Swiss communities with different languages (French versus German). The
language border separates cultural groups, but not labor markets or political
jurisdictions. They find that cultural differences (identified by language differ-
ences) can explain differences in unemployment duration of about 20 percent.

A number of papers have emphasized the persistence of cultural factors. Cul-
ture may respond to changes in the institutional environment, but cultural shifts
may take time. This is consistent with the view that adults’ preferences are by
and large fixed, as opposed to those of children, whose beliefs, non-cognitive
  26
    In a related paper, Acemoglu and Wolitzky (2012) proposes a theory where mistaken signals
can trigger belief-driven conflict between two groups.

                                             47
skills, and preferences can be shaped by cultural transmission and the surround-
ing environment. Even with these influences, cultural changes can take several
generations to reach a new steady state after institutions have changed. Alesina
and Fuchs-Schuendeln (2007) focuses on the fall of the Berlin Wall. After the end
of communism, East Germans became subject to the same institutions as West
Germans, but carried with them the cultural heritage of the communist experi-
ence. Their study documents that several years after unification, East Germans
(compared to West Germans) are more supportive of redistribution and believe
that social conditions are a more important determinant of individual success.
Voigtlaender and Voth (2012) goes much further and documents evidence that a
particular form of cultural trait, namely anti-Semitism in German local commu-
nities, has persisted for more than 600 years.27

Finally, exogenous sources of variation for culture can be found in historical data.
Using data for European regions, Tabellini (2010) finds evidence that culture has
a significant causal effect on economic development. The identification relies on
two historical variables, the literacy rate and past political institutions.



7 Outlook and Conclusions

Explaining the vast variation in rates of economic growth and living standards
around the world remains one of the main challenges in economics. Growth-
theoretic explanations for these observations have focused on variation in fac-
tor endowments, technology, or institutions as explanatory variables, while ab-
stracting from the potential role of differences in culture, values, and preferences.
In contrast, in this chapter we have developed a theory in which culture (mod-
eled as endogenous preferences) and economic growth are endogenous and af-
fect each other. Economic growth feeds back into the preference formation and
transmission process of families, and conversely the existing distribution of pref-
erences in the population determines the potential for economic growth. The the-
  27
    They document that cities where Jews were victims of medieval pogroms during the plague
era were also very likely to experience anti-Semitic violence in the twentieth century, before and
during the Nazi rule.


                                               48
ory predicts that countries can reach different balanced growth paths, in which
some countries grow fast and others more slowly. Fast-growing countries are the
ones with larger shares of the population exhibiting a “spirit of capitalism” (i.e.,
preferences conducive to innovative activities). Institutions, the development of
financial markets, and government policies affecting risk sharing all feed back
into preferences and culture, giving rise to long-term changes in economic devel-
opment that can long outlast the underlying institutions and policies.

In the past, economists generally have shied away from explaining economic
phenomena with variation in culture or preferences. A common concern is that
such explanations put little discipline on the data. However, this criticism does
not apply to explicit models of intergenerational preference transmission that
generate specific testable implications, which is the route that we have taken here.
In this sense, this chapter is in the spirit of Stigler and Becker (1977), which also
analyzes phenomena that at first sight suggest an important role for variation in
preferences (such as addiction, customs and tradition, and fashion and advertis-
ing).

Of course, for testable implications to be meaningful, researchers need data al-
lowing them to evaluate the restrictions imposed by the theory in practice. From
this perspective, an important change in recent years is the increased availabil-
ity of data sets that permit empirical analyses of the transmission of preference
traits from parents to children as well as the mutual interaction between cultural
preferences and the economic environment (we review a number of such studies
in Section 6 above). We expect that combining these new empirical insights with
theoretical analyses of the interaction of culture, entrepreneurship, and growth
of the kind developed in this chapter will, over time, greatly enhance our under-
standing of the development process.



A Proofs of Propositions and Lemmas

Proof of Proposition 1: Given equation (14), the zero growth (λ = 0) steady state



                                         49
exists if and only if:
                                                                            1−σ        
                                  1−σ
                                                                    α
                   χ 1 − (ψ)                ≥β        2 (1 − α) α   1−α   ξ             −1 .


Conversely, the balanced growth path features λ = 1 if and only if:
                                                                                       !1−σ      
                                                                           α
                         1−σ
                                                          (1 − α) α      1−α      ξψ
             χ 1 − (ψ)           ≤ β(1 + ξ)1−σ                        1                       − 1 .
                                                             1+α      1−α      ξ

An interior balanced growth path with positive fractions of workers and en-
trepreneurs exists if (14) is satisfied as an equality for some λ with 0 < λ < 1.
A steady state has to exist (either corner or interior) because (14) is continuous in
λ. The first inequality in Assumption 1 guarantees that the right-hand side of (14)
is positive for λ = 0. The second inequality guarantees that the right-hand side
of (14) reaches zero for a λ̃ with 0 < λ̃ < 1. This also implies that the right-hand
side of (14) is strictly decreasing in λ for λ ≤ λ̃ sufficiently close to λ̃. Let λ̂ denote
the lower bound of the monotonic region. The right-hand side of (14) is bounded
strictly away from zero for 0 ≤ λ ≤ λ̂. By choosing χ sufficiently small, we can
guarantee that (14) is not satisfied for a λ in this region. This implies that (14) is
satisfied for a λ that lies in this monotonic region, which then has to be unique,
resulting in a unique, interior balanced growth path.                           ✷

Proof of Proposition 2: The system of Bellman equations (16)–(18) defines a map-
ping T on the space of bounded continuous functions on the interval [0, βmax ],
endowed with the sup norm, where the mapping is given by:

                                                        
  T v(β) =      max           (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ
             I∈{0,1},0≤l≤1
                                                            
                             + I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v(β ′) , (34)

where the maximization is subject to

                                        β ′ = (1 − δ)β + f (l),

I is an indicator variable for the occupational choice, and βmax = f (1)/δ. Since

                                                      50
we imposed assumptions that guarantee 0 < z(1 + g)1−σ < 1, this mapping is
a contraction by Blackwell’s sufficient conditions, and it therefore has a unique
fixed point by the Contraction Mapping Theorem. This proves the first part of
the proposition.

The proof that the value function is increasing and convex is an application of
Corollary 1 to Theorem 3.2 in Stokey and Lucas (1989). Using this result, we can
establish the result by establishing that the operator T preserves these proper-
ties. To establish that the value function is increasing, let v be a non-decreasing
bounded continuous function. We need to show that T v is a strictly increasing
function. To do this, choose β > β . We now need to establish that T v(β) > T v(β).
Since the right-hand side of (34) is the maximization of a continuous function
over a compact set, the maximum is attained. Let l and {I be choices attaining
the maximum for B. We then have:

                                     
 T v(β) ≥ (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ
                                       
        + I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                                                       
                          > (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ
                                    
     + I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) = T v(β),

which is the desired result. Here the weak inequality follows because the choices
l, I may not be maximizing at β, and the strict inequality follows because v is
assumed to be increasing, and we have that β > β and η > 0.

To establish convexity of the value function, let v be a (weakly) convex bounded
continuous function. We need to establish that T v is also a convex function. To
show this, choose a number θ such that 0 < θ < 1, let β > β, and let β =
θβ + (1 − θ)β. We now need to show that θT v(β) + (1 − θ)T v(β) ≥ T v(β). Let l
and I be choices attaining the maximum for β. Since these are feasible, but not




                                        51
necessarily optimal choices at β and β, we have:
                                      
  T v(β) ≥ (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ
                                         
           +I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)),
                                      
  T v(β) ≥ (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ
                                         
           +I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z (1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)).

Working towards the desired condition, we therefore have:

   θT v(β) + (1 − θ)T v(β) ≥
                                                                       
             (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ + I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ
                                                                            
             +z (1 + g)1−σ θv((1 − δ)β + f (l)) + (1 − θ)v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                                                                       
           ≥ (1 − I) χ(l) + β (1 + g)1−σ + I χ(l)ψ 1−σ + β ((1 + g) η)1−σ
                +z (1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) = T v(β),

which is the required condition. Here, the last inequality follows from the as-
sumed convexity of v. The operator T therefore preserves convexity, and thus
the fixed point must also be convex. Notice that linearity is key to this result: the
discount factor enters utility linearly, and the parental discount factor has a linear
effect on the discount factor of the child.

Regarding the optimal occupational choice, the difference between the utility of
being a worker and an entrepreneur for given β and l is given by:
                                                           
                     χ(l) 1 − ψ 1−σ − β (1 + g)1−σ η 1−σ − 1 ,

where the first term is always positive, and the second term is negative as long
as η > 1. Given that the second term is weighted by β, it follows that being a
worker is always optimal for β sufficiently close to zero. Since the utility derived
from entrepreneurship relative to being a worker is strictly increasing in β, there
is either a cutoff β̄ such that entrepreneurship is chosen for β ≥ β̄, or being a
worker is always the preferred choice (when the required cutoff would be larger
than βmax ).


                                         52
As the last step, we would like to show that the optimal investment in patience
l = l (β) is non-decreasing in β. Fix two discount factors β < β. Let u1 = 1 if at β
the optimal choice is to be a worker, and u1 = ψ 1−σ otherwise. Similarly, for the
second period we define u2 = (1 + g)1−σ for workers and u2 = ((1 + g) η)1−σ for
entrepreneurs. u1 and u2 are defined in the same way. Now let l and l denote the
optimal investments in patience at β and β. The optimal choice of l the implies
the following inequalities:

           χ(l)u1 + βu2 + z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                         ≥ χ(l)u1 + βu2 + z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
           χ(l)u1 + βu2 + z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                         ≤ χ(l)u1 + βu2 + z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)).

Subtracting the two inequalities yields:

                                                                            
  χ(l) (u1 − u1 ) + z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) − v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                                                                                 
        ≥ χ(l) (u1 − u1 ) + z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) − v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) .

Now there are two possibilities. If the optimal occupational choices at β and β
are the same, we have u1 = u1 and the inequality reads:

  v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) − v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                                         ≥ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) − v((1 − δ)β + f (l)).

Since we have already shown that v is convex, this implies l ≥ l. The second
possibility is that at β it is optimal to be a worker, and at β it is optimal to be an
entrepreneur, so that we have u1 − u1 > 0. Rearranging the expression gives:

                                       
   χ(l) − χ(l) (u1 − u1 ) ≥ +z(1 + g)1−σ v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) − v((1 − δ)β + f (l))
                                                                               
                                   − v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) − v((1 − δ)β + f (l)) .

Due to the convexity of v, if we have l > l, the left-hand side would be negative
and the right-hand side positive; we therefore must have l ≤ l, which completes


                                           53
the proof.                                                                                        ✷
Proof of Proposition 3: In Proposition 2, we can subdivide the state space [0, βmax ]
into ( at most) two closed intervals (they are closed because of our continuity as-
sumptions), where each interval corresponds to the choice of a given occupation
(worker or entrepreneur). The agent is just indifferent between the occupations
at the boundary between the intervals, and strictly prefers a given occupation in
the interior of an interval. The intervals can be further subdivided according to
the occupational choice of the child. Since l(β) may not be single-valued, there
may be multiple optimal β ′ corresponding to a given β today. Nevertheless, since
the β ′ are strictly increasing in β (because of Proposition 3 and δ < 1) and given
that there are only two occupations, we can once again subdivide today’s state
space into at most two closed intervals, each one corresponding to a specific oc-
cupational choice of the child. Continuing this way, the state space [0, βmax ] can
be divided into a countable number of closed intervals (there are two possible
occupations in each of the countably many future generations), where each in-
terval corresponds to a specific occupational choice of each generation. Let [β, β]
be such an interval. We want to establish that the value function is linear over
this interval, and that the optimal choice of patience l(β) is single-valued and
constant over the interior of this interval.
It is useful to consider the sequential formulation of the decision problem. Taking
the present and future occupational choices as given and writing the resulting
first and second period utilities net of cost of investing in patience as u1,t and u2,t ,
we can substitute for βt and write the remaining decision problem over the lt on
the interval [β, β] as:

               (
  v(β) = max χ(l0 )u1,0 + βu2,0

                  ∞
                           "                               t
                                                                                   !         #)
                  X                                        X
              +          z t χ(lt )u1,t +   (1 − δ)t β +         (1 − δ)t−s−1 f (ls ) u2,t    . (35)
                   t=1                                     s=0


For given current and future occupations, (35) is strictly concave in lt for all t,
since χ is convex and f is strictly concave. Moreover, the discount factor β and all
expressions involving lt appear in separate terms in the sum. Therefore, it follows

                                                54
that, given the optimal income profiles, for all t the optimal lt is unique, and
independent of β. Since on the interior of [β, β], the current and future optimal
occupations are unique, the optimal policy correspondence l(β) is single-valued.
By construction of the intervals, at the boundary between the two intervals both
occupations are optimal choices for at least one generation, hence l(β) may take
on more than one optimal value, one corresponding to each optimal set of income
profiles.
The optimal value function v over the interval [β, β] is given by (35) with occupa-
tions and investment in patience lt fixed at their optimal (and constant) values.
(35) is linear in β; it therefore follows that the value function is piecewise linear,
with each kink corresponding to the boundary between two of the intervals.                  ✷
Proof of Proposition 4: Since f is an increasing function and we assume that
δ < 1, the law of motion is strictly increasing in β. Notice that l(β) may not be
                                                                                    ′
single-valued for all β. Strictly increasing here means that β < β implies β < β ′
                 ′
for all optimal β ∈ g(β) and β ′ ∈ g(β), even if g(β) or g(β) is a set. For a given β0 ,
the law of motion g defines (potentially multiple) optimal sequences of discount
factors {βt }∞t=0 . Any such sequence is a monotone sequence on the compact set
[0, βmax ], and must therefore converge. Notice, however, that since l(β) is not
single-valued everywhere, different steady states can be reached even from the
same initial β0 .                                                            ✷
Proof of Lemma 1: Assume that (23) holds with equality:

                                                                                        
  v E = χ(lEW )ψ 1−σ + β E ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lW ) + β EW (1 + g)1−σ
                                                            + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v W . (36)

Now replacing lEW and β EW on the right-hand side with lE and β E lowers util-
ity, because these are not the optimal choices given the chosen occupations. We
therefore have:

  χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β E ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v E
                                                                                   
      > χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β E ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lW ) + β E (1 + g)1−σ
                                                                + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v W ,

                                           55
where we also rewrote the left-hand side to explicitly show the first-generation
utility. Now subtracting the (identical) first-generation terms on both sides and
dividing by z(1 + g)1−σ we get:
                                               
                  v E > χ(lW ) + β E (1 + g)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v W ,

which is (22) as a strict inequality.

Moving on, replacing the β E of the initial generation on both sides of (36) with
β W leaves the equality intact, because the discount factor enters both sides in the
same way:

  χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β W ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v E
                                                                                    
    = χ(lEW )ψ 1−σ + β W ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lW ) + β EW (1 + g)1−σ
                                                           + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v W . (37)

Now switching the first-generation occupational choice from entrepreneurship
to work yields the following strict inequality:

                                                                               
  χ(lW E ) + β W (1 + g)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lE )ψ 1−σ + β W E ((1 + g) η)1−σ
                                                         + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v E < v W .

The strict inequality arises because lEW < lE , implying that the increase in the
first-period utility from being a worker is larger on the right-hand side. This
still applies after investment in patience is reoptimized (to lW E on the left-hand
side and lW on the right-hand side) due to the envelope theorem. The resulting
inequality is a strict version of (25).

Finally, again starting with (37), replacing the initial investment in patience with
lEW (and plugging in the corresponding discount factor in the next generation)




                                           56
lowers utility on the left-hand side, so that we have:

                                                                                     
  χ(lEW )ψ 1−σ + β W ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lE )ψ + β EW ((1 + g) η)1−σ
                                 + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v E
                                                                                     
    < χ(lEW )ψ 1−σ + β W ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ χ(lW ) + β EW (1 + g)1−σ
                                                                + z 2 (1 + g)2(1−σ) v W .

Subtracting the identical first-generation terms and dividing by z(1+g)1−σ yields:

  χ(lE )ψ + β EW ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v E
                                       < χ(lW ) + β EW (1 + g)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v W .

Now changing the initial discount factor from β EW to β W < β EW lowers the left-
hand side yet again more than the right-hand side (because η > 1), so that the
inequality stays intact:

                 χ(lE )ψ + β W ((1 + g) η)1−σ + z(1 + g)1−σ v E < v W ,

which is a strict version of (24).                                                          ✷

Proof of Proposition 5: The fraction of entrepreneurs λ in the balanced growth
path can be mapped into an entrepreneurial premium η and a growth rate g given
the analysis in Section 2.3 above. The entrepreneurial premium is continuous in
λ. Hence, if there exists a fraction of entrepreneurs λ that satisfies 0 < λ < 1 and
such that conditions (22)–(25) hold as strict inequalities, there has to be a range
of λ and associated η and g such that the conditions continue to hold. If at the
initial λ condition (23) holds with equality, then given Lemma 1 we know that
the remaining constraints hold as strict inequalities. Given continuity it is then
possible to raise η (by changing λ) within some range and have all conditions
hold as strict inequalities, implying that a continuum of balanced growth paths
exists. The same argument can be applied reversely to the point where (25) holds
as an equality. The highest entrepreneurial return that is consistent with balanced
growth is characterized by (25) holding as an equality.                           ✷



                                          57
Proof of Proposition 6: Since the financial market allows for an arbitrary alloca-
tion of consumption across the two periods, an occupation that is dominated in
terms of the present value of income is also dominated in terms of consumption,
and therefore is never chosen. Hence, the set of optimal occupations is indepen-
dent of patience β, because the present value of income in the two occupations
does not depend on β. When both occupations yield the same present value of
income, they also lead to the same consumption profile. The cost of investing
in patience depends only on first-period consumption, which therefore does not
depend on the chosen occupation. Likewise, the return to investing in patience is
independent of the occupation of the current generation. Investment in patience
therefore does not depend on which occupation is chosen.                        ✷



References
 Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2006. “Distance to
    Frontier, Selection and Economic Growth.” Journal of the European Economic
    Association 4 (1): 37–74.
 Acemoglu, Daron, Davide Ticchi, and Andrea Vindigni. 2010. “Persistence of
   Civil Wars.” Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (4): 664–76.
 Acemoglu, Daron, and Alexander Wolitzky. 2012. “Cycles of Distrust: An Eco-
    nomic Model.” NBER Working Paper 18257.
 Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Howitt. 1992. “A Model of Growth through Cre-
   ative Destruction.” Econometrica 60 (2): 323–51.
 Aghion, Phillipe, Yann Algan, and Pierre Cahuc. 2011. “Civil Society and the
   State: The Interplay Between Cooperation and Minimum Wage Regulation.”
    Journal of the European Economic Association 9 (1): 3–42.
 Aghion, Phillipe, Yann Algan, Pierre Cahuc, and Andrei Shleifer. 2010. “Regu-
   lation and Distrust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (3): 1015–49.
 Alesina, Alberto, and Nicola Fuchs-Schuendeln. 2007. “Good Bye Lenin (or
    Not?): The Effect of Communism on People’s Preferences.” American Eco-
    nomic Review 97 (4): 1507–28.

                                        58
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2009. “Preferences for Redistribution.”
   NBER Working Paper 14825.
Alesina, Alberto, and Edward Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and
   Europe. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc. 2013. “Trust and Growth.” Forthcoming, An-
   nual Review of Economics 5(1).
Algan, Yann, Pierre Cahuc, and Marc Sangnier. 2013. “Efficient and Inefficient
   Welfare States.” Unpublished Manuscript, Sciences Po, Paris.
Ashraf, Quamrul, and Oded Galor. 2013. “The ’Out of Africa’ Hypothesis, Hu-
  man Genetic Diversity, and Comparative Economic Development.” Ameri-
   can Economic Review 103 (1): 1–46.
Barro, Robert J., and Rachel M. McCleary. 2003. “Religion and Economic Growth
   across Countries.” Americal Sociological Review 68 (5): 760–81.
Baudin, Thomas. 2010. “A Role for Cultural Transmission in Fertility Transi-
   tions.” Macroeconomic Dynamics 14 (4): 454–81.
Beauchamp, Jonathan, David Cesarini, and Magnus Johannesson. 2011. “The
   Psychometric Properties of Measures of Economic Risk Preferences.” Un-
   published Manuscript, Harvard University.
Becker, Gary S., and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination
   of Time Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (3): 729–58.
Becker, Sascha, and Ludger Woessmann. 2009. “Was Weber Wrong? A Hu-
   man Capital Theory of Protestant Economic History.” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 124 (2): 531–96.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2001. “The Economics of Cultural Trans-
   mission and the Dynamics of Preferences.” Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2):
   298–319.
Botticini, Maristella, and Zvi Eckstein. 2005. “Jewish Occupational Selection:
   Education, Restrictions, or Minorities?” Journal of Economic History 65 (4):
   922–48.



                                        59
      . 2006. Path Dependence and Occupations. New Palgrave Dictionary of
   Economics, edited by Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence Blume.
      . 2007. “From Farmers to Merchants, Voluntary Conversions and Dias-
   pora: A Human Capital Interpretation of Jewish History.” Journal of the Eu-
   ropean Economic Association 5 (5): 885–26. Journal of the European Economic
   Association.
Bowles, Samuel, and Howard Gintis. 2002. “The Inheritence of Inequality.”
   Journal of Economic Perspectives 16 (3): 3–30.
Bruegger, Beatrice, Rafael Lalive, and Josef Zweimueller. 2009. “Does Culture
   Affect Unemployment? Evidence from the Roestigraben.” CESifo Working
   Paper Series No. 2714.
Carneiro, Pedro, and James J. Heckman. 2003. “Human Capital Policy.” In
   Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies, edited by James J.
   Heckman and Alan B. Krueger, 77–240. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Carroll, Christopher D., and Lawrence H. Summers. 1991. “Consumption
   Growth Parallels Income Growth: Some New Evidence.” In National Sav-
   ing and Economic Performance, edited by B. Douglas Bernheim and John B.
   Shaven, 305–43. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Cavalcanti, Tiago V., Stephen L. Parente, and Rui Zhao. 2007. “Religion in
  Macroeconomics: A Quantitative Analysis of Weber’s Thesis.” Economic The-
   ory 32 (1): 105–23.
Cavalli-Sforza, Luigi Luca, and Marcus W. Feldman. 1981. Cultural Transmission
  and Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton University Press.
Clark, Gregory, and Gillian Hamilton. 2006. “Survival of the Richest: The
   Malthusian Mechanism in Pre-Industrial England.” Journal of Economic His-
   tory 66 (3): 707–36.
Coen-Pirani, Daniele. 2004. “Effects of Differences in Risk Aversion on the
  Distribution of Wealth .” Macroeconomic Dynamics 8 (5): 617–32.
Cozzi, Marco. 2011. “Risk Aversion Heterogeneity, Risky Jobs and Wealth In-
  equality.” Unpublished Manuscript, Queen’s University.


                                        60
Cramer, J. S., Joop Hartog, Nicole Jonker, and C.M. van Praag. 2002. “Low Risk
   Aversion Encourages the Choice for Entrepreneurship: An Empirical Test of
   a Truism.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 48 (1): 29–36.
De Nardi, Mariacristina. 2004. “Wealth Inequality and Intergenerational Links.”
   Review of Economic Studies 71 (3): 743–68.
Doepke, Matthias, and Michèle Tertilt. 2009. “Women’s Liberation: What’s in It
  for Men?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1541–91.
Doepke, Matthias, Michèle Tertilt, and Alessandra Voena. 2012. “The Economics
   and Politics of Women’s Rights.” Annual Review of Economics 4:339–72.
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2005. “Social Class and the Spirit of
   Capitalism.” Journal of the European Economic Association 3 (2-3): 516–24.
       . 2008. “Occupational Choice and the Spirit of Capitalism.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 123 (2): 747–93.
       . 2012. “Parenting with Style: Altruism and Paternalism in Intergenera-
   tional Preference Transmission.” IZA Discussion Paper 7108.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, and Uwe Sunde. 2012. “The
   Intergenerational Transmission of Risk and Trust Attitudes.” Review of Eco-
   nomic Studies 79 (2): 645–77.
Fehr, Ernst, and Karla Hoff. 2011. “Introduction: Tastes, Castes and Culture:
   the Influence of Society on Preferences.” The Economic Journal 121 (556):
   F396F412.
Fernández, Raquel. 2013. “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of
   Female Labor Force Participation over a Century.” American Economic Review
   103 (1): 472–500.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2006. “Fertility: The Role of Culture
   and Family Experience.” Journal of the European Economic Association 4 (2-3):
   552–61.
      . 2009. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertil-
   ity.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1): 147–77.



                                      61
Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and
   Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1249–99.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Jeremy Greenwood, and Nezih Guner. 2013.
   “From Shame to Game in One Hundred Years: An Economic Model of the
   Rise in Premarital Sex and its De-Stigmatization.” Journal of the European
   Economic Association, vol. 11 (Forthcoming).
Fisman, Raymond, and Edward Miguel. 2007. “Corruption, Norms and Legal
   Enforcement: Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets.” Journal of Political
   Economy 115 (6): 1020–48.
Fogli, Alessandra, and Laura Veldkamp. 2011. “Nature or Nurture? Learning
   and the Geography of Female Labor Force Participation.” Econometrica 79
   (4): 1103–38.
Galor, Oded, and Stelios Michalopoulos. 2012. “Evolution and the Growth
   Process: Natural Selection of Entrepreneurial Traits.” Journal of Economic
   Theory 147 (2): 759–80.
Galor, Oded, and Omer Moav. 2002. “Natural Selection and the Origin of Eco-
   nomic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1133–91.
Giuliano, Paola. 2007. “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural
   Origin Matter?” Journal of the European Economic Association 5 (5): 927–52.
Gradstein, Mark. 2007. “Endogenous Reversals of Fortune.” Unpublished
   Manuscript, Ben Gurion University.
Greif, Avner. 1994. “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Histor-
   ical and Theoretical Reflection on Collectivist and Individualist Societies.”
   Journal of Political Economy 102 (5): 912–50.
Guiso, Luigi, and Monica Paiella. 2008. “Risk Aversion, Wealth, and Back-
  ground Risk.” Journal of the European Economic Association 6 (6): 1109–50.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2003. “People’s Opium? Reli-
   gion and Economic Attitudes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50 (1): 225–82.
      . 2006. “Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes?” Journal of Economic
   Perspectives 20 (2): 23–49.

                                       62
Guvenen, Fatih. 2006. “Reconciling Conflicting Evidence on the Elasticity of
  Intertemporal Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective .” Journal of Mon-
   etary Economics 53 (7): 1451–72.
Haaparanta, Pertti, and Mikko Puhakka. 2004. “Endogenous Time Preference,
  Investment and Development Traps.” BOFIT Discussion Paper No. 4/2004,
  Bank of Finland.
Harbaugh, William T., Kate Krause, and Lise Vesterlund. 2002. “Risk Attitudes
   of Children and Adults: Choices Over Small and Large Probability Gains
   and Losses.” Experimental Economics 5 (1): 53–84.
Harrison, Glenn W., Morten I. Lau, and Melonie B. Williams. 2002. “Estimat-
  ing Individual Discount Rates in Denmark: A Field Experiment.” American
   Economic Review 92 (5): 1606–17.
Hassler, John, Jose V. Rodriguez Mora, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti.
  2005. “A Positive Theory of Geographic Mobility and Social Insurance.”
  International Economic Review 46 (1): 263–303.
Hauk, Esther, and Maria Saez-Marti. 2002. “On the Cultural Transmission of
   Corruption.” Journal of Economic Theory 107 (2): 311–35.
Heckman, James J. 2000. “Policies to Foster Human Capital.” Research in Eco-
  nomics 54 (1): 3–56.
Heckman, James J., Jora Stixrud, and Sergio Urzua. 2006. “The Effects of Cog-
  nitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Be-
   havior.” Journal of Labor Economics 24 (3): 411–82.
Hendricks, Lutz. 2007. “How Important Is Discount Rate Heterogeneity for
  Wealth Inequality?” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 31 (9): 3042–68.
Inglehart, Ronals, Elena Bashkirova, Miguel Basanez, Hei-yuan Chiu, Juan
   Diez-Nicolas, Yilmaz Esmer, Loek Halman, Hans-Dieter Klingemann, Elone
   Nwabuzor, Thorleif Petterson, Renata Siemienska, and Seiko Yamazaki.
   2000. “World Values Surveys and European Values Surveys, 1981-1984, 1990-
   1993 and 1995-1997.” Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social
   Research ICPSR 2790.



                                       63
Kan, Kamhon, and Wei-Der Tsai. 2006. “Entrepreneurship and Risk Aversion.”
  Small Business Economics 26:465–74.
Kihlstrom, Richard E., and Jean-Jacques Laffont. 1979. “A General Equilibrium
   Entrepreneurial Theory of Firm Formation Based on Risk Aversion.” Journal
   of Political Economy 87 (4): 719–48.
Klasing, Mariko J. 2012. “Cultural Change, Risk-Taking Behavior, and the
   Course of Economic Development.” Unpublished Manuscript, Carleton Uni-
   versity.
Knight, Frank H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston and New York:
   Houghton Mifflin.
Knowles, John A., and Andrew Postlewaite. 2004. “Do Children Learn to Save
  from Their Parents?” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.
Krusell, Per, and Anthony A. Smith, Jr. 1998. “Income and Wealth Heterogeneity
   in the Macroeconomy.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (5): 867–96.
Lindbeck, Assar, and Sten Nyberg. 2006. “Raising Children to Work Hard:
   Altruism, Work Norms, and Social Insurance.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   121 (4): 1473–503.
Matsuyama, Kiminori. 1999. “Growing Through Cycles.” Econometrica 67 (2):
   335–47.
Michau, Jean-Baptiste. 2013. “Unemployment Insurance and Cultural Trans-
   mission: Theory and Application to European Unemployment.” Journal of
   the European Economic Association 11, no. 5.
Mischel, Walter, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica L. Rodriguez. 1992. “Delay of
   Gratification in Children.” Chapter 6 of Choice Over Time, edited by George
   Loewenstein and Jon Elster. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Mokyr, Joel. 2011. “Cultural Entrepreneurs and Economic Development.” Un-
  published Manuscript, Ben-Gurion University.
Mulligan, Casey B. 1997. Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. University
   of Chicago Press.



                                      64
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 110:551–84.
Reyes-Garcia, Victoria, Ricardo Godoy, Tomas Huanca, William R. Leonard,
   Thomas McDade, Susan Tanner, and Vencent Vadez. 2007. “The Origin of
   Monetary Income Inequality: Patience, Human Capital, and the Division of
   Labor.” Evolution and Human Behavior 28:37–47.
Richerson, Peter J., and Robert Boyd. 2005. Not by Genes Alone. The University
   of Chicago Press.
Rohner, Dominic, Mathias Thoenig, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2012. “Seeds of Dis-
  trust: Conflict in Uganda.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 8741.
      . 2013. “War Signals: A Theory of Trade, Trust and Conflict.” Review of
   Economic Studies, vol. 80 (Forthcoming).
Roland, Gerard, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2010. “Culture, institutions and the
   wealth of nations.” NBER Working Paper 16368.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political
   Economy 98 (5, Part 2): S71–S102.
Saez-Marti, Maria, and Anna Sjoegren. 2008. “Peers and Culture.” Scandinavian
   Journal of Economics 110:73–92.
Saez-Marti, Maria, and Yves Zenou. 2011. “Cultural Transmission and Discrim-
   ination.” Journal of Urban Economics 72 (2–3): 137–46.
Saez-Marti, Maria, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2008. “Preferences as Human Capi-
   tal: Rational Choice Theories of Endogenous Preferences and Socioeconomic
   Changes.” Finnish Economic Papers 21 (2): 81–94.
Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1942. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy. New York:
   Harper.
Segal, Carmit. 2013. “Misbehavior, Education, and Labor Market Outcomes.”
   Journal of the European Economic Association, vol. 11 (Forthcoming).
Shonkoff, Jack, and Deborah Philips, eds. 2000. From Neurons to Neighbor-
   hoods: The Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington, D.C.: National
   Academy Press.

                                       65
Smith, Adam. 1776. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
  Edited by Edwin Cannan. The University of Chicago Press, 1976.
Song, Zheng, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2012. “Rotten Parents
   and Disciplined Children: A Politico-Economic Theory of Public Expendi-
   ture and Debt.” Econometrica 80 (6): 2785–803.
Stigler, George J., and Gary S. Becker. 1977. “De Gustibus Non Est Disputan-
    dum.” American Economic Review 67 (2): 76–90.
Stokey, Nancy L., and Robert E. Lucas, Jr. 1989. Recursive Methods in Economic
   Dynamics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Sutter, Matthias, Martin G. Kocher, Daniela Glaetze-Ruetzler, and Stefan T.
   Trautmann. 2013. “Impatience and Uncertainty: Experimental Decisions
   Predict Adolescents’ Field Behavior.” American Economic Review 103 (1): 510–
   31.
Tabellini, Guido. 2008. “The Scope of Cooperation: Norms and Incentives.” The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3): 905–50.
       . 2010. “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions
   of Europe.” Journal of the European Economic Association 8 (4): 677–716.
Taylor, J., M. McGue, and W. G. Iacono. 2000. “Sex Differences, Assortative
   Mating, and Cultural Transmission Effects on Adolescent Delinquency: A
   Twin Family Study.” Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 41 (4): 433–40.
van Praag, C. M., and J. S. Cramer. 2001. “The Roots of Entrepreneurship and
   Labour Demand: Individual Ability and Low Risk Aversion.” Economica 68
   (269): 45–62.
Vereshchagina, Galina, and Hugo A. Hopenhayn. 2009. “Risk Taking by En-
   trepreneurs.” American Economic Review 99 (5): 1808–30.
Voigtlaender, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2012. “Persecution Perpetuated:
   The Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 127 (2): 1339–92.
Voors, Maarten J., Eleonora E. M. Nillesen, Philip Verwimp, Erwin H. Bulte,
   Robert Lensink, and Daan P. Van Soest. 2012. “Violent Conflict and Behavior:
   A Field Experiment in Burundi.” American Economic Review 102 (2): 941–64.

                                       66
Weber, Max. 1905. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Translated
  by Talcott Parsons; with a foreword by R. H. Tawney. New York: Charles
   Scribner’s Sons, 1958. Republished by Dover, New York, 2003.
Zumbuehl, Maria, Thomas Dohmen, and Gerard Pfann. 2013. “Parental Invest-
  ment and the Intergenerational Transmission of Economic Preferences and
  Attitudes.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Bonn.




                                     67
