                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




ELICITING MATERNAL EXPECTATIONS ABOUT THE TECHNOLOGY OF COGNITIVE
                         SKILL FORMATION

                                             Flávio Cunha
                                               Irma Elo
                                           Jennifer Culhane

                                         Working Paper 19144
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w19144


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013

We thank Dalton Banks, Michelle Gifford, Debbie Jaffe, Snejana Nihtianova, Ben Sapp, and Cheryl
Tocci for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Jere Behrman, Pietro
Biroli, Hanming Fang, Limor Golan, Katja Kaufmann, James Heckman, Pedro Mira, Krishna Pendakur,
Matt Wiswall, and Ken Wolpin for their comments in different stages of this research. We also thank
participants at the Early Childhood Development and Human Capital Accumulation conference at
University College London, the Institute for Research on Poverty's Summer Workshop at the University
of Wisconsin Madison, the Children’s Human Capital Development workshop at Aarhus University
in Denmark, the CESifo conference on the Economics of Education, the Conference on the Economics
of the Family at the University of Chicago and seminar participants at Columbia University, the University
of Pennsylvania, UCLA, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, Insper São Paulo, CHPPP at the Harris
School, the International Food and Policy Research Institute, Duke University, the EPGE/FGV Rio
de Janeiro, the Pontifical Catholic University in Rio de Janeiro, UCI, and the Federal Reserve Bank
in New York. This research was supported by grant INO1200013 from the Institute for New Economic
Thinking. All remaining errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Flávio Cunha, Irma Elo, and Jennifer Culhane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Eliciting Maternal Expectations about the Technology of Cognitive Skill Formation
Flávio Cunha, Irma Elo, and Jennifer Culhane
NBER Working Paper No. 19144
June 2013
JEL No. I10,I20,J24

                                                ABSTRACT

In this paper, we formulate a model of early childhood development in which mothers have subjective
expectations about the technology of skill formation. The model is useful for understanding how maternal
knowledge about child development affects the maternal choices of investments in the human capital
of children. Unfortunately, the model is not identified from data that are usually available to econometricians.
To solve this problem, we conduct a study where mothers were interviewed to elicit maternal expectations
about the technology of skill formation. We interviewed a sample of socioeconomically disadvantaged
AfricanAmerican women. We find that the median subjective expectation about the elasticity of child
development with respect to investments is between 4% and 19%. In comparison, when we estimate
the technology of skill formation from the CNLSY/79 data, we find that the elasticity is between 18%
and 26%. We use the model and our unique data to answer a simple but important question: What
would happen to investments and child development if we implemented a policy that moved expectations
from the median to the objective estimates that we obtain from the CNLSY/79 data? According to
our estimates, maternal investments would go up by between 4% and 24% and the stocks of cognitive
skills at age 24 months would subsequently increase between 1% and 5%. Needless to say, the impacts
of such a policy would be even higher for mothers whose expectations were below the median.


Flávio Cunha                                           Jennifer Culhane
Department of Economics                                Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
University of Pennsylvania                             34th Street and Civic Center Boulevard
160 McNeil Building                                    Philadelphia, PA. 19104-4399
3718 Locust Walk                                       culhanej@email.chop.edu
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
fcunha@sas.upenn.edu

Irma Elo
University of Pennsylvania
Population Studies Center
Department of Sociology
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
popelo@pop.upenn.edu
1. Introduction

Research shows that the early environment that children face has long‐term
consequences for their human capital development (e.g., Karoly et al, 2005; Cunha and
Heckman, 2007; Campbell et al, 2008; Hoddinott et al, 2008; Heckman et al, 2010;
Almond and Currie, 2010). A central question of interest for public policy is whether early
investments depend on the parental expectations about the importance of the
environment for their children’s development. If so, it is conceivable that policymakers
can improve the outcomes of children through informational interventions that affect
parental expectations.

The issue that low subjective expectations about returns may affect investments has been
recognized in developmental psychology for over 50 years (Hunt, 1961; Vygostky, 1978).
Our research is related to, but different from, that field’s large body of literature that
focuses on measuring maternal and paternal knowledge about child development. These
studies show that the lower the parents’ socio‐economic status (SES), the lower their
expectations about cognitive development (e.g., Epstein, 1979; Hess et al., 1980; Ninio,
1988; Mansbach and Greenbaum, 1999).

The gaps in beliefs about when children will master certain skills may arise for different
reasons. First, the gaps may be a product of the differences in investments that arise even
when parents have the same beliefs about the technology of skill formation. These
differences in investments could be associated with differences in preferences, resources,
or parental/offspring characteristics (e.g.,Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman, 1982; Becker
and Tomes, 1986). Second, the gaps may be a product of the differences in beliefs holding
investments fixed. Obviously, it is also possible that some of the differences in
investments arise because of differences in beliefs as well as differences in preferences,
resources, and parental/offspring characteristics. Unfortunately, the data collected so far
in the different fields of the social sciences do not allow us to isolate the importance of
these different factors.

Even though no studies quantify maternal beliefs about the technology of skill formation,
a few studies do suggest that maternal beliefs play a significant role in the determination
of investments. In a pioneering study, Hart and Risley (1995) documented the differences
in how much parents of different SES talked to their babies. Children whose families were
on welfare heard about 600 words per hour. In contrast, children from professional
families heard over 2,000 words per hour. Hart and Risley (1995) also showed that the
better the early language environment at home (as measured by the number of words or
conversational turns) the better the language development of children, the higher their
IQ, and the better they did in school.

A natural question that arises is: Why do high SES parents talk more to their children than
low SES ones? The research by Rowe (2008) argues that the gaps in the early home
language environment exist because poor, uneducated mothers do not know about the
role it plays in determining the language and cognitive development of their children.
Indeed, Suskind et al (2013) show that it is possible to improve the home language
environment through an informational intervention with low SES mothers. The
experimental intervention, known as the Thirty Million Word Project, had sizable impacts
in the early home language environment as measured by conversational turns (about 30
per hour in the control group versus 45 in the treatment group). It also had a large impact
on child language development as measured by the number of child vocalizations (about
120 per hour in the control group versus 180 per hour in the treatment group).

Attanasio and Kauffman (2009) show that the higher the subjective expectations of the
returns to schooling, the more likely the decision to invest in education. In his study in the
Dominican Republic, Jensen (2010) finds that students hold subjective expectations of
returns to schooling that imply extreme underestimation of the objective returns to
schooling. More important for the purposes of the current paper, Jensen shows that
individuals react to new information: Students in randomly selected schools who were
given information about the higher measured returns completed on average 0.20–0.35
more years of school over the next four years than those who were not.

Recent literature provides evidence that expectations about the technology of skill
formation can be changed by public information campaigns, but it is important to keep in
mind that the effectiveness of the campaigns may differ across SES groups. Aizer and
Stroud (2010), for example, track the smoking habits of educated and uneducated
pregnant women before and after the release of the 1964 Surgeon General’s Report on
Smoking and Health. Before the release of the report, educated and uneducated pregnant
women smoked at roughly the same rates. After the report, the smoking habits of
educated women decreased immediately, creating a ten‐percentage‐point gap in
pregnancy smoking rates between educated and uneducated women.

Further evidence that public policy can alter expectations comes from developing
countries. Field et al (2009) show that iodine deficiency is causally linked to deficits in
cognitive development. In related research, Roy (2009) investigates how maternal
investments are affected by maternal knowledge that iodized salt prevents early onset
brain damage. Her research documents that mothers often elect not to use iodized salt,
despite its being inexpensive, because they are simply unaware of its positive impact on
child development. Roy also found that uptake of iodized salt increased after parents
became aware of its benefit. As expected from Field et al’s (2009) results, Roy also finds
sizable improvements in children’s cognitive development.

In this paper, we formulate a model of early childhood development in which mothers
have subjective expectations about the technology of skill formation. The model is useful
for understanding how maternal knowledge about child development affects maternal
choices about investment in the human capital of children. Unfortunately, the model is
not identified from data that are usually available to econometricians. If we only observe
investments and measures of human capital, it is impossible to decompose heterogeneity
in expectations from heterogeneity in preferences (Manski, 2004).

To solve this identification problem, we created a survey instrument to elicit maternal
expectations about the technology of skill formation. In summary, in this survey we
create scenarios of “high” and “low” levels of investments. For each investment scenario,
we ask the respondents to provide the youngest and oldest age at which they believe a
baby will learn how to do a set of tasks. The tasks are taken from the Motor‐Social
Development (MSD) Scale used in the Children of the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth/1979 (CNLSY/79) and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES). By comparing the answers to the questions about the “high” investment
scenarios with those of the “low” investment scenarios, we are able to estimate maternal
subjective expectations about the technology of skill formation.

We interview a sample of socioeconomically disadvantaged, pregnant African‐American
women. We find that the median subjective expectation about the elasticity of child
development with respect to investments is between 4% and 19% and our preferred set
of estimates is clustered around the high values in this interval. In comparison, when we
estimate the technology of skill formation from the CNLSY/79 data, also using the MSD
scale, we find that the elasticity is between 21% and 36%.

We find that the subjective expectations are positively correlated with the child’s health
at birth, as proxied by variables such as birth weight, birth length, and gestational age.
More important, we also document large heterogeneity in subjective expectations even
after accounting for measurement error in a systematic fashion. In our preferred set of
estimates, the 25th percentile is between 2% and 5% and the 75th percentile is between
24% and 40%. The distribution of beliefs is positively skewed, so even in this very
disadvantaged sample, some mothers have very high expectations about the elasticity of
child development with respect to investments.

We use the model and our unique data to answer the following question: Consider the
median mother in our survey. What would happen to investments and child development
if we implemented a policy that moved her subjective expectation to the objective
estimates that we obtain from the CNLSY/79 data? According to our estimates,
investments would go up by between 4% and 24% and the stocks of cognitive skills at age
24 months would increase between 1% and 5%. The impacts of such a policy would be
even higher for mothers whose expectations were below the median.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present a simple model of maternal
subjective expectations about the technology of skill formation, and we illustrate the
identification problems that arise from using this simple model. In Section 3, we introduce
our methodology for estimating maternal subjective expectations about the technology
of skill formation. We present the results from our survey in Section 4. In Section 5, we
estimate the remaining components of the model presented in Section 2. This is done so
that we can evaluate the economic importance of introducing a policy that moves
maternal expectations.

2. Model

Consider a mother who has just given birth to a child whose health is , . To make the
setting as simple as possible, consider a static problem in which the mother’s preferences
depend on household consumption, , and the child’s cognitive development at the end
of the period, , .1 Suppose that maternal preferences are represented by the following
Cobb‐Douglas function:

         ,   ,        ln            ln   ,                                                        (1)

where      captures how much mother values the child’s cognitive development. The
child’s cognitive development at the end of the period is determined by the following
technology of skill formation:

ln   ,           ln        ln   ,            ln                                                   (2)



1
 In the empirical application below, we measure   1,
                                                       by developmental tests around the time the child is 24
months old.
where is an intercept, is the maternal investment in the child’s cognitive skills, is
the maternal efficiency in producing skills, and are shocks. The parameter captures
the elasticity of child development with respect to investments. Given preferences, the
higher the value of , the higher the maternal investments in the cognitive skills of the
child.2

Let    and      denote, respectively, the mother’s income and the relative price of
investment. In our simple set‐up, the mother faces the following budget constraint:

                                                                                             (3)

Finally, let denote the mother’s information set. The mother’s problem is to choose
consumption and investment that maximize:

         ,   ,                                                                               (4)

subject to (1), (2), and (3). It is common to explicitly assume that the mother’s
information set contains the state variables that influence the choice of investment and
consumption. For example, if we assume that at the time investment decisions are made
the variable     is known by the mother, but            is not, then the state vector is
    , , , ,   ⊂ . Typically, it is implicitly assumed that the parameter vector is
    , , ,   ⊂ . As a result, the expectation in (4) is with respect to the shock , which
is not observed by the mother at the time of the investment choice. In particular, note
that      |        . As a result, the optimal investment is given by:
    ∗
                                                                                             (5)

Given data in which the vector              , , , , , ,      is observed, it is possible to
identify the distribution of   directly from the estimation of the technology of skill
formation (2) (e.g., Heckman and Vytlacil, 1998). If we estimate (5), we clearly identify the
share              . We can then recover the utility parameter          :

                                                                                             (6)

The assumption that ∈     guarantees that the parameters and can be identified
given data . We can use the estimated parameters to answer questions such as what

2
 Cunha and Heckman (2007) work with a CES technology of skill formation. The simpler specification we
adopt in this paper is motivated by the fact that Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) do not reject the
Cobb‐Douglas production function for cognitive skills at early stages of the lifecycle.
would happen to child development and investments if we had a program that increased
maternal income or if we implemented a policy that subsidized the price of investments.

The model, however, cannot be used to understand informational issues about the
technology of skill formation precisely because, by assumption, ∈ . In principle, one
could assume that ∉         and      |         , . However, one cannot separately identify
the maternal expectation about the elasticity of cognitive development with respect to
investment, , , from maternal valuation of the child’s cognitive development, . The
identification problem arises because investment choices depend not on , but on the
maternal expectation of , which is , :

 ∗        ,
                                                                                  (7)
              ,


Although we can still use the model to estimate the impact of a policy that increased
income or subsidized investments – simply because we do not need to separately identify
   from , to answer this question – we cannot test the assumption that ∈ . What
we cannot do is to say by how much investments would change if we implemented a
policy that moved , closer to .

In the context of this model, the main contribution of our research is to develop and
implement a methodology to elicit , . Clearly, to the extent that investments are partly
determined beliefs , , these variables are interesting by themselves. More important, if
we add , to the data , we would be able to separately identify heterogeneity in
preferences from heterogeneity in beliefs.

3. Eliciting Expectations about the technology of skill formation

As we show in the model described in Section 2, a mother's decisions regarding how
much to invest in her child depend partly on the subjective expectations that she holds
about the technology of skill formation, in particular, her subjective expectations about
the parameter . In order to quantify this relationship, it is obviously necessary to collect
data on these expectations. Since at least the 1940s, economists and other social
scientists have studied the usefulness of expectations (or “anticipation”) data for
understanding and forecasting firm investments, individual consumption of durable
goods, individual choices about total fertility, and age of retirement (e.g., Hart, 1940;
Ryder and Westoff, 1971; Rippe and Wilkinson, 1974; De Menil and Bhalla, 1975;
Griliches, 1980; Jacobs and Jones, 1980; Koenig, Nerlov, and Oudiz, 1981; Wolpin and
Gonul, 1985).
More recently, data on expectations have been collected to test or relax the assumption
that individuals have rational expectations. In a series of papers, Dominitz and Manski
(1996, 1997a,b) developed a useful framework for the measurement of subjective
distributions and very successfully used it to measure subjective expectations about the
returns to schooling, perception of job insecurity, and future income.3 Kauffman and
Pistaferri (2009) showed how data on subjective expectations on future earnings could be
useful to separately identify the roles of information and insurance in models that try to
quantify households’ ability to smooth consumption across time and states of nature.

There is also a large literature on subjective expectations and their role in human capital
investment decisions made by individuals. Stinebrickner and Stinebrickner (2007) collect
longitudinal data on expectations and college performance and show that the decision to
drop out of college is primarily driven by the student learning about his or her own
academic ability. Zafar (2008) also constructs panel data on college students and
establishes that the gap across genders in the choice of a college major is not explained
by differences in expectations about academic ability but rather by differences in
preferences.

Standard economic theory suggests that educational choices are partially determined by
expectations about future earnings (e.g., Attanasio and Kauffman, 2009). As discussed
above, Jensen (2010) shows that experimental information about returns to schooling
affects schooling decisions made by individuals. Wiswall and Zafar (2012) build on this
literature by showing evidence that subjective expectations react to new information.
When combined, these findings suggest that human capital investment choices are
partially determined by subjective beliefs about returns that can be affected by
information that is made available to the decision maker. Interestingly, there is evidence
that expectations and resources interact: Kauffman (2012) explores the heterogeneity in
returns between individuals from poor and rich backgrounds in Mexico, and she finds that
the former require higher expected returns than the latter in order to be induced to
attend college. Interestingly, poor individuals with high expected returns are particularly
responsive to changes in direct costs, which is consistent with their being credit
constrained.

Finally, the literature in economics has used expectations data to understand decisions to
participate in a crime, contraceptive choices, and retirement behavior. For example,
3
  Dominitz, Manski, and Heinz (2003) investigate expectations about future benefits from Social Security
and Bruine de Bruin et al. (2011) build on the framework to measure consumer uncertainty about future
inflation.
Lochner (2007) shows that individual heterogeneity in beliefs about the criminal justice
system leads to differences in criminal participation. Delavande (2008) studies how
beliefs about contraception methods help explain choices made by sexually active
women. She finds that the contraceptive method chosen by a woman depends partially
on her perception about that method’s effectiveness. Van der Klaauw and Wolpin (2008)
use the HRS data on survival expectations and retirement expectations to help estimate a
dynamic stochastic model of retirement behavior under the assumption of rational
expectations.

A remarkable feature of the data collected in these studies is the fact that there is a tight
connection between information about expectations that is elicited and the economic
model that is formulated to study the topic of interest. In this study, we would have liked
to collect data on beliefs about directly, but this is impossible because mothers do not
think about child development in the abstract framework presented in Section 2. As a
proxy, we argue, however, that women do have implicit knowledge about the impacts of
their actions, and the research design we describe below allows the analyst to translate
this implicit knowledge into beliefs regarding the parameter .

3.1. Survey instrument

In order to elicit maternal subjective expectations of child development, we adapt the
MSD instrument used in the CNLSY/79. In the MSD instrument, mothers answer 15 out of
48 items regarding motor, language, and numeracy development. These items are divided
into eight components (parts A through H) that a mother completes contingent on the
child's age. Part A is appropriate for infants during the first four months of life (i.e., zero
through three months) and the most advanced section, Part H, is addressed to children
between the ages of 22 and 47 months. All items are dichotomous (scored “no” is equal
to zero and “yes” is equal to one) and the total raw score for children of a particular age is
obtained by a simple summation (with a range 0 to 15) of the affirmative responses in the
age‐appropriate section.

One major advantage of using the same items is that comparability is maintained: the set
of items used to elicit maternal subjective expectations about child development is the
same one used to measure actual child development in the objective estimation of the
technology of skill formation (2) that we employ in Section 5. As we now explain,
although the questions are similar, they differ in two important details. In the MSD
instrument, a mother provides yes/no answers to questions about child development. For
example, one of the items in the MSD Scale for children who are 24 months old is: “Does
your child speak a partial sentence of three words or more?” If the child has already
spoken a partial sentence of three words or more, the mother chooses yes; otherwise,
she chooses no. The key property of the instrument is that the tasks are described in
language easily understood by the mothers and that the tasks are recognizable based on
the daily interactions of mothers and their children.

The first difference is that in our instrument, which is designed to measure subjective
expectations about the technology of skill formation, the mother is asked: “What do you
think is the youngest age and the oldest age at which a child learns to speak a partial
sentence of three words or more?” The respondent uses a sliding scale to indicate the age
range in which she believes a child will develop these skills (Appendix Figure A1)4.

There is another important difference. Because we are interested in measuring the
expectation with respect to the parameter       in the technology of skill formation, it is
necessary for the respondents to provide answers to the above age‐range question for
different levels of investments. Thus, the second step is to create hypothetical scenarios
of parental investments. We need at least two scenarios: one in which investment is
“high” and another in which investment is “low.” In fact, our survey instrument describes
to the expectant mother four different scenarios of investments and the baby’s health at
birth. In the first scenario, the baby's health at birth is “good”        and the mother
chooses a “high” level of investment         . In the second scenario, the mother also chooses
a “high” level of investment       , but the baby's health at birth is “poor”         . In the third
scenario, the baby's health at birth is “good”             , but the mother chooses a “low” level
of investment       . Finally, in the fourth scenario, the baby's health at birth is “poor”
and the maternal choice of investment is low           .

It is important to emphasize that the levels of the two inputs in the technology of skill
formation are invariant across groups of subjects in the survey. As we make clearer
below, the variability in the beliefs about arises because of the heterogeneity in the
age ranges provided by survey respondents.

Before answering the survey questions, the respondents watch a five‐minute video that
explains in detail the differences between the baby's “good” and “poor” health at birth.
For example, in one version of the instrument, we designate “good” health as the one in
which the baby is “normal” at birth, while the “poor” level of initial human capital
4
  The design of the survey instrument was influenced by Delavande, Giné, and McKenzie (2011) who show
that individuals report more accurately when their answers are represented with visual instruments.
corresponds to a baby that is “small” at birth. As we explain to the mother, a “normal”
baby is the one whose gestation lasts 9 months, weighs 8 pounds at birth, and is 20
inches long at birth. Conversely, the “small” baby is a baby that is born after 7 months of
gestation, weighs only 5 pounds at birth, and is only 18 inches long at birth. The “normal”
and “small” babies occupy extremely different positions in the distribution of health at
birth: the “normal” baby is around the 60th percentile in the distribution, while the
“small” baby is around the 1st percentile.

The video also shows examples of activities that mothers do with the child. With the
exception of breastfeeding, all of the activities are part of the Home Observation for the
Measurement of Environment – Short Form (HOME‐SF) instrument5: (a) soothing the
baby when he/she is upset; (b) moving the baby’s arms and legs around playfully; (c)
talking to the baby; (d) playing peek‐a‐boo with the baby; (e) singing songs with the baby;
(f) telling stories to the baby; (g) reading books to the baby; and (h) taking the baby
outside to play in the yard, park, or playground. The activities are the same for the “high”
and “low” level of investments. The difference is in the amount of time: in the “high”
level, mothers spend more time doing these activities than in the “low” level. For
example, in one version of the survey instrument, we say that in the “high” level the
mothers spend six hours a day doing these types of activities, while in the “low” level they
spend only two hours a day. These figures correspond, respectively, to roughly the 15th
and 85th percentile of investments.

Our sample is divided into different groups of subjects in terms of the definition of what
constitutes “high” and “low” investments or “good” and “poor” health at birth. As a
result, we can and do investigate the sensitivity of answers with respect to variations in
the definition of scenarios.

3.2. Estimating expectations

We now discuss how to transform the answer to the question asked in our instrument –
“What do you think is the youngest age and the oldest age at which a child learns to do
[an MSD task]?” – into a measurement of the subjective expectation of child
development at age 24 months, a quantity we denote by               ln ,    , , . This
expectation is conditional on the level of initial human capital and investment given to
the respondent through the scenarios described above.



5
    Bradley and Caldwell (1980, 1984).
In order to go from the age range to ln ,            , , , we break the problem into three
steps. In the first step, we transform the age range into the probability that a child will
learn a given MSD task by age 24 months. In the second step, we transform this
probability into an estimate of the child's skill.6 This estimate contains information about
   ln ,      , , but is potentially contaminated with measurement error. In the third
step, we show how to address the measurement error in a flexible way.

3.2.1. Transforming age range into probability

Without loss of generality, consider the scenario in which both initial conditions and
investment are “high.” For this scenario, suppose that the survey respondent states that
the youngest and oldest age at which a child will learn how to speak partial sentences of
three words or more is and months, respectively. Our interpretation of the answer is
that the respondent believes that the probability that the child will be able to speak a
partial sentence of three words or more before age is a number Δ (arbitrarily) close to
zero and the probability after age months is a number Δ (arbitrarily) close to one. To
infer the respondent's subjective probability that the child will learn how to speak partial
sentences by age 24 months, we need to somehow construct how the probability varies
with age. Suppose, for example, that the relationship between probability and age is
logistic. That is, let , ,   denote the maternal subjective expectation that the child
will be able to do MSD item (e.g., “speak a partial sentence of three words or more”)
under hypothetical scenario by age            months. Under the logistic assumption, this
probability is linked to the child's age according to the following parametric specification:

               , ,
ln                     , , ,   , , ,                                                           (8)
                 , ,


Given Δ and Δ , the parameters , , , and , , , are just identified from the data
provided by the survey respondent. In fact, it is possible to show that:


    ̂,   , ,                       ,   ̂,   , ,
                                                                 .

Given the knowledge of the parameters ̂ , , , and ̂ ,                , ,   , we can invert the logistic
function (8) to predict the probability at age 24 months:

6
  This second step is not strictly necessary. The reason we do it is that when we objectively estimate the
technology of skill formation, we do so by transforming the MSD scores (which is a sum of fifteen yes/no
answers, yes coded as one and no coded as zero) into a metric of “mental” development that is measured
in months.
                      , , ,     , , ,
    , ,       24        , , ,       , , ,
                                            .

For concreteness, Figure 1 illustrates this algorithm for two different scenarios of
investments. In both scenarios, the baby’s health at birth is “good.” When investment is
“high,” suppose that a respondent states that the lowest and highest ages are 18 and 28
months, respectively. If we choose Δ       0.005 and Δ       0.995, then the interpolation
under the logistic assumption implies that the probability at age 24 months is around 0.75
(Figure 1, solid curve). For comparison, when investment is “low,” suppose that the same
respondent reports that the lowest and highest ages are 20 and 30 months, respectively.
Using the same values for Δ and Δ , the higher age range implies a lower probability of
learning how to “speak a partial sentence of three words or more” at age 24 months, of
around 0.25 (Figure 1, dashed curve).

3.2.2. Transforming probability into a measure of expected development

To see how we can derive an error‐ridden measure of maternal expectation of
development at age 24 months, , , , from the probability obtained in the previous step,
    , ,       24 , we explore the information from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES) data set.7 An important feature of the MSD instrument is
that it asks an item about children who are at very different ages. For example, the MSD
item “speak a partial sentence of three words or more” is asked about children who are
between 13 and 47 months. This large variation in age allows us to estimate the fraction
of children who can perform the same task at each age , a quantity that we denote by
   , . We can then estimate how this probability evolves with age by adopting the
following “flexible” logistic specification:
          ,
ln                              ,
              ,


where          is monotonically increasing in and , is an error term that is orthogonal
to age . For illustration purposes, Figure 2 (right panel) shows the data and the resulting
logistic prediction using the logistic specification for the MSD item “speak a partial
sentence of three words or more.” Clearly, the function         provides a very good fit of
the data.

7
 In principle, we could implement the procedure we describe in the following paragraphs in the CNLSY/79
data set. However, as we discuss in Appendix B, the sample for which the MSD score is observed in the
CNLSY/79 data is not representative of the children born to the NLSY/79 respondents, while the NHANES
data set is.
The interpretation of the function           is straightforward: If we had 100 children who

are    months old, we would expect 100                        of them to be able to “speak a partial
sentence of three words or more.” Conversely, consider a group of 100 children, all of
whom have the same unknown age. Suppose that a fraction of children in this group
could “speak a partial sentence of three words or more.” Would it be possible to estimate
the age of this group of children from the information above? The answer is yes! Given
the monotonicity of the function        , we can invert it to obtain an estimate of the age
of the children in the group. The estimator would be

          ln        .                                                                      (9)

It turns out that when we use the probability           , ,    24 derived in subsection 3.2.1 in the
right‐hand side of (9) above, we obtain in the left‐hand side of (9) the error‐ridden
measure of maternal expectations of child development at age 24 months, , , . That is,
                        , ,
 , ,           ln               . Conveniently,   , ,         is measured in age in months, which is
                          , ,

the same metric we will use in Section 5 to measure skills when objectively estimating the
parameters of the technology of skill formation (2).

Importantly, the higher the subjective probability that the mother reports for a given item
  and scenario , the higher the corresponding quality , , . Figure 2 illustrates the
mechanics of the argument. Again, consider the hypothetical survey respondent in
subsection 3.2.1. As discussed above, her answers imply probabilities around 0.75 and
0.25 for the “high” and “low” investment scenarios, respectively. As shown in Figure 2,
25% of the children who are about 16 months old and 75% of the children who are about
22 months old have already learned “how to speak a partial sentence of three words or
more.” Thus, when investment is “high,” the mother expects the 24‐month‐old child to
have the skills of the typical 22‐month‐old child; when investment is “low,” she expects
the 24‐month‐old child to attain the development level of a typical 16‐month‐old child.

3.2.3. Accounting for measurement error

In order to elicit maternal expectations with respect to , it is sufficient to ask the
mother about the age ranges for just one MSD item (say, “partial sentence of three words
or more”). In what follows, let       1 denote the situation in which baby’s health at birth
is “good” and investment is “high” and let          3 denote the scenario in which baby’s
health at birth is also “good,” but investment is “low.” In this case, we would estimate the
maternal subjective expectation of         ,    ,     , using the following relationship
               , ,    , ,
  ,                         . For example, if we use the age ranges provided by our
hypothetical survey respondent in the equation above, we would conclude that
  ,                         29%.

There are at least three reasons to include more than one MSD item in the instrument for
elicitation of expectations. First, we can investigate how the respondents' answers vary
across MSD items for a fixed scenario. For example, the top right panel in Figure 3 shows,
for each age, the fraction of children who can “speak a partial sentence of three words or
more” (solid curve). Also shown in the same top right panel in Figure 3 is the fraction of
children who “know own sex and age” (dashed curve). Clearly, at each age, there are
children who can “speak a partial sentence of three words or more” but who do not know
their “own sex and age.” This fact indicates that the former is a more difficult item than
the latter.

If the respondents understand the survey instrument, we would expect them to assign a
lower probability to items that are more difficult. This is the case depicted in the top left
panel of Figure 3: Fixing the scenario in which the baby’s health at birth is “good” and
investments is “high,” this hypothetical respondent reports age ranges that imply a high
probability of “speak[ing] a partial sentence” but a low probability of “know[ing] own age
and sex.” As a result, once we transform the probability into measures of expected
development, the two different measures are quite close in a quantitative sense (top
right panel). As we document below, this is qualitatively what happens with the
participants in our survey.

It is also possible that respondents report similar age ranges for the same scenario across
different items. Such a possibility is depicted at the bottom half of Figure 3. In that case,
we would see measures of expected development that vary widely from easier to more
difficult items. If the results indicate such constancy of age ranges, we would be worried
about the possibility that respondents do not understand the instrument very well.
Fortunately, this is not what happens in our data.

As anticipated from the discussion above, if the instrument contains multiple MSD items,
we can also investigate the importance of measurement error in subjects’ responses. For
example, suppose that for each respondent and scenario              we have different
measurements of implicit subjective expectations of child development. If we knew that
all of these measurements are equally informative, we could just average over the
answers for the same scenario k to minimize the role of measurement error in the
analysis. In this case, the maternal expectations about child development for scenario
would be defined by:

     ln        ,   ,       ,                   ∑            ln           , ,       .                                               (10)

However, it is reasonable to expect that measurement error is better captured by a richer
specification. For example, the respondents may have a harder time answering some
items and an easier time answering others. This suggests that not all items are equally
informative. For this reason, we also investigate the following specification for the
measurement‐error model:

ln       , ,           ,           ,           ln       ,                ,         ,            ,   , ,                            (11)

where , is the measurement error associated with item and , , is the measurement
error associated with item and scenario . The measurement system (14) can be
estimated via maximum likelihood and the implicit subjective expectations about child
development ln ,         , , can be predicted via the Bartlett method. This approach
gives higher weights to items that have higher loading       , or lower variance of
measurement error , , .

Finally, knowledge of ln ,         , , allows us to estimate the expected beliefs about
the technology of skill formation. Assume that the information provided by the four
hypothetical scenarios we constructed does not affect the respondents’ expectations
about future shocks that will be realized after the child is born, so that | , ,       0.
Under this assumption, note that the following relationship holds for the first and third
scenarios:

     ln        ,   ,       ,               ln                    ln                        ,   ln

     ln        ,   ,       ,               ln                    ln                        ,   ln

Clearly, we can estimate                            ,                        for every mother from:

                               ,       ,   ,                         ,         ,       ,
     ,                                                                                                                             (12)

Expression (12) states that                                      ,                     is the subjective expectation about the elasticity of
child development with respect to parental investment. Note that, so far, we have used
only two of the four scenarios that we have. It is also possible to construct a second
estimate of beliefs from the second and fourth scenarios:

                   ,   ,   ,        ,   ,       ,
    ,                                                                                     (13)

If parents believe that the technology of skill formation is Cobb‐Douglas, then we should
not reject the null hypothesis that         ,         ,      .

4. Results

In this section, we describe the empirical results from our analysis of the Maternal
Knowledge of Infant Development Survey (MKIDS). To focus on the important results, we
have placed a detailed explanation about the study procedures as well as important
features of the data in Appendix A.

The analysis in this paper focuses on the 335 black participants (Appendix Table A1). The
study participants are young: Around 80% of the sample is at most 25 years old. With
respect to education, around 20% of the respondents are high‐school dropouts or have
received a GED. The fraction of participants who have a high‐school diploma is 38%,
which is just slightly higher than the fraction with some college experience: 31%. Few
participants have a two‐year or four‐year college degree.

The sample is economically disadvantaged. The median income is $1500/month, which
puts the sample under the 20th percentile in the US distribution of household income.8 9
Another indication of the prevalence of poverty in the group is that close to 90% of the
respondents are on Medicaid. This contrasts with a figure of around 16% for the overall
US population (US Census Bureau, 2011). Finally, the vast majority of the respondents are
single.

4.1 Subjective expectations about the technology of skill formation

Before we report our findings about maternal expectations, we briefly describe basic
features of the data. Typically, the youngest and oldest ages provided by respondents
vary in predictable ways (Appendix Table A2). Holding constant the health at birth, the
youngest and oldest age ranges take on higher values when investment is “low”.


8
  For comparison, in 2010 the black median household income was $33,460. The median household income
in our survey was roughly half that amount.
9
  Unfortunately, we did not collect information on the number of adult earners in the household.
Conversely, holding constant investment, age ranges are higher when health at birth is
“poor”. More important, age ranges are also higher for more MSD items that are more
difficult (as explained in Section 3.2.3). As shown in Appendix Table A3, the probabilities
at age 24 months, , , 24 , also exhibit the same qualitative features.

Given probabilities   , ,   24 we can estimate our error‐ridden measures of the natural
log child development at age 24 months for a scenario of investment and health at birth,
ln , , . The estimation of the statistical model (11) suggests that measurement error is,
indeed, important in our context. As shown in Appendix Table A5, measurement error
accounts for 40% to 70% of the total variance in responses. In any case, estimation of the
measurement error model allows us to predict the subjective expected natural log of
human capital at age 24 months, ln ,           , ,    which we plot on Appendix Figure
A2. Again, ceteris paribus, higher or higher       imply higher expectations about child
development at age 24 months.

Table 1 displays the summary statistics of the subjective expectations with respect to .
The top part of Table 1 presents the results when ln ,       , , is determined by the
simple average as defined in equation (10). The bottom part of the panel reports our
findings when ln ,         , ,     is estimated from the measurement‐error model (11).
The typical and median woman believes that by increasing time spent with children by
100%, increases the stock of skills at age 24 months by approximately 8.8% and 4.5%,
respectively. If we focus on the results from the measurement‐error model (11), the
figures are very similar. The mean and median expectations are 7.4% and 3.9%,
respectively.

We find evidence of large heterogeneity in expectations. For example, the 75th percentile
expectations are between 21% (in the factor model) and reach 23% (in the simple average
model). In contrast, the 25th percentile has negative expectations: ‐4.5% in the simple
average model and ‐3.4% in the factor model. As we will see in Section 4.3, the negative
expectations are sensitive to the logistic approximation.

An advantage of defining scenarios for health at birth is that we can investigate whether
respondents believe that the technology of skill formation follows a Cobb‐Douglas
specification. Interestingly, we find that the expectations about returns are even lower
for the scenarios in which      is “poor”. In the simple average model, when the baby’s
health at birth is “good,” the mean and median respondent expectation is around 13%
and 7%, respectively. In contrast, when the baby’s health at birth is “poor”, median and
mean expectations are 5% and 3%, respectively. The findings are basically the same
when we focus on the factor model in the bottom panel of Table 1. Interestingly, the
respondents on the 25th percentile do not have negative expectations for the “good”
health scenarios, but they do so for the “poor” health scenarios.

The mean and median expectations are lower if we focus only on the MSD items that are
primarily capturing cognitive (or language) skills. In this case, median expectation is
between 0% and 2%, while the mean is 5% and 8%. In contrast, when we use only the
motor items, median expectations are slightly higher and lie somewhere between 3% and
5% and mean expectations are located between 7% and 10%.10

4.2 Method of interview and definition of scenarios

Researchers interested in eliciting information about sensitive information (e.g., sexual
behavior) worry about face‐to‐face interviewing methods because it may induce study
participants to report what is socially desirable (Waruru, Nduati, Tylleskar, 2005). In our
context, one could be worried about respondents who hold very low expectations would
report higher beliefs because they understand that this is a more socially desirable
answer.11 As reported in Appendix Table A6, we find that the women below the median in
the ACASI sample tend to report even lower expectations than the same group in the
CAPI sample. This is consistent with respondents giving socially desirable answers, but the
differences are not statistically significant.

Next, we investigate how expectations vary with respect to different definitions of what
constitutes “low” versus “high” levels of investments. For this part of the analysis, it is
important to clarify that the data was collected via ACASI. As explained above, the main
group of respondents was shown a video in which a mother spent either six or two hours
per day interacting with the baby. In contrast, a second group of respondents was told
that a mother spent either four or three hours per day interacting with the baby. Table 2
shows the results. If we focus on the median expectation, we conclude that the
qualitative and quantitative findings are robust to different definitions of what

10
   It is also possible to consider combinations of items within scenarios. The results here depend on whether
we account for measurement error. When we do, we find that the difference between cognitive and motor
items is almost exclusively driven by the scenarios in which the baby's health at birth is “good.”
11
    There is also evidence that ACASI may generate lower quality data because the respondent may have
difficulty understanding by himself or herself the instructions on the survey instrument (Estes et al., 2010,
Elst et al, 2009).
constitutes “high” and “low” investments. For example, median expectations overall
items and scenarios is around 7% for the respondents that were told six versus two hours
of interaction per day and 7.5% for the respondents who were informed four versus three
hours of investments per day. A similar conclusion arises when we focus on the
expectations when the baby’s health is “good” (roughly 14% for the “six versus two” and
12% for the “four versus three”). The main difference in the median expectations relates
to the scenario when health is “poor”: It is negative for the “four versus three” group, but
positive for the “six versus two” group. Again, the difference in median expectations
between “good” and “poor” health at birth indicate that respondents do not believe that
the technology is Cobb‐Douglas. Their beliefs are that the production function exhibits
more complementarity between          and than the one implied by the Cobb‐Douglas
specification.

Although the results relating to mean expectations are qualitatively robust, there are
important quantitative discrepancies. A possible explanation for the discrepancy in the
means in the way scenarios are presented may be due to a combination of small sample
sizes and the large effect of outliers in the means (but not the medians).12 Another
explanation is that some respondents believe that the returns decay fast as the number
of hours increase. These explanations are not mutually exclusive and they operate by
increasing the expectations in the right tail of the distribution.

We next investigate what happens with differences in expectations when “poor” health at
birth is defined closer to the midpoint of the distribution of observed health at birth. A
third set of respondents were told that by “good” health we meant a baby whose
gestation lasted 9 months, weighed 8 pounds at birth and was 20 inches long at birth. On
the other hand, by “poor” health we meant a baby whose gestation lasted only 8.5
months, weighed 7 pounds at birth, and was 19 inches long at birth. The respondents
were also told that the mother could spend four (“high” investment) or three (“low”
investment) hours per day interacting with the baby.

An important result is that the median respondent believes that the technology is locally
Cobb‐Douglas. That is, the median expectation is not different across scenarios of “good”
and “poor” health at birth. However, the mean expectations are distinct in the same way
as before: mean expectations are higher for “good” health. The differences are in the


12
  Note that when “high” and “low” investments are four and three hours per day, the denominator in
equations (12) and (13) is around 0.288. In contrast, when “high” and “low” investments are six and two
hours per day, the same denominator is around 1.10, a number almost four times larger.
right tail of the distribution of expectations. However, we do not know if the
discrepancies in the means would disappear if we had a larger sample size.

4.3. Robustness check: Logistic assumption and target age

In this subsection, we examine the robustness of our findings with respect to the
interpolation that uses the logistic distribution. Consider the scenario in which           is
“good”, and is “high” and suppose that the survey respondent states that the youngest
and oldest age at which a child will learn how to speak partial sentences of three words or
more is and months, respectively. Then, we envelop the logistic distribution between
   and by defining the following two triangular distributions. The “upper” triangular
distribution is the one in which the mode is set arbitrarily close to , while the “lower”
triangular distribution is the one in which the mode is set arbitrarily close to . Figure 4
plots the logistic as well as the upper and lower triangular distributions for a hypothetical
respondent who provides           18 and      28 months. Let            ,         , and
denote, respectively, the upper triangular, lower triangular, and logistic distribution. Note
that for any ∈ , we have                                    .

Table 3 displays the results from our robustness analysis.13 The triangular distributions
tend to produce larger mean and median estimates. For example, the median expectation
is 4.5% for the logistic and around 7% for the triangular distributions. More important,
there is an important difference in the left tail distribution of beliefs: The 25th percentile is
negative for the logistic (‐3.4%), but positive for the lower and upper triangular
distributions (3.3% and 2.1%, respectively). In contrast, note that there are negligible
differences for the 75th percentile.14

Another assumption we have maintained so far relates to the target age, which in our
exercise so far has been set at 24 months. A large literature in developmental psychology
documents that parents tend to overestimate the age at which children develop skills
(e.g., Epstein, 1979; Hess et al., 1980; Ninio, 1988; Mansbach and Greenbaum, 1999). In
fact, our findings reported in Appendix Table A3 are consistent with the evidence from

13
  We also consider a uniform interpolation.
14
  The sensitivity of the results is distinct for the scenarios of health at birth. While they increase mean
expectations by 50% when             , they produce much higher means when               (an increase of over
100%). Although the median also increases more for           , the increase is not enough to equalize median
expectations across scenarios of health at birth.
developmental psychology. If many women believe that the age ranges are above 24
months across all scenarios, then our methodology will generate mean beliefs that are
zero. Clearly, this will produce downwardly biased expectations.

In order to investigate the importance of the target age, we re‐analyze our data taking
ages 28, 32, and 36 months as target ages. We also consider four different interpolation
methods we discussed above: the logistic, the uniform, the upper, and lower triangular
distributions. The results are also displayed in Table 3. Focusing on the logistic
distribution, we find evidence that age 24 months provides expectations that are too low:
if we increase the target age from 24 to 28 months, then median expectation almost
doubles from 4.5% to 8.7%. If we set the target age at 32 months, the median expectation
increases to 10.7%. However, there is evidence that further increases in the target age
tend to reduce returns. The reason is similar to the problem at age 24 months: Many
respondents think that children will develop skills before age 36 months across all
scenarios.

It turns out that the right tail of the distribution is sensitive to the changes to the
assumptions about the target age. The 75th percentile increases from 22% to around 33%
in the lower triangular distribution and from 24% to about 40% in the upper triangular
distribution. Interestingly, although the left tail is sensitive to the interpolation method, it
is not so with respect to the target age.

Instead of asking respondents to provide age ranges, it is possible to elicit probabilities
directly from respondents. For example, one could ask “How likely is it that a baby will be
able to speak a partial sentence of 3 words or more by age 2 years?”. In this case, the
respondent provides a number from 0 to 100 for each scenario of investment and the
baby’s health at birth. Interestingly, the answers from the direct elicitation of
probabilities generate returns that are more similar to the ones produced by the upper
and lower triangular distributions at ages 28 and 32 months than the logistic distribution
at any age. However, the method of direct elicitation of probabilities is not without
problems. As shown in Appendix D, the probabilities across MSD items for a given
scenario are roughly independent from item difficulty. As discussed in Section 3.2.3, this
answer pattern tends to produce substantial measurement error and may be an
indication that respondents are not consistent in their evaluations across items.

Considering all target ages and interpolation methods, the median expectation across all
scenarios and items is between 4.5% (logistic distribution at 24 months) and 19.1% (upper
triangular distribution at 32 months). Given the wide variability in the median
expectation, and the fact that the results vary by interpolation method and target age, it
is worthwhile to explore whether there are other differences that are produced by these
different approaches.

It is possible that one of the above methods produces expectations that are more closely
correlated with actual investments. Unfortunately, the MKIDS study did not collect any
investment data.15 Instead, we return to the measurement‐error model (11) and evaluate
the performance of the different methods in terms of the total variance that can be
attributed to ln ,         , , .

Table 4 displays these results. We consider two different ways of looking at the data.
First, we simply look at the average share of the total variance that is attributed to the
variance of     ln ,     , , . For example, the “upper triangular distribution at 24
months” produces an estimate of ln ,            , ,     that explains, on average, 50% of
the total variance in the women’s answers. In comparison, an estimate of
   ln ,     , , generated by the logistic distribution at age 24 months – the method
we have employed throughout the paper – explains approximately 39% of the total
variance. This result implies that the responses, when analyzed under the logistic
distribution at 24 months, are much less “reliable” than when we use the upper triangular
distribution at 24 months. In fact, the models that use the logistic assumption tend to
perform the worst when we consider this metric.

Another way to consider the model’s performance is to examine the model’s fit based on
the log‐likelihood. Although the models are not nested, they do estimate the same
number of parameters. These comparisons are also presented in Table 4. Remarkably, the
models that use the logistic interpolation also tend to have the worst performance in
terms of model fitting. On the other hand, the upper triangular and uniform distributions
around age 28 and 32 months seem to perform the best.

If we take the above analysis at its face value, we can draw two conclusions from the
exercise. First, the logistic distribution produces estimates of expected developmental
outcomes that explain the smallest share of variance. This is true regardless of the target
age. Second, the uniform, the upper, and the lower triangular distributions at age 28 and
32 months are among the best performing methods. This result is important because

15
   It is common to measure investment by visiting the mother and child at home and conducting an
assessment of the home environment. Our respondents were recruited and interviewed in the clinics where
they received their prenatal care. This fact, combined with the fact that most of our sample consists of
primiparous women, makes it impossible to measure investments in the human capital of children.
these alternatives tend to produce higher median expectations. For this reason, we
conclude that the women’s median expectations range from approximately 4.5% to
19.1% and that the preferred estimates are closer towards the end of this interval.
Moreover, median expectations tend to be higher for the scenarios in which        ,
which indicates that the median respondent does not believe that the technology of skill
formation is Cobb‐Douglas. In what follows, we now turn to the estimation of the other
components of the model presented in Section 2.

5. Estimation of the Technology of Skill Formation and Preferences

5.1 Preferences

Let       ,   denote the parental investments when expectations are , . An important
question we would like to answer is: What is the elasticity of investments with respect to
expectations , ? Given the model described in Section 2, it is easy to show that the
elasticity is determined by the following equation:

                          ,
                      ,
                                                                                  (15)
                      ,       ,
                  ,


Note that in order to calculate this elasticity, we only need to know the parameters
and , . Clearly, if we observed , , , , and – which we do not – we could estimate
  from equation (7).

In order to estimate we need to follow a different route. Our approach is to elicit the
preference parameter by stated‐choice data. In our survey, we first told the respondent
to assume that the baby’s health at birth is “good.” We then presented the respondent
with nine hypothetical scenarios of monthly income and prices of investments. These
nine hypothetical scenarios are the combination of three levels of monthly income
($1500, $2000, and $2500) and three levels for the price of investment goods ($30, $45,
and $60).

In order to link investment to time (i.e., the age of the child), we prepared a three‐minute
video in which we explain to the respondent that the more time the mother interacts
with her child, the more money she has to spend every month on educational goods, such
as children’s books and educational toys. The purpose of this exercise was to explain to
the respondent that investments are costly16. We illustrate the concept by giving
examples:

        “If [the mother] spends two hours a day interacting with the child, she
        needs to buy two books and two educational toys per month… But if she
        spends three hours a day, she needs to buy three books and three
        educational toys per month… and so on.”

For each combination of prices and income, we ask the respondents the following
question (Appendix Figure A3):

        “Suppose that your household income is $ per month and that for each
        hour per day that the mother spends interacting with the child she has to
        spend $ per month on educational goods. Consider the following four
        options…”:

The four options represent different levels of investments: two, three, four, or five hours
per day interacting with a child. For example, if the mother chooses , , hours per day
when the price is $    and income is $ then her monthly expenditure is $            , , and
                                                                $       ,   ,
the share of income allocated to investment is          , ,                     . Note that variability in
                                                                    $
the share , , across respondents arises strictly because of variability in choices , ,
(all respondents face the same set of prices and incomes). Appendix Figure A4 plots the
demand function of investment for each level of income (left panel) and the Engel curve
for each level of price (right panel). Clearly, the demand for investments is a decreasing
function of prices and, as income rises, so does the amount of investments chosen by the
respondents.

We can estimate shares for each respondent               from: ̂            ∑       ∑       , ,   . In our
sample, the mean and median shares of expenditure on investments are around 8%. The
range of share values is between 4.9% and 11.75%. In comparison, Lino (2012) reports
shares of investment around 7% for low‐income parents. Given the estimated shares, we
manipulate equation (7) to estimate . Note that our estimate of parental valuation
takes into account the heterogeneity in expectations about the elasticity parameter .
Appendix Table A6 displays summary statistics of for the best interpolation and target



16
  We have implicitly assumed that the production function is Leontieff in maternal time and investment
goods (such as children books). Obviously, this need not be the case.
age combinations (see Table 4 and Section 4.7).17 When we account for heterogeneity in
beliefs, we find that the typical woman has between 0.94 and 1.32, while the median
woman’s        is between 0.39 and 0.46. Clearly, the distribution is positively skewed and
with a large standard deviation, indicating substantial heterogeneity in the women’s
valuation.

5.2. Objective estimation of the technology of skill formation

In this section, we rely on the CNLSY/79 data. Appendix B provides a description of the
data set and summary statistics for the variables and the sample used in these analyses.

In order to objectively estimate the technology of skill formation, we assume that the
dependent variable in (2), , , is the child’s cognitive development around age 24
months, which in the CNLSY/79 is measured by the MSD scale. In order to maintain
comparability with the analysis in Section 4, it is necessary to transform the raw score
produced from the simple summation of maternal answers into a scale measured in time
(i.e., age in months). Although most scales provide the equivalency table between scores
and age in months, to the best of our knowledge this is not the case for the MSD scale. In
order to derive this scale, we conduct an Item‐Response Theory (IRT) analysis of the MSD
data. The estimation of the IRT model allows us to classify the MSD items according to
their level of difficulty (which is denoted by an item‐specific intercept) as well as their
informational content (which is captured by an item‐specific factor loading). With this
information, we can construct a scale of cognitive skills that is measured in age equivalent
scores, which we refer to as “mental age” of development (see Appendix C).18

Correspondingly,       is investment during the first 24 months of the child’s life. In the
CNLSY/79, investment is measured by the HOME‐SF. As in Cunha, Heckman, and
Schennach (2010), we factor analyze the items of the HOME‐SF scale. In their analysis, the
scale of the factor is set by the number of children’s books in the household. Although
this is a valid metric, this is not convenient for the current study. To maintain consistency
with the analysis in Section 4 above, it is necessary to set the location and scale of the

17
   To produce the estimates of      in Table 14, we set to missing the 14 individuals who have non‐positive
values of , . Clearly, the situation in which ,     0 is problematic for the elasticity equation (15). Because
the shares ̂ are positive, negative values of , would imply negative values of .
18
   IRT is also helpful with measurement error. Note that IRT is the equivalent for factor analysis when the
measurements take on discrete values. Another advantage is that the IRT analysis allows us to estimate the
cognitive scores of children whose mothers do not provide answers to all of the 15 MSD items.
instrument in a metric of time, i.e., the child’s age. Details of the procedure are also
described in Appendix C.

Finally, , is measured by the child’s health at birth. Among other information, the
CNLSY/79 data set asks parents to report the child's weight and length at birth, the length
of the gestation, and the number of days that the child spent in the hospital after birth. In
order to produce a scalar variable, we factor analyze the four measures above and extract
one factor. The location and scale of the factor are set by the gestation length. This is
convenient because gestation length is measured in number of months, which is the same
unit used for cognitive skills around 24 months.19

We use within‐family variation to estimate the parameters of the technology of skill
formation. Thus, in the empirical application that follows, we consider the following
parameterization of the technology of skill formation:

ln   ,,     ln         ln    ,,        ln   ,       ,               ,                                 (14)

where the index         denotes the birth order of the child and             , are observed
characteristics of child (e.g., the child’s gender, birth order, year of birth, and the age at
the time of the MSD test). Note that in formulation (14), both           and     are constant
across children .

Table 5 shows the estimated of the technology (14).20 In all of the regressions we show
in Table 5, we control for the child's age at the time of the interview, the child's year of
birth (to account for cohort effects), dummy variables for maternal age at the time of the

19
   Tables B1‐B3 in Appendix B describe in detail summary statistics for the CNLSY/79 variables that we use
for the estimation of the technology of skill formation (2). For example, the stocks of skills for the typical
Hispanic, black, and white children around 24 months are, respectively, 24, 26.4 and 25.6 months. The
black‐white difference is not statistically significant. The advantage of black children in the MSD scale arises
partly due to the fact that they exhibit superior performance in motor items. In terms of investments, the
typical white child tends to receive around 2.2 months of investments per year, while the median black
child receives only 1.5 months per year. This difference is statistically significant even after we account for
the differences in family backgrounds of children. There is reason to suspect that the differences in the
quantity of investments do not completely capture differences in quality of investments. Kalil, Ryan, and
Corey (2012) show that educated mothers not only spend more time with their children, but are also more
likely to dedicate time to activities that best suit their children’s developmental needs. It is possible that the
differences are causal: Currie and Moretti (2002) and Carneiro, Meghir, and Parey (2013) explore
exogenous variations in college‐attendance costs to show that maternal schooling raises investments in
children.
20
   To focus on the parameter of interest, Appendix Table B4 reports our estimates for the other parameters
in (14) for the full sample regression.
child's birth, a dummy variable for the child's gender, and dummy variables for the child's
birth order.

We start by showing the results when we use the least restricted sample: we include all
children whose age at the time of the MSD measurement is between 13 and 35 months.21
For this sample, the elasticity of skills with respect to investment (i.e., the parameter ) is
18%. This means that a 10% increase in investments translates into a 1.8% increase in
skills at age 24 months. Column (2) restricts the age range of children at the time of the
interview to 16 and 32 months. Interestingly, we find that the elasticity parameter is
about 10% higher (around 20%). Column (3) displays the results when we work with an
even more restricted sample: we only include the children who are between 19 and 29
months old. We find to be significantly higher in this sample: the elasticity in the overall
sample is 26%, which is about 43% higher than when we work with the least restricted
sample.22 The higher values of may be due to the fact that the components of the MSD
instrument applied to older children focus on developmental dimensions that are more
affected by parental investments. Another possibility is that the families for which we
observe child development closer around 24 months are the same families that have high
values of .

Next, we investigate whether varies across mothers. We proceed by dividing the sample
by maternal observable characteristics: maternal race/ethnicity, education, and skills.
Interestingly, we find little evidence for difference in estimates of by maternal race or
maternal education. We find some evidence that mothers with higher stocks of cognitive
or socio‐emotional skills tend to have higher values for , but this difference is not
statistically significant. For the vast majority of the specifications we find that the
estimates of       are larger as we restrict the data to age ranges that are close to 24
months.

In the context of this paper, it is especially important to consider variability in because
maternal expectations may be more closely associated with the mother’s own             than

21
   We choose ages 13, 16, 19, and 22 as the cutoff ages owing to the structure of the MSD instrument. As
explained in Section 3.1, Part E of the MSD instrument is given to children who are at least 13 and at most
15 months old. The parents of children who are at least 16 and at most 18 months old respond to Part F.
Part G is assigned to the parents of children who are between 19 and 21 months old. Finally, Part H is
answered by parents whose children are at least 22 and at most 47 months. The end date is determined so
that age 24 months is the center of the interval.
22
   If we only include the respondents whose development is measured between 22 and 26 months, our
estimate for is 28%. However, the sample size becomes too small to be decomposed in the smaller
subsamples presented in Table 5.
with moments of the distribution of across the population, such as             . To tackle this
question, we implement the procedure described by Arellano and Bonhomme (2012). 23
These authors derive estimators for moments of correlated random coefficients in panel
data under the assumption of strict exogeneity of investments, an assumption we have
maintained in our analysis.24 A drawback of the approach is that it is necessary to observe
at least 3 children for each mother. The sample, in this case, is rather small: there are only
303 mothers who satisfy this requirement. For this sample,              19%.

The analysis reveals important heterogeneity in γ . For example, a mother who is half a
standard deviation above the mean has          0.36. In comparison, if we look at the overall
sample for children who are between 19 and 29 months, the point estimate of is 26%.
This heterogeneity in     indicates that some mothers are very efficient in translating
investments into cognitive skills of children.

5.3 Quantifying the impact of moving median expectations

Finally, we use all of this information to answer the following question: Take a respondent
whose expectation is exactly at the median and consider the point estimates of the
technology of skill formation that are located above the median expectation. What would
happen to investments and child development if we were able to move her median
expectations to the (higher) objective estimate we obtained from the CNLSY/79? Table 6
shows the estimated elasticity for the interpolation methods and target age ranges that
are among the most reliable (and which also produce the highest estimates for median
expectations). Clearly, the answer depends on the difference between , and . For the
low value of         0.199, the policy that equates , to produces little changes in
investments (between 3.6% and 24.3%, depending on the interpolation and target age)
and child development (between 0.7% and 5%). Obviously, for higher values of , policies
that increase maternal beliefs have higher impacts on investment and child development.
For example, if        0.257, then the policy increases investments by at least 31.4% and
child development by at least 7.4%. Importantly, these changes are estimated for the
median expectation. The model implies even larger effects for the women whose
expectations are below the median.




23
  See Appendix E for details on our implementation of the Arellano‐Bonhomme (2012) estimator.
24
  As shown by Arellano and Honore (2001), in general the respondent‐specific parameters are not point
identified when strict exogeneity does not hold.
Conclusion

In this paper, we presented a simple model in which mothers have subjective
expectations about the technology of skill formation. We show that the model can be
used to evaluate the impact of policies that affect maternal knowledge about the
importance of investments for developing the human capital of children. In order to be
empirically useful, it is necessary to separately identify heterogeneity in expectations
from heterogeneity in beliefs.

We propose to solve this problem by collecting data on subjective expectations about the
technology of skill formation. We survey a sample of socio‐economically disadvantaged,
pregnant African‐American women. By comparing the subjective expectations with the
objective estimates of the technology of skill formation, we find evidence that our
respondents may underestimate the elasticity of child development with respect to
investments.

We also elicit data that allows us to estimate the parameters that describe parental
preferences. We do so to evaluate the impact of a policy that would move expectations
from the median value in our sample to the objective estimate based on the CNLSY/79.
We find that investments would increase by at least 6.9% and that the children’s stocks of
cognitive skills at age 24 months would increase by at least 1.4%. The values are higher
for mothers whose beliefs are below the median.

In future work, we will follow the respondents longitudinally and see if measures of
expectations are correlated with parental investments once we account for other state
variables that may be correlated with beliefs and investments, such as maternal skills,
family income, and others. This will be an important step to validate the measures of
beliefs and preferences we propose in this paper.

References

Aizer, Anna and Laura Stroud (2010): “Education, Medical Knowledge and the Evolution of Disparities in
Health,” NBER Working Paper 15840.
Almond, Douglas and Janet Currie (2010): “Human Capital Development Before Age Five”, "Handbook of
Labor Economics", Volume 4: Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Ch. 15: 1315‐1486, Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Arellano, Manuel and Stéphane Bonhomme (2012): “Identifying Distributional Characteristics in Random
Coefficients Panel Data Models,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 79(3): 987‐1020.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Katja M. Kaufmann (2009): “Educational Choices, Subjective Expectations, and
Credit Constraints,” NBER Working Paper 15087.
Becker, Gary S. and Nigel Tomes (1986): “Child endowments and the quantity and quality of children,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 84(4), pp. S143–S162.
Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollak, Robert and Paul Taubman (1982): “Parental Preferences and Provision
for Progeny, ” Journal of Political Economy, University of Chicago Press, vol. 90(1): 52‐73.
Bradley, Robert H., and Bettye M. Caldwell (1980): “The Relation of Home Environment, Cognitive
Competence, and IQ Among Males and Females,” Child Development, Vol. 51(4): 1140–1148.
Bradley, Robert H., and Bettye M. Caldwell (1984): “The Relation of Infants’ Home Environments to
Achievement Test Performance in First Grade: A Follow‐Up Study,” Child Development, Vol. 55(3): 803–809.
Bruine de Bruin, Wandi, Charles F. Manski, Giorgio Topa, and Wilbert van der Klaauw (2011): “Measuring
Consumer Uncertainty about Future Inflation,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 26(3): 454‐478.
Campbell, Frances A., Barbara H. Wasik, Elizabeth Pungello, Margaret Burchinal, Oscar Barbarin, Kirsten
Kainz, Joseph J. Sparling, Craig T. Ramey (2008): “Young adult outcomes of the Abecedarian and CARE early
childhood educational interventions,” Early Childhood Research Quarterly, Vol. 23(4): 452‐466.
Carneiro, Pedro, Costas Meghir, and Matthias Parey (2013): “Maternal Education, Home Environments and
Child Development,” Journal of European Economic Association, Vol. 11(IS1):123‐160.
Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman (2007): “The Technology of Skill Formation,” American Economic
Review, Vol. 97(2): 31‐47.
Cunha, Flavio, James J. Heckman, and Susanne M. Schennach (2010): “Estimating the Technology of
Cognitive and Non‐Cognitive Skill Formation,” Econometrica, Vol. 78(3): 883‐931
Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti (2002): “Mother's Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings and Longitudinal Data,” NBER Working Paper 9360.
Delavande, Adeline (2008): “Pill, Patch or Shot? Subjective Expectations and Birth Control Choice,”
International Economic Review, Vol. 49(3): 999‐1042.
Delavande, Adeline, Xavier Giné, and David McKenzie (2011): “Eliciting Probabilistic Expectations with
Visual Aids in Developing Countries: How Sensitive Are Answers to Variations in Elicitation Design?,” Journal
of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 26(3): 479‐497.
de Menil, George, and Surjit S. Bhalla (1975): “Direct Measurement of Popular Price Expectations,”
American Economic Review, Vol.65(1): 169‐180.
Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski (1996): “Eliciting Student Expectations of the Returns to Schooling,”
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 31(1), pp. 1‐26.
Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski (1997a): “Using Expectations Data to Study Subjective Income
Expectations,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 92(439): 855‐867.
Dominitz, Jeff and Charles F. Manski (1997b): “Perceptions of Economic Insecurity: Evidence from the
Survey of Economic Expectations,” Public Opinion Quarterly, Vol. 61(2): 261‐287.
Dominitz, Jeff, Charles F. Manski, and Jordan Heinz (2003): “Will Social Security Be There for You? How
Americans Perceive Their Benefits,” NBER Working Paper 9798.
Epstein, Ann S. (1979): “Pregnant Teenagers’ Knowledge of Infant Development,” High/Scope Educational
Research Foundation Working Paper, available at http://www.eric.ed.gov/PDFS/ED176875.pdf.
Estes, Larissa J., Linda E. Lloyd, Michelle Teti, Sheela Raja, Lisa Bowleg, Kristi L. Allgood, and Nancy Glick
(2010): “Perceptions of Audio Computer‐Assisted Self‐Interviewing (ACASI) among Women in an HIV‐
Positive Prevention Program,” PLoS ONE Vol. 5(2): e9149. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0009149.
Field, Erica, Omar Robles, and Maximo Torero (2009): “Iodine Deficiency and Schooling Attainment in
Tanzania”, American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, Vol. 1(4): 140‐169.
Griliches, Zvi (1980): “Expectations, Realizations, and the Aging of Young Men, ” Research in Labor
Economics, JAI Press, 1980.
Hart, Albert G. (1940): “Anticipations, Uncertainty, and Dynamic Planning,” University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Hart, Betty and Todd R. Risley (1995): “Meaningful Differences in the Everyday Experience of Young
American Children”, Paul H. Brookes Publishing Co.
Heckman, James J., Seong H. Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Q. Yavitz (2010):
“Analyzing Social Experiments as Implemented: A Reexamination of the Evidence From the High Scope
Perry Preschool Program,” Quantitative Economics, Vol. 1(1): 1‐46.
Heckman, James J. and Edward Vytlacil (1998): “Instrumental Variables Methods for the Correlated
Random Coefficient Model: Estimating the Average Rate of Return to Schooling When the Return is
Correlated with Schooling,” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 33(4): 974‐987.
Hess, Robert D., Keiko Kashiwagi, Hiroshi Azuma, Gary Price, and W. P. Dickson (1980): “Maternal
Expectations for Mastery of Developmental Tasks in Japan and the United States,” International Journal of
Psychology, Vol. 15(2), pp. 259‐271.
Hoddinott, John, John A. Maluccio, Jere R Behrman, Rafael Flores and Reynaldo Martorell (2008): “The
Impact of Nutrition During Early Childhood on Income, Hours Worked, and Wages of Guatemalan Adults“
Lancet Vol. 371 (February): 411‐416.
Hunt, Joseph M. (1961): “Intelligence and experience,” New York, Ronald Press.
Jacobs, R. L., and R. A. Jones (1980): “Price Expectations in the United States: 1947‐1975,” American
Economic Review, Vol.70(1): 269‐276.
Jensen, Robert (2010): “The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 125(2): 515‐548.
Kauffman, Katja M. (2012): “Understanding the Income Gradient in College Attendance in Mexico: The Role
of Heterogeneity in Expected Returns,” Bocconi University Working Paper.
Kaufmann, Katja and Luigi Pistaferri (2009):“Disentangling Insurance and Information in Intertemporal
Consumption Choices,” American Economic Review P&P, Vol. 99(2): 387‐92.
Kalil, Ariel, Rebecca Ryan, and Michael Corey (2012): “Diverging Destinies: Maternal Education and the
Developmental Gradient in Time with Children,” Demography, Vol. 49(4): 1361‐1383.
Karoly Lynn A., M. Rebecca Kilburn, and Jill S. Cannon (2005): “Early Childhood Interventions: Proven
Results, Future Promise,” RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.
Koenig, H., M. Nerlov, and G. Oudiz (1981): “On the Formation of Price Expectations: An Analysis of
Business Test Data by Log‐linear Probability Models,” European Economic Review, Vol. 16(1):103‐138.
Lino, Mark (2012): “Expenditure on Children by Families, 2011,” U.S. Department of Agriculture, Center for
Nutrition Policy and Promotion. Miscellaneous Publication No. 1528‐2011.
Lochner, Lance (2007): “Individual Perception of the Criminal Justice System,” American Economic Review,
Vol. 97(1), pp. 444‐460.
Mansbach, Ivonne K. and Charles W. Greenbaum (1999): “Developmental Maturity Expectations of Israeli
Fathers and Mothers: Effects of Education, Ethnic Origin, and Religiosity,” International Journal of
Behavioral Development, Vol. 23(3): 771‐797.
Manski, Charles F. (2004): “Measuring Expectations,” Econometrica, Vol 72(5): 1329‐1376.
Ninio, Anat (1988): “The Effects of Cultural Background, Sex, and Parenthood on Beliefs about the
Timetable of Cognitive Development in Infancy,” Merrill‐Palmer Quarterly, Vol. 34(4), pp. 369‐388.
Rippe, Richard D. and Maurice Wilkinson (1974): “Forecasting Accuracy of the McGraw‐Hill Anticipatory
Data”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, Vol. 69(348):849‐858.
Rowe, Meredith L. (2008): “Child‐directed speech: Relation to socioeconomic status, knowledge of child
development, and child vocabulary skill,” Journal of Child Language, Vol. 35(1): 185‐205.
Roy, Shalini (2009): “Can Awareness Campaigns Promote Early Childhood Investment? Evidence from the
Philippines,” University of Pennsylvania Ph.D. Dissertation.
Ryder, Norman. B and Charles F. Westoff (1971): “Reproduction in the United States, 1965“, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Stinebrickner Todd R. and Stinebrickner Ralph (2007): “Learning About Academic Ability and the College
Drop‐Out Decision”, University of Western Ontario Working Paper.
Van der Elst, Elisabeth M., Haile Selassie Okuku, Phellister Nakamya, Allan Muhaari, Alun Davies, R. Scott
McClelland, Matthew A. Price, Adrian D. Smith, Susan M. Graham, Eduard J. Sanders (2009): “Is Audio
Computer‐Assisted Self‐Interview (ACASI) Useful in Risk Behaviour Assessment of Female and Male Sex
Workers, Mombasa, Kenya?”, PLoS ONE Vol. 4(5): e5340. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0005340.
Van der Klaauw, Wilbert and Kenneth I. Wolpin (2008): “Social Security and the Savings and Retirement
Behavior of Low Income Households,” Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 145(1‐2): 21‐42.
Vygotsky, Lev S. (1978): “Mind in Society,” MIT Press, Cambride, MA.
Wallsten, Thomas, S., David V. Budescu, Amnon Rapoport, Rami Zwick, and Barbara Forsyth (1986):
“Measuring the Vague Meanings of Probability Terms,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, Vol.
115(4): 348‐365.
Waruru, Anthony K., Ruth Nduati and Thorkild Tylleskar (2005): "Audio computer‐assisted self‐
interviewing (ACASI) may avert socially desirable responses about infant feeding in the context of HIV,"
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, Vol. 5 (24) doi:10.1186/1472‐6947‐5‐24.
Wiswall, Matt and Basit Zafar (2012): “Determinants of College Major Choices: Identification from an
Information Experiment”, Arizona State University Working Paper.
Wolpin, Ken and Gonul, Fusun (1985): “On the Use of Expectations Data in Micro Surveys: The Case of
Retirement, ” Center for Human Resource Research at Ohio State University working paper.
Zafar, Basit (2008): “College Major Choice and the Gender Gap,” Staff Report no. 364, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
                                                                 Figure 1
                                               Transforming age range into probability


        1   .75
Probability
    .5  .25
        0




                      0           4      8      12    16      20    24    28     32                36    40      44     48
                                                           Child Age (in months)

                                                  Logistic prediction, high                 High investment
                                                  Logistic prediction, low                  Low investment




                                                               Figure 2
                                Expected development for two levels of investments (x)
                              Age range to probability                       Probability to expected development
                              Speak partial sentence - MKIDS                          Speak partial sentence - NHANES
        1




                                                                        1
        .75




                                                                        .75
  Probability




                                                                    Probability
      .5




                                                                        .5
        .25




                                                                        .25
        0




                                                                        0




                  0       4     8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48                   0   4   8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48
                                   Child Age (in months)                                      Child Age (Months)

                                      High x           Low x                               Data            Predicted
                                                                      Figure 3
                                         Comparing answers to different MSD items
                       Age range into probability                                 Probability into expected development
1




                                                                           1
             Speak partial sentence                                                     Speak partial sentence
.25 .5 .75




                                                                           .25 .5 .75
                                               Know own age and sex                                                Know own age and sex
0




                                                                           0
             0     4     8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48                                0     4     8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48
                            Child Age (in months)                                                       Child Age (Months)
1




                                                                             1
             Speak partial sentence                                                      Speak partial sentence
.75




                                                                             .75
.5




                                                                             .5
.25




                                                                             .25
                                               Know own age and sex                                                 Know own age and sex
0




             0     4     8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48                     0          0     4     8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48
                            Child Age (in months)                                                       Child Age (Months)




                                                                       Figure 4
                                        Checking the robustness of the logit assumption
1
.8
.6
.4
.2
0




             12                        16                 20              24                              28           32                  36
                                                                          Age

                                      Logit distribution                                                Upper triangular distribution
                                      Lower triangular distribution
                                                              Table 1
                                   Subjective expectations about the technology of skill formation
                                    Accounting for measurement error by averaging across items
                                                                                                      25th       75%            Std
                                                                             Mean        Median
                                                                                                    Percentile Percentile     Deviation
Overall items and Scenarios1                                                 8.8%         4.5%         ‐4.5%       23.0%        32.9%

"Good" versus "poor" heath at birth
Overall items, only scenarios with "good" health at birth                    12.7%        7.2%          0.0%       29.1%        36.5%
Overall items, only scenarios with "poor" health at birth                    4.9%         2.9%         ‐7.2%       21.1%        33.6%

Primarily motor vs. primarily cognitive items
Cognitive items, all scenarios                                               7.6%         0.0%         ‐0.9%       20.8%        33.4%
Motor items, all scenarios                                                   9.9%         4.6%         ‐8.0%       23.7%        38.7%

Primarily motor vs. primarily cognitive items by health at birth
Cognitive items, "good" health at birth                                      10.3%        0.0%          0.0%       26.1%        35.6%
Cognitive items, "poor" health at birth                                      4.9%         0.0%         ‐1.8%       17.0%        34.5%
Motor items, "good" health at birth                                          14.8%        9.0%          0.0%       35.7%        43.8%
Motor items, "poor" health at birth                                          4.9%         0.0%         ‐6.1%       22.3%        41.2%

                                    Accounting for measurement error by estimating factor model
                                                                                                       25th       75%           Std
                                                                             Mean        Median
                                                                                                    Percentile Percentile     Deviation
Overall items and Scenarios1                                                 7.4%         3.9%        ‐3.4%      21.0%         32.9%

"Good" versus "poor" heath at birth
Overall items, only scenarios with "good" health at birth                    11.8%        6.7%          1.3%       29.4%        36.1%
Overall items, only scenarios with "poor" health at birth                    3.0%         0.2%         ‐8.2%       15.8%        32.8%

Primarily motor vs. primarily cognitive items
Cognitive items, all scenarios                                               5.1%         2.1%         ‐4.0%       16.3%        36.4%
Motor items, all scenarios                                                   6.9%         3.1%         ‐5.0%       19.0%        35.4%

Primarily motor vs. primarily cognitive items by health at birth
Cognitive items, "good" health at birth                                      10.2%         4.2%        ‐0.4%       24.7%        39.2%
Cognitive items, "poor" health at birth                                       0.0%        ‐4.4%        ‐7.4%       13.3%        36.9%
Motor items, "good" health at birth                                          16.6%        10.4%        3.4%        36.1%        39.9%
Motor items, "poor" health at birth                                          ‐2.8%        ‐4.1%       ‐13.9%       7.3%         36.6%

1
 Health at birth is "good" if (1) the baby's weight at birth is 8 pounds, the baby's length at birth is 20 inches, and the gestational age
is 9 months. Health at birth is "poor" if the baby's weight at birth is 5 pounds, the baby's length at birth is 18 inches, and the
gestational age is 7 months. When investment is "high" the mother spends 6 hours/day interacting with the baby. In contrast,
when investment is "low" the mother spends only 2 hours/day interacting with the baby.
                                                                                         Table 2
                                                               Subjective beliefs about the technology of skill formation
                                          How do maternal mean beliefs change with definitions of health conditions at birth and investments?
                                                             Accounting for measurement error by estimating factor model
                                                              Gestation: 9 months                         Gestation: 9 months                            Gestation lasts 9 months
                                                   Healthy    Birth weight: 7 pounds               Healthy   Birth weight: 7 pounds         Normal       Birth weight: 8 pounds
                                                              Birth length: 20 inches                        Hospital time: 3 days                       Birth length: 20 inches
Health conditions at birth
                                                              Gestation: 7 months                            Gestation: 7 months                         Gestation: 8.5 months
                                                 Not Healthy Birth weight: 5 pounds           Not Healthy Birth weight: 5 pounds                Small    Birth weight: 6 pounds
                                                              Birth length: 19 inches                        Hospital time: 7 days                       Birth length: 19 inches

                                                    High      6 hours/day                           High     4 hours/day                        High     4 hours/day
Investments
                                                     Low      2 hours/day                           Low      3 hours/day                        Low      3 hours/day

                                                      Number of observations = 42                     Number of observations = 71                 Number of observations = 32

                                                    Mean         Median        Std Dev             Mean        Median         Std Dev           Mean       Median         Std Dev

Overall items and Scenarios                         7.2%          6.9%          28.1%              18.7%         7.6%          48.4%            22.6%        8.1%          41.1%

Overall items, only scenarios with high
                                                    8.3%          13.8%         37.9%              29.8%        11.9%          59.0%            28.9%        8.4%          49.5%
health conditions at birth

Overall items, only scenarios with low
                                                    6.1%          1.1%          29.2%               7.7%        ‐3.2%          49.2%            16.3%        8.2%          42.4%
health conditions at birth
                                             Table 3
                    Subjective beliefs about the technology of skill formation
                          Checking sensitivity of the logit assumption
                             Not accounting for measurement error
                                  Overall items and Scenarios
                                                           Logistic
                                                            25th           75th
                              Mean          Median                                    Std Dev
                                                          Percentile     Percentile
Target age is 24 months        8.8%          4.5%           ‐3.4%          21.0%      32.9%
Target age is 28 months       12.6%          8.7%           ‐3.0%          28.9%      32.2%
Target age is 32 months       14.6%          10.7%          ‐3.0%          30.1%      29.0%
Target age is 36 months       12.8%          7.6%           ‐2.1%          27.8%      24.8%

                                                           Uniform
                                                            25th           75th
                              Mean          Median                                    Std Dev
                                                          Percentile     Percentile
Target age is 24 months        7.4%          3.9%           ‐3.4%          21.0%      32.9%
Target age is 28 months       22.8%          17.2%          4.9%           36.7%      23.0%
Target age is 32 months       21.7%          19.2%          4.2%           33.0%      21.6%
Target age is 36 months       21.0%          16.7%          5.7%           32.8%      19.3%

                                                   Lower Triangular
                                                        25th          75th
                              Mean          Median                                    Std Dev
                                                      Percentile    Percentile
Target age is 24 months       15.8%          7.2%           3.3%           22.3%      22.9%
Target age is 28 months       20.8%          15.7%          4.3%           32.1%      22.7%
Target age is 32 months       21.7%          17.8%          4.2%           33.7%      22.1%
Target age is 36 months       21.7%          17.6%          3.9%           32.8%      22.3%

                                                   Upper Triangular
                                                        25th          75th
                              Mean          Median                                    Std Dev
                                                     Percentile     Percentile
Target age is 24 months       15.2%          7.1%           2.1%           24.3%      23.5%
Target age is 28 months       24.1%          18.3%          4.8%           39.9%      25.3%
Target age is 32 months       22.9%          19.1%          4.1%           40.0%      23.7%
Target age is 36 months       21.1%          15.2%          4.4%           35.7%      21.2%

                                              Direct Elicitation of Probability
                                                            25th           75th
                              Mean          Median                                    Std Dev
                                                         Percentile     Percentile
Target age is 24 months       26.1%          17.5%          4.8%           40.9%      35.3%
                                                                  Table 4
                             Comparison of different interpolation method with respect to measurement error
                                   Mean Share of
                                                       Median                                                               Median
      Interpolation Method         Signal to Total                        Interpolation Method          Log likelihood
                                                     Expectation                                                          Expectation
                                   Variance Ratio
Upper triangular at 24 months          50.0%            7.1%        Lower triangular at 24 months              ‐8362.76     7.2%
Lower triangular at 32 months          48.9%            17.8%       Lower triangular at 28 months              ‐8526.64     15.7%
Lower triangular at 28 months          48.7%            15.7%       Lower triangular at 32 months              ‐9303.08     17.8%
Upper triangular at 28 months          48.4%            18.3%       Uniform at 32 months                       ‐9953.78     19.2%
Upper triangular at 32 months          48.2%            19.1%       Uniform at 28 months                      ‐10480.21     17.2%
Uniform at 32 months                   47.8%            19.2%       Uniform at 36 months                      ‐10480.21     16.7%
Uniform at 28 months                   47.6%            17.2%       Upper triangular at 32 months             ‐11734.71     19.1%
Lower triangular at 36 months          47.4%            17.6%       Upper triangular at 24 months             ‐11939.96     7.1%
Lower triangular at 24 months          46.3%            7.2%        Upper triangular at 28 months             ‐12742.74     18.3%
Uniform at 36 months                   45.3%            16.7%       Lower triangular at 36 months             ‐13262.94     17.6%
Upper triangular at 36 months          45.3%            15.2%       Upper triangular at 36 months             ‐13307.42     15.2%
Logistic at 28 months                  41.4%            8.7%        Logistic at 36 months                     ‐14877.54     7.6%
Logistic at 32 months                  41.4%            10.7%       Uniform at 24 months                      ‐14897.94     3.9%
Uniform at 24 months                   38.6%            3.9%        Logistic at 24 months                     ‐14897.94     4.5%
Logistic at 24 months                  38.6%            4.5%        Logistic at 32 months                     ‐14935.06     10.7%
Logistic at 36 months                  37.5%            7.6%        Logistic at 28 months                     ‐15041.75     8.7%
                                                                                                                 Table	  5
                                                                       Objective	  estimation	  of	  the	  technology	  of	  skill	  formation
                                                                        Estimates	  of	  γ	  for	  full	  sample	  and	  selected	  subsamples
                                                            Dependent	  variable:	  Natural	  log	  of	  skills	  around	  age	  24	  months1
                                                                                                       Full	  Sample
                                                                                                       13	  to	  35	  Months             16	  to	  32	  Months      19	  to	  29	  Months
Full	  Sample                                                                                               18.0%***                             19.9%***                      25.7%***
                                                                                                              (1.99%)                              (2.70%)                       (3.84%)
                                                                                               Analysis	  by	  race/ethnicity
                                                                                                       13	  to	  35	  Months             16	  to	  32	  Months      19	  to	  29	  Months
Hispanic	  subsample	  only                                                                               18.3%***                             18.9%***                       34.4%***
                                                                                                             (4.21%)                              (5.45%)                        (7.64%)
Black	  subsample	  only                                                                                  18.7%***                             21.7%***                       20.1%***
                                                                                                             (3.17%)                              (4.42%)                        (6.33%)
Non-­‐Hispanic,	  non-­‐black	  subsample	  only                                                         16.9%***                             19.7%***                       31.1%***
                                                                                                             (3.80%)                              (5.45%)                        (8.82%)

                                                                            Analysis	  by	  maternal	  education	  at	  first	  birth
                                                                                                    18.1%***                                     20.2%***                       20.4%***
Mother	  is	  high-­‐school	  dropout	  at	  birth	  of	  the	  first	  child
                                                                                                      (3.16%)                                     (4.64%)                        (5.80%)

Mother	  is	  at	  least	  high-­‐school	  graduate	  at	  birth	  of	  the	  first	             17.8%***                             18.6%***                       29.3%***
child                                                                                                        (2.71%)                              (3.69%)                        (5.30%)

                                                                                       Analysis	  by	  maternal	  cognitive	  skills
Maternal	  AFQT	  is	  in	  bottom	  quartile                                                          16.3%***                             18.9%***                       16.5%***
                                                                                                             (3.19%)                              (4.23%)                        (4.99%)
Maternal	  AFQT	  is	  in	  2nd	  quartile	  or	  higher                                             20.0%***                             20.9%***                       29.4%***
                                                                                                             (2.84%)                              (3.99%)                        (5.79%)

                                                           Analysis	  by	  maternal	  score	  on	  Rotter's	  locus	  of	  control	  scale
Maternal	  score	  on	  Rotter's	  locus	  of	  control	  is	  in	  top	                19.6%***                                  20.0%***                            23.5%***
quartile2                                                                                          (2.44%)                                     (3.28%)                           (4.71%)
Maternal	  score	  on	  Rotter's	  locus	  of	  control	  is	  in	  3rd	                          13.9%***                             20.4%***                        17.6%**
quartile	  or	  lower2                                                                                     (4.14%)                              (5.67%)                        (6.94%)

                                                       Analysis	  by	  maternal	  score	  on	  Rosenberg's	  self	  esteem	  scale
Maternal	  score	  on	  Rosenberg's	  self	  esteem	  scale	  is	  in	               13.9%***                            21.4%***                                       18.2%*
                          3
bottom	  quartile                                                                                           (4.16%)                               (6.29%)                       (9.94%)
Maternal	  score	  on	  Rosenberg's	  self	  esteem	  scale	  is	  in	  2nd	                      18.6%***                             19.1%***                       27.2%***
quartile	  or	  higher      3                                                                              (2.37%)                              (3.02%)                        (4.33%)

Robust	  standard	  errors	  in	  parentheses.	  All	  regressions	  have	  dummy	  variables	  for:	  (i)	  the	  child's	  gender,	  (ii)	  birth	  order,	  (iii)	  age	  at	  
the	  time	  of	  measurement	  of	  the	  dependent	  variable,	  (iv)	  year	  of	  birth	  and	  (v)	  maternal	  age	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  child's	  birth.	  	  

***	  p<0.01,	  **	  p<0.05,	  *	  p<0.1
1
 Skills	  are	  measured	  by	  the	  Motor-­‐Social	  Development	  Scale	  and	  are	  scaled	  in	  "mental"	  age	  of	  development.	  

2
 The	  Rotter	  locus	  of	  control	  scale	  measures	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  individuals	  believe	  that	  they	  can	  control	  events	  that	  affect	  them.	  In	  
the	  NLSY/79,	  it	  takes	  on	  values	  between	  4	  and	  16.	  Low	  values	  indicate	  that	  individuals	  tend	  to	  believe	  that	  they	  can	  control	  the	  
events,	  while	  high	  values	  suggest	  that	  individuals	  believe	  that	  events	  are	  beyond	  their	  control.	  

3
 The	  Rosenberg	  self	  esteem	  scale	  measures	  an	  individuals	  self	  esteem.	  In	  the	  NLSY/79,	  it	  takes	  on	  values	  between	  9	  and	  30.	  Low	  
values	  indicate	  lack	  of	  self	  esteem.	  
                                       Table 6
                 Moving median expectations close to objective estimates


                                  Median                               Change in child
                                               Target       Change in
     Interpolation method       expectation                            development at
                                            elasticity () investments
                                   ()                                age 24 months


Lower triangular at 32 months      17.8%         19.9%        10.6%         2.2%
Upper triangular at 32 months      19.1%         19.9%        3.6%          0.7%
Lower triangular at 28 months      15.7%         19.9%        24.3%         5.0%
Upper triangular at 28 months      18.3%         19.9%        7.9%          1.6%

Lower triangular at 32 months      17.8%         25.7%        40.4%        9.5%
Upper triangular at 32 months      19.1%         25.7%        31.4%        7.4%
Lower triangular at 28 months      15.7%         25.7%        58.1%        13.7%
Upper triangular at 28 months      18.3%         25.7%        36.9%        8.7%

Lower triangular at 32 months      17.8%         28.3%        53.8%        19.5%
Upper triangular at 32 months      19.1%         28.3%        43.8%        15.9%
Lower triangular at 28 months      15.7%         28.3%        73.3%        26.6%
Upper triangular at 28 months      18.3%         28.3%        50.0%        18.1%
A The MKIDS Data

In this Appendix, we describe the MKIDS data. To collect the data we describe next, we
clarify that we first obtained IRB approval from the University of Pennsylvania, Drexel
College of Medicine, and the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia.

A.1 Procedures and sample used in this paper

The sample is recruited from four prenatal clinics affiliated with a university hospital in
Philadelphia, PA. Eligibility criteria include women who were currently pregnant, at least
18 years of age, English‐speaking, and had at most only one previous live birth. Appendix
Table A1 shows other demographic characteristics of our sample.

The recruitment procedures consisted of the following: every week clinic staff released to
the study coordinator a list of the date, time, and location of prenatal appointments of
potentially eligible study participants. Once a potential participant registered at the clinic,
the interviewer approached her to explain the study and screen for eligibility. If eligible,
the participant was asked to provide written informed consent. Over1300 subjects were
approached of which 539 were deemed eligible. Of these women, 535 agreed to
participate. Subjects who completed the entire survey received $25 for their
participation. The interview was conducted in a private office at the prenatal clinic while
the respondents waited for their prenatal care visit.

A.2 Features of the data

Appendix Table A2 reports the average youngest and oldest age reported by the
respondents for each scenario of investment and the baby’s health at birth. In order to
facilitate the presentation of our results, we sort the MSD items in increasing order of
difficulty. Note that maternal answers are consistent in that they report higher ages for
more difficult items.

Appendix Table A3 shows the summary statistics for the probabilities at age 24 months
for each MSD item and scenario. As we explained in subsection 3.2.1 the probabilities
  , , 24 are derived from the age range information provided by the respondent under
the assumption of logistic distribution. Column (1) displays the NHANES objective
probability that 24‐month‐old children have already learned a certain MSD task. For
example, 88.5% of 24‐month‐old children can “speak a partial sentence of 3 words or
more.” However, only 13.5% of 24‐month‐old children “can count out loud up to 10.”
Column (2) shows the corresponding average probabilities for each MSD item when the
initial stock of human capital and parental investment are set according to the values in
Scenario 1. We make two observations: First, these probabilities tend to decrease with
the difficulty of the task. This qualitative feature is consistent with the ordering in the
NHANES. However, it is also clear that there are substantial discrepancies in a percentage
of children who are expected to be able to complete the task by age 24 months: women’s
subjective probabilities in MKIDS under Scenario 1, which is the one in which children
have “good” health at birth and high levels of investments, tend to be lower than the
estimated probabilities in NHANES. Nevertheless, we find reassuring that the ordering
provided by the MKIDS participants is consistent with the ordering we estimate from the
NHANES dataset.

It is also interesting to compare column (2) with the corresponding columns for Scenarios
2, 3, and 4. As we explained above, the difference between Scenarios 1 and 3 and
Scenarios 2 and 4 is in the values taken by . In contrast, Scenarios 1 and 4 differ in terms
of both       and . Interestingly, parents understand that the technology of skill formation
is increasing in both inputs. For example, according to parents, the average probability
that the child will be able to “speak a partial sentence of 3 words” by age 24 months is
31% for Scenario 1 (column 2), 22% for Scenario 2 (column 4), about 19% for Scenario 3
(column 3), and 16% for Scenario 4 (column 5).

A crucial step in the analysis is the one in which the probabilities           , ,   24 are
transformed into measurements of expected human capital at age 24 months             , ,   . This
is done by the inverse of the function          in equation (12). We rely on the NHANES
data set to do so. Using the notation from Subsection 3.2.2, , is the fraction of children
who can perform MSD task at age . We specify the function              as a polynomial of
degree five at age, . That is, we estimate the following equation:
     ,
ln           ∑              ,
         ,


Appendix Table A4 shows the estimated coefficients ,     1, … ,5. The high   denotes
a very good model fit, which is important because the estimated model is used to
transform , , 24 into , , . This is done by numerically inverting the function
(see equation 9).

We report our findings from the measurement‐error model specified in equation (11).
Perhaps not surprisingly, we find substantial evidence of measurement error. Appendix
Table A5 displays the decomposition of the variance of ln              , ,   into information about the
latent variable   ln ,                 ,     , , item‐specific measurement error,         , , and
measurement uniqueness,              , ,   . The measurement signal – the part of the variance on
ln   , ,   that is due to   ln   ,          ,    ,   – varies between just below 30% to close to 60%.
Clearly, not all items are equally informative. There are eight MSD items that contain a
signal between 40% and 60% of total variance; six items' signal captures between 30%
and 40% of total variance; and the signal of one item represents less than 30% of total
variance of ln , , .

We use the measurements ln                 , ,   and the measurement‐error model (11) to estimate
the subjective expected natural log of human capital at age 24 months,
   ln ,      , , . This is done by estimating the Bartlett scores, which are unbiased
estimates of the factors. Appendix Figure A2 plots the marginal densities of the four
   ln ,      , ,     (one for each scenario). First, the marginal densities are positively
skewed. The global modal is situated around the value ln 12 2.5, which implies that a
large group of women expect human capital at age 24 months to be equivalent to human
capital of the typical child who is 12 months old, even in the best scenario. There is also
evidence of a local mode, situated around ln 24 3.5, which implies the existence of a
large number of women with expectations at age 24 months around the human capital of
the typical 24‐month‐old child.

Second, we focus on the scenarios in which the baby’s health at birth is “good” (the
densities depicted in solid lines in Appendix Figure A2). Clearly, the density in which the
investment is high is located to the right of the density in which the investment is low.
This property derives directly from the maternal responses regarding age ranges: mothers
believe that children will learn tasks at earlier ages in the high‐investment scenario. The
difference between high and low investments is much smaller in the scenarios in which
the baby’s health at birth is “poor”.

A.3 Method of Interview

We examine whether the way the survey is implemented affects the results. Table A6
compares subjective expectations for a sample using computer‐assisted personal
interviews (CAPI) with those of a sample using audio version of the computer‐assisted
personal interviews (ACASI).25 The results are qualitative consistent across survey
methods, but the respondents on the left tail of the median tend to report lower values
under ACASI than under CAPI.

B The CNLSY/79 Data

B.1 Description of the data and sample used in this paper

The CNLSY/79 consists of all children born to NLSY/79 female respondents.26 These
children have been independently followed and interviewed every two years since 1986.
To this day, there are roughly 11,500 children enrolled in the study, but not all children
are measured in all the interviews. As shown in Appendix Table B1, there are over 2,000
Hispanic, over 3,000 black, and over 6,000 non‐black and non‐Hispanic (henceforth,
white) children in the CNLSY/79. More important for this paper, many children were born
many years before 1983. As a result, we do not observe early measures of investments or
skills for around 30% and 40% of the white and black sample, respectively. In other
words, the most that one can hope for is to obtain the full data for 60% of the black
children and 70% of the white children. Unfortunately, even these rates are not possible
because of other missing data issues.

There is also substantial missing information on proxy measures of health at birth – birth
weight, birth length, gestational age, and number of days in the hospital after birth. They
are important not only for the objective estimation of the technology of skill formation
but also for the creation of scenarios for the elicitation of subjective beliefs. The
measures of health at birth are reported by the mother and the information is available
for 1,366 Hispanic, 1,760 black, and 3,961 white children, respectively.

In order to estimate the technology of skill formation, we also need data on skills and
investments around age 24 months. If we were to use only the children whose skills are
measured between 22 and 26 months, the sample would be too small (184 Hispanic, 242
black, and 588 white children). In order to have a larger sample size, we consider intervals
centered at age 24 months. The cost of this choice is that we add individuals whose skills
are measured with different MSD items. The items at younger ages focus on dimensions
of skills that may be differentially affected by parental investments. If we include the
individuals whose skills and investments are measured between (and including) 13 and 35

25
   Note that the definitions of the baby’s health at birth are slightly different. The “poor” health at birth in
the CAPI survey was 18 inches long at birth versus 19 inches in the ACASI interview; the “good” health at
birth in the CAPI survey was 8 pounds at birth versus 7 pounds in the ACASI survey.
26
   The NLSY/79 respondents are a representative sample of U.S. women born between 1957 and 1964.
months, we have 913 Hispanic, 1,182 black and 2,626 white children. If we make the
width a little narrower and include only the children whose skills and investments were
measured between (and including) 16 and 32 months, then our sample is smaller: 685
Hispanic, 882 blacks, and 1,948 whites. Finally, if we make the band even narrower and
consider only the individuals with data collected between (and including) 19 and 29
months, then our sample size is substantially smaller and contains only 435 Hispanic, 548
black children, and 1,260 white children.

B.2. Summary statistics

Appendix Table B2 contains descriptive statistics used in the estimation of the technology
of skill formation. In our sample, the typical child's skill level is close to 25.5 months.
Given that the typical child is interviewed at age 27.8 months, this implies a mental
development delay of around 2.3 months.

Appendix Table B2 also shows differences between the skills of Hispanic, black, and white
children. According to the MSD instrument, black children tend to have more skills at age
24 months than the observationally equivalent Hispanic and white children. However, the
black‐white difference is neither large nor statistically significant after we control for the
child's gender, birth order, and age at date of the measurement, as well as the age of the
mother at the birth of the child (Appendix Table B3). The same conclusion holds even
after we have added dummies for maternal education, a measure of maternal skills, and a
variable that contains information on permanent family income.

Interestingly, Appendix Table B3 shows large differences across gender and birth order.
The typical female has a developmental advantage of around two and half months. The
second‐born child is 1.5 months less developed than his older sibling, and this difference
is larger for children with higher birth order. Columns 2 and 3 in Appendix Table B3
display the heterogeneity of skills around age 24 months across and within families.
Interestingly, even within families there is a large discrepancy between boys and girls and
among siblings of different birth order.

Health at birth is scaled and located by gestational age. As expected, the health at birth of
the typical child in our sample analysis is around 9 months. There is a small difference in
this dimension across races and black children tend to be worse off than Hispanic or
white children in this dimension. If we control for the child's gender, birth order, and the
mother's age at the time of the birth of the child, we conclude that the difference
between white and black children is roughly about four days as measured on the scale of
health at birth (Appendix Table B3). About a quarter of this difference can be accounted
for by the difference in maternal education, maternal skills, and permanent family income
across the groups.

The gender gap in health at birth is the opposite to those found in skills at age 24 months:
the girls’ stocks of        at birth are lower than boys’. This is true whether we look at
variation across or within families. The birth‐order gaps are mostly small and not
statistically significant. (Appendix Table B3, columns 4‐6).

Appendix Table B2 also shows that the typical child receives a little under two months of
investment per year. However, there is large heterogeneity: the child in the 90th
percentile receives almost twice the amount of investments as the child in the 10th
percentile. The black‐white gap in investments is around a half month per year (in favor
of white children) once we account for the child's gender, birth order, and age at
interview as well as maternal age at the birth of the child (Appendix Table B3).
Furthermore, only 30% of this difference is explained by maternal education, maternal
skills, and permanent family income.

As shown in Appendix Table B3, girls tend to receive slightly more investments. The birth‐
order gap is substantially larger: the first‐born child receives between 4.7 and 6.5 more
days of investments per year than the second‐born. The third‐born is allocated at least
one fewer week of investments per year than the first‐born child. The variation within
families confirms differences between genders or among siblings of different birth order.

We finish this subsection by comparing the variability of residuals of key variables (skills
around 24 months, health at birth, and investments) across and within families. This is
important because we rely on variation within families to estimate the technology of skill
formation. Appendix Figure B1 plots the histograms of the cognitive skill residuals around
age 24 months, health at birth, and investments. In order to produce these residuals, we
regress the key variable of interest against dummies for the child's gender, birth order,
and age at the time of the interview, as well as maternal age at the time of the birth of
the child. The top row shows the histogram of the residuals across all families. The
bottom row shows the histogram of deviation of the residuals with respect to the family
average residual. Interestingly, our estimates indicate that 20% to 30% of the variability of
residualized key variables is attributed to within‐family variability, while the bulk of the
variability (70% to 80%) is due to unmeasured factors that vary across families.
C Measurement of Child Development and Investments in the CNLSY/79

C.1 Construction of the measure of cognitive skills at age 24 months

Several problems arise in the use of the MSD scale as a measure of early human capital.
First, Cunha, Heckman, and Schennach (2010) find evidence that the MSD is
contaminated with measurement error. One reason why the MSD has measurement error
may be that it has relatively few items. For example, the Bayley Scale of Infant
Development has a total of 64 items – 32 items measure mental development and the
other 32 items measure motor development. In comparison, the MSD has only 15 items.
Another reason that may generate measurement error is the fact that the MSD is based
on maternal reports. In contrast, the Bayley Scale of Infant Development involves direct
observation of the child by a trained expert in child development.

To mitigate the problem of measurement error, we conduct item response theory (IRT)
analysis and treat the mother's responses as repeated binary indicators of her child's
ability. To understand how IRT can help mitigate measurement error, note that the child's
raw score in the MSD is simply the number of "yes" answers that the mother reports for
the child. If all items were of identical difficulty, then this simple average is the best that
one could achieve to estimate a child's ability. To the extent that the items differ in their
level of difficulty, a weighted average can provide a more precise estimate of the child's
ability by assigning a higher weight to more difficult items. IRT analysis provides a way to
obtain these weights and makes it possible to estimate the child's ability as precisely as
possible.
      ∗
Let    ,   denote the latent variable that is determined according to:
 ∗
  ,          ,       ,   ,       ,   .


The variable , is the child’s (latent) cognitive ability around age 24 months and is
independent of the error term , , which is i.i.d. across children and items . The
variable ∗, is not observed. Instead, we observe ,        1 if, and only if, ∗, 0 and
  ,        0, otherwise. Thus:

       ,         1   ,       1           ,   ,   ,   ,   ,     1           ,     ,   ,
where is the distribution of , . The parameter , represents the location of item . In
the case of cognitive testing, the higher the value of , , the higher the difficulty of the
item. The parameter , represents the discrimination of the item: when , is high,
children with low ability have a much smaller chance of correctly performing a given task
  than children with high ability.

Estimation of the IRT model is done via maximum likelihood. Assume that , is i.i.d.
across children and let     denote its density function. The problem is to choose
parameter vectors                                 ,   ,…,      ,           and                            ,…,       ,       as well as a density
function  that solves:

                                                                                               ,
max     ,       ,   ∏       ∏                          ,           ,       ,                       1
                                    ,
            ,       ,   ,                                                                          (B1)

In principle, it would be possible to use the CNLSY/79 data to estimate the parameters
and       and the density function           in (B1). Although the CNLSY/79 sample is
representative of the children of the women born between 1957 and 1964, it is not a
representative sample of U.S. children in general. For this reason, we use the data from
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1988‐1994 (NHANES). Interestingly,
the MSD scale is used in both studies.

In our empirical implementation, we assume that                                                                 ,   ∼        0,1       and
∑                   ,       ,   ,       ,    where                     ,       ,       ,       ,       is the density of a normal random
variable with mean                      ,   and variance                   ,   . The term                   is the weight of the element
and satisfies ∑            1. To fix the location of                                                    , we impose the restriction that
∑           ,   0. To fix the scale of , we set ,                                                       1. Appendix Table C1 presents the
estimated parameters      and      for the 48 items of the MSD scale. Note that there is
substantial heterogeneity across items in terms of difficulty and discrimination power.

Next, we estimate , for each child in the NHANES data set. This is done by solving for
each child the following problem:

                                                                                   ,                                               ,
    ,   argmax ∏                              ,            ,   ,                           1               ,            ,    ,
                                    (B2)

If , were continuous measures and              was the normal density, then the solution of
(B2) would be given by the Bartlett scores of the factor , . The advantage of the Bartlett
scores is that they produce unbiased estimates of the factors, which is one of the reasons
we choose this approach.

Importantly, , addresses measurement error. Items that are more difficult or have
more discriminating power obtain a higher weight. However, the IRT analysis per se does
not produce estimates of cognitive skills that have a natural metric. To do so, we explore
the fact that children as young as two months old and as old as 47 months old were
assessed by NANHES. As one would expect, there is a monotonic relationship between
the MSD score and the child’s age at the time of the test (Appendix Figure C1). It is this
monotonic relationship that we explore to transform the test score in an estimated “age
of development.”

For each age (measured in months), let                                   ,           . That is,
         is the median MSD score among children who were exactly months old at the
time of the MSD test. Appendix Figure C2 plots the relationship between age (in the
horizontal axis) and median score           . Interestingly, as shown in Appendix Figure C2,
the empirical relationship is very well approximated by the following function:

                   ln


                                                                     ,
where     and     are estimated by OLS. Note that the quantity               is the child’s MSD
score written in terms of developmental age. In other words, a child whose score is          ,
                                                   ,
has the skills of children who are exactly             months old. In the estimation of the
                                                       ,
technology of skill formation (2), we use ln   ,            as the dependent variable in our
objective estimation of the technology of skill formation in Section 5.2.

C.2 Construction of investment data

To obtain a measure of investment in the metric of time, we proceed in two steps. First,
we estimate the distribution of time spent investing in children from the Child
Development Supplement of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics ‐ Child Development
Supplement (PSID‐CDS). The PSID‐CDS asks parents to report their children time diaries
for two days of the week (one weekday and one weekend day, both picked randomly). It
is possible to use this information to construct a measure of parental investments in
hours of interaction with their child per day. However, for consistency with the measures
of cognitive skills, we measure investments in number of months per year.27 28 We
approximate the density of time investment time from the PSID‐CDS data with a mixture
of normal densities. Let      denote the distribution of time investment estimated from
the PSID‐CDS sample.

We then impose the same distribution on the factor that is extracted from the HOME‐SF
items from the CNLSY/79. Specifically, let , denote an item of the HOME‐SF scale. We
assume that the relationship between observed , and latent investment is given by
the following equation:

     ,        ,    ,        ,


where     ,   ~   0,   ,   is measurement error,        ~    is independent from        ,   and    is the
distribution of investment estimated from the PSID‐CDS data on time investments.

D Direct elicitation of probabilities

We now describe an alternative way to elicit expectations about the parameter . The
advantage of the approach described here is that it does not require interpolation
assumptions to predict the probability at a given target age. As originally conceived, the
MSD scale are maternal self‐reports indicating, with yes/no answers, whether a child has
reached a particular developmental milestone by a given age. We have changed the
instrument so that, instead of yes/no answers, the mother reports the subjective
probability that a developmental milestone will be reached at a given age (e.g., 24
months) depending on a level of investments and the infant’s characteristics at birth. For
example, we show the mother what a high level of investment means that the mother
spends 4 hours a day interacting with the child. We tell the mother that the child is born
normal weight at birth, normal length at birth, and normal gestation length. We then ask
the respondent to provide the subjective probability using a sliding scale on the computer
screen that ranges from 0 to 100. This process is repeated for three other combinations
of investments and child health at birth (See Figure D1).



27
   The stocks of cognitive skills and health at birth are measured in months. The flow of investment is
measured in months per year.
28
   The conversion is simple: hours per day with the child is equivalent to 365 hours per year. Note that
there are 365/12 days in a month. As a result, there are 24           730 hours in a month. Thus, 365
                                       /
hours per year are equivalent to              months per year. For example, it is equivalent to say that a
                                   /
mother spends 2 hours per day or 1 month per year with the child.
We chose to use sliding scales for two reasons. First, they allow us to combine verbal and
numerical representations of probabilistic statements. Evidence in cognitive psychology
shows that subjects best communicate their beliefs when they are given access to verbal
expressions of probabilistic statements (Wallsten et al. 1986). The labels representing
probabilities in Figure D1 (e.g., “Toss‐up”) were chosen according to the findings
described in Hamm (1991). Second, Delavande, Giné, and McKenzie (2011) show that
individuals report probabilities more accurately when their beliefs are represented with
visual instruments.

In our implementation of this approach, our video explains to the mother that the “high”
investment is four hours and the “low” investment is three hours. In terms of the baby’s
health at birth, we defined the “healthy” baby is the one whose gestation lasts nine
months, weighs seven pounds at birth, and stays at most three days at the hospital. We
define the “not healthy” baby the one whose gestation was short (only seven months),
the weight at birth was only five pounds, and that the baby had to stay in the hospital for
seven days after birth.

As shown in Section 4.3, the direct elicitation of probabilities produces expectations
about       that are close to the ones generated by the upper and lower triangular
distributions at target ages 28 and 32 months. Our analyses of measurement error and
model fit indicate that these methods are among the top performing ones when we use
the elicitation of expectations through the age‐range approach. Although the direct
elicitation of probabilities does not require any assumption about the interpolation
method, it does have other problems. As discussed in Section 3.2.3, if respondents
understand the instrument well, we would expect them to report lower probabilities for
items that are more difficult once we hold constant investment and the baby’s health at
birth. Unfortunately, as shown in Table D1, this is not what happens with the direct
elicitation of probabilities. Remarkably, the probabilities across items fluctuate around
75% for Scenario “1”, 56% for Scenario “2”, 70% for Scenario “3” and 50% for Scenario
“4”. Interestingly, the findings confirm our conclusion that respondents understand that
the production function is monotonic, but they also have different returns for

E Implementation of the Arellano‐Bonhomme Procedure

In what follows, suppose that each mother has           children. Let Γ              ′ and
Β          ′ . Define the matrices and as:
            1        ,                 ln           ,,        ,
            ⋮        ⋮                          ⋮             ⋮
            1        ,                 ln           ,,        ,


We rewrite (8) as:

ln      ,            Β       Γ         ,    .

Note that ln , , is in the matrix , which has a common parameter vector Β. Although it
would be interesting to allow the parameter to vary across , this is costly: As we
increase the number of parameters that vary across individuals, we also need to increase
the number of children observed for each mother. So, when , , and vary across
mothers , it is necessary to observe at least four children for each mother.
Unfortunately, there are very few respondents who satisfy this condition in the CNLSY/79
data set.

Let                                             . The estimator for Β is:

Β           ∑                      ∑                     ln       ,   .

We use Β to obtain an estimator for Γ :

Γ                            ln    ,                Β .

Clearly, we can use Γ to estimate Γ                                       Γ :

Γ           ∑    Γ.

Next, define the variance of orthogonal (to                                     ) residuals as           ∑   ln   ,

    Β           ln       ,        Β . Then, an estimator of Σ                           Γ is given by:

Σ           ∑        Γ       Γ     Γ        Γ                         ∑           .
Appendix Figure A1
                                     Appendix Figure A2
                 Kernel density of expected human capital at age 24 months
                 Health at birth is good                                Investment is high
                 High versus low investments                        Good versus poor health at birth
0 .5 1 1.5




                                                   0 .5 1 1.5
             2      2.5          3     3.5     4                2       2.5          3       3.5       4
                                 x                                                   x

                          High           Low                                  High             Low



                  Health at birth is poor                                Investment is low
                 High versus low investments                        Good versus poor health at birth
0 .5 1 1.5




                                                   0 .5 1 1.5



             2      2.5          3     3.5     4                2       2.5          3       3.5       4
                                 x                                                   x

                          High           Low                                  High             Low
Appendix Figure A3
                                                  Appendix Table A1
                                             Demographic Characteristics
                                         MKIDS African‐American Participants
                            Number of observations = 335 of which 201 (60%) are primiparous

                                                                            Age Group

                                               18‐20          21‐25           26‐30             31‐35           36+

Overall (Fraction)                             35.52          46.57           12.24             3.87            1.80
Primiparous                                    47.76          38.31           10.95             1.50            1.49
Non‐primiparous                                17.16          58.96           14.19             7.47            2.24

                                                                          Education Level

                                            Dropout or     High School                      2‐Year College 4‐Year College
                                                                          Some College
                                               GED          Graduate                          Graduate       Graduate

Overall (Fraction)                             19.40          38.51           30.75             4.48            6.87
Primiparous                                    18.91          39.30           30.35             2.99            8.46
Non‐primiparous                                20.15          37.31           31.34             6.72            4.48

                                                                 Household income ($/month)

                                               10th           25th            50th              75th           90th
                                             percentile     percentile      percentile        percentile     percentile
Overall ($/Month)                             319.00         800.00          1500.00           2300.00        3200.00
Overall ‐ Location in US Distribution1           2              6              19                28             40
Primiparous                                   209.00         800.00          1500.00           2500.00        3500.00
Non‐primiparous                               360.00         705.00          1500.00           2028.00        2900.00

                                                                   Type of Medical Insurance

                                               Private
                                                            Medicaid          Other
                                             Insurance
Overall (Fraction)                              7.76          87.46            4.78
Primiparous                                     9.95          86.57            3.48
Non‐primiparous                                 4.48          88.81            6.72

                                                                          Marital Status

                                                          Cohabiting or    Separated or
                                               Single
                                                            married          divorced
Overall (Fraction)                             80.54          18.26            1.20
Primiparous                                    83.08          15.92            1.00
Non‐primiparous                                76.69          21.80            1.50
1
    US Census Bureau
                                                                                         Appendix Table A2
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                     Average lowest and highest age by MSD item and scenario
                                                                                                                2                                                                    2
                                                                                      Health at birth is "good"                                            Health at birth is "poor"
                                                                       Investment is "high"3              Investment in "low"3              Investment is "high"3              Investment in "low"3
                                                                            Scenario 1                         Scenario 3                        Scenario 2                         Scenario 4
                                                                     Lowest age Highest age             Lowest age Highest age            Lowest age Highest age             Lowest age Highest age
MSD 30: Let someone know, without crying, that wearing wet
                                                                        14.58          28.39              18.52           32.74              16.81          30.32               21.11          34.16
or soiled pants or diapers bothers him or her?

MSD 35: Speak a partial sentence of 3 words or more?                    22.26          35.69              26.63           39.02              24.66          37.88               29.09          40.53

MSD 37: Walk upstairs by himself/herself without holding on to
                                                                        22.47          36.15              25.42           38.16              25.39          38.09               28.29          39.86
a rail?
MSD 44: Wash and dry his/her hands without any help except
                                                                        24.03          37.34              27.37           39.53              26.08          38.54               29.53          41.22
for turning the water on and off?
MSD 39: Walk upstairs by himself/herself with no help, stepping
                                                                        24.23          37.44              27.22           39.99              26.69          39.15               29.68          41.27
on each step with only one foot?

MSD 38: Count 3 objects correctly?                                      25.08          37.72              28.70           40.84              26.54          38.63               30.50          42.26

MSD45: Dress himself/herself without any help except for tying
                                                                        29.96          42.27              32.87           43.77              31.77          42.76               35.00          44.37
shoes?

MSD 46: Go to the toilet alone?                                         25.86          38.20              29.04           40.53              28.05          39.84               31.53          42.23


MSD 40: Know his/her age and sex?                                       25.35          38.70              28.97           40.91              27.16          39.99               31.10          42.35


MSD 43: Do a somersault without help from anybody?                      28.78          40.49              31.66           42.45              31.04          41.84               34.09          43.72


MSD 42: Pedal a tricycle at least 10 feet?                              30.16          41.44              32.92           43.68              32.04          42.49               34.98          45.01


MSD 41: Say the names of at least 4 colors?                             26.06          38.85              30.23           41.84              28.24          39.86               32.08          43.30

MSD 36: Say his/her first and last name together without
                                                                        27.30          39.37              30.97           41.81              28.64          40.42               32.88          43.00
someone's help?

MSD 47: Count out loud up to 10?                                        27.96          40.58              31.42           42.96              29.11          41.28               33.03          43.78

MSD 48: Draw a picture of a man or woman with at least 2 parts
                                                                        33.42          43.35              35.85           44.59              34.16          43.78               37.13          45.34
of the body besides a head?
1
    MSD items are listed in descending order with respect to the probability that children age 24 months are able to execute the task.
2
 Heath at birth is "good" if the baby weighs 8 pounds at birth, is 20 inches long at birth, and the gestational age is 9 months. It is "poor" if the baby weighs 5 pounds at birth, is 18 inches long at
birth, and the gestational age is 7 months.
3
    Investment is "high" when mother spends 6 hours/day interacting with the child and is "low" when the mother spends 2 hours/day.
                                                                                   Appendix Table A3
                                                            Average probability by age 24 months by MSD item and scenario1
                                                                                                        Health at birth is "good"2                  Health condition at birth is "poor"2
                                                                                                     Scenario 1             Scenario 3               Scenario 2             Scenario 4
                                                                                                     Investment is          Investment in           Investment is          Investment in
                                                                                   NHANES                     3
                                                                                                        "high"                  "low"3                 "high"3                 "low"3
MSD 30: Let someone know, without crying, that wearing wet or soiled
                                                                                   92.52%                66.32%                 41.86%                 55.26%                 38.48%
pants or diapers bothers him or her?

MSD 35: Speak a partial sentence of 3 words or more?                               88.54%                31.29%                 19.51%                 22.44%                 16.06%

MSD 39: Walk upstairs by himself/herself with no help, stepping on each
                                                                                   62.11%                24.57%                 15.55%                 21.16%                 16.19%
step with only one foot?

MSD45: Dress himself/herself without any help except for tying shoes?              47.92%                21.92%                 14.98%                 19.44%                 16.34%

MSD 40: Know his/her age and sex?                                                  42.55%                18.37%                 17.20%                 19.26%                 20.50%

MSD 41: Say the names of at least 4 colors?                                        32.98%                13.71%                 13.09%                 18.21%                 20.39%

1
    MSD items are listed in descending order with respect to the probability that children age 24 months are able to execute the task.
2
 Heath at birth is "good" if the baby weighs 8 pounds at birth, is 20 inches long at birth, and the gestational age is 9 months. It is "poor" if the baby weighs 5 pounds at birth, is 18
inches long at birth, and the gestational age is 7 months.
3
    Investment is "high" when mother spends 6 hours/day interacting with the child and is "low" when the mother spends 2 hours/day.
                                                                           Appendix Table A4
                                                          Logistic Approximation of NHANES MSD Items by Age
                                                                                Panel A
                    Let someone know, without
                                                                                  Say his/her first and last       Walk upstairs by
                    crying, that wearing wet or Speak a partial sentence of 3
                                                                                  name together without         himself/herself without       Count 3 objects correctly?
                       soiled pants or diapers        words or more?
                                                                                     someone's help?              holding on to a rail?
VARIABLES               bothers him or her?

Intercept                    ‐11.05***                      ‐9.921***                       ‐10.10***                  ‐10.18***                      ‐9.860***
                                (0.29)                         (0.39)                          (0.46)                     (0.40)                         (0.36)
Age                           2.010***                       0.742***                        0.995***                   1.018***                       0.667***
                                (0.10)                         (0.16)                          (0.19)                     (0.22)                         (0.20)
Age squared                  ‐0.148***                     ‐1.150E‐02                      ‐0.0679***                   ‐0.0437*                      ‐1.430E‐02
                                (0.01)                         (0.02)                          (0.02)                     (0.02)                         (0.02)
Age cubed                   0.00565***                      4.870E‐05                      0.00281***                   1.330E‐03                      2.470E‐04
                                (0.00)                         (0.00)                          (0.00)                     (0.00)                         (0.00)
Age to the fourth          ‐9.53e‐05***                    ‐1.430E‐06                     ‐5.43e‐05***                 ‐2.400E‐05                     ‐4.920E‐06
                                (0.00)                         (0.00)                          (0.00)                     (0.00)                         (0.00)
Age to the fifth            5.78e‐07***                     3.100E‐08                      3.87e‐07***                  1.800E‐07                      5.300E‐08
                                (0.00)                         (0.00)                          (0.00)                     (0.00)                         (0.00)
Observations                     17                             37                             37                           34                            34
R‐squared                      0.999                          0.994                          0.986                        0.992                         0.993

                                                                                Panel B
                          Walk upstairs by
                    himself/herself with no help,                               Say the names of at least 4    Pedal a tricycle at least 10    Do a somersault without
                                                    Know his/her age and sex?
                     stepping on each step with                                           colors?                         feet?                 help from anybody?
                           only one foot?

Intercept                     ‐10.07***                    ‐10.15***                        ‐9.819***                   ‐10.08***                      ‐10.46***
                                (0.49)                        (0.39)                          (0.34)                      (0.41)                         (0.41)
Age                           0.884***                      1.012***                         0.627**                    0.911***                       1.319***
                                (0.27)                        (0.22)                          (0.26)                      (0.30)                         (0.31)
Age squared                  ‐3.500E‐02                    ‐0.0609**                       ‐1.890E‐02                  ‐4.720E‐02                      ‐0.0756**
                                (0.03)                        (0.02)                          (0.03)                      (0.03)                         (0.03)
Age cubed                     1.090E‐03                    0.00235**                        6.040E‐04                   1.700E‐03                      0.00249*
                                (0.00)                        (0.00)                          (0.00)                      (0.00)                         (0.00)
Age to the fourth            ‐2.160E‐05                   ‐4.49e‐05**                      ‐1.380E‐05                  ‐3.210E‐05                     ‐4.33e‐05*
                                (0.00)                        (0.00)                          (0.00)                      (0.00)                         (0.00)
Age to the fifth              1.740E‐07                   3.23e‐07***                       1.250E‐07                   2.370E‐07                     3.03e‐07**
                                (0.00)                        (0.00)                          (0.00)                      (0.00)                         (0.00)
Observations                    34                             34                             31                           31                            31
R‐squared                      0.985                          0.99                           0.994                        0.992                         0.991

                                                                                Panel C

                     Wash and dry his/her hands     Dress himself/herself                                                                     Draw a picture of a man or
                     without any help except for without any help except for      Go to the toilet alone?      Count out loud up to 10?       woman with at least 2 parts
                    turning the water on and off?       tying shoes?                                                                          of the body besides a head?


Intercept                     ‐11.18***                     ‐10.51***                      ‐11.00***                   ‐8.731***                       ‐9.714***
                                (0.99)                        (0.89)                         (0.93)                       (0.39)                         (0.77)
Age                            2.114**                     1.386E+00                        1.937**                   ‐5.660E‐01                       5.340E‐01
                                (0.93)                        (0.83)                         (0.87)                       (0.36)                         (0.78)
Age squared                  ‐1.540E‐01                    ‐9.360E‐02                       ‐0.157*                     0.0887**                      ‐3.350E‐02
                                (0.09)                        (0.08)                         (0.09)                       (0.04)                         (0.08)
Age cubed                    5.490E‐03                      3.440E‐03                      0.00614*                   ‐0.00315**                       1.600E‐03
                                (0.00)                        (0.00)                         (0.00)                       (0.00)                         (0.00)
Age to the fourth            ‐9.150E‐05                    ‐6.040E‐05                     ‐0.000107*                   4.33e‐05*                      ‐3.510E‐05
                                (0.00)                        (0.00)                         (0.00)                       (0.00)                         (0.00)
Age to the fifth              5.740E‐07                     4.030E‐07                      6.85e‐07*                  ‐1.900E‐07                       2.790E‐07
                                (0.00)                        (0.00)                         (0.00)                       (0.00)                         (0.00)
Observations                     27                             28                             28                           28                            26
R‐squared                      0.988                          0.983                          0.988                        0.996                         0.994
Standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                                                                 Appendix Table A5
                                                          Decomposition of measurement error

                                                                                                                                   Share of variance due to
                                                                               Share of variance due to Share of variance due to
                 MSD Item                      Scenario     Total Variance                                                            item and scenario
                                                                                         signal         item measurement error
                                                                                                                                     measurement error

                                                  1            0.6885                  12.22%                   52.23%                     35.55%
MSD 30: Let someone know, without crying,
                                                  2            0.6171                  12.07%                   58.28%                     29.65%
that wearing wet or soiled pants or diapers
                                                  3            0.6469                  11.32%                   55.59%                     33.09%
           bothers him or her?
                                                  4            0.7197                  11.23%                   49.97%                     38.80%

                                                  1            0.6156                  27.17%                   27.90%                     39.26%
   MSD 35: Speak a partial sentence of 3          2            0.5561                  26.64%                   30.88%                     36.93%
             words or more?                       3            0.4675                  31.15%                   36.74%                     25.62%
                                                  4            0.4866                  33.03%                   35.30%                     24.79%

                                                  1            0.5457                  50.05%                   27.83%                     24.84%
  MSD 36: Say his/her first and last name         2            0.4572                  52.91%                   33.22%                     16.75%
   together without someone's help?               3            0.4614                  51.54%                   32.91%                     18.35%
                                                  4            0.5324                  49.28%                   28.52%                     24.88%
                                                  1            0.7349                  33.23%                   41.14%                     25.62%
 MSD 37: Walk upstairs by himself/herself         2            0.6726                  32.16%                   44.95%                     22.89%
      without holding on to a rail?               3            0.6769                  31.41%                   44.67%                     23.91%
                                                  4            0.7517                  31.21%                   40.23%                     28.56%

                                                  1            0.5915                  45.90%                   22.09%                     34.38%
                                                  2            0.4753                  50.60%                   27.50%                     24.52%
    MSD 38: Count 3 objects correctly?
                                                  3            0.4240                  55.75%                   30.82%                     16.31%
                                                  4            0.4459                  58.50%                   29.31%                     15.21%

                                                  1            0.7827                  33.59%                   38.31%                     29.32%
 MSD 39: Walk upstairs by himself/herself
                                                  2            0.6864                  33.93%                   43.68%                     23.62%
 with no help, stepping on each step with
                                                  3            0.6770                  33.82%                   44.29%                     23.12%
              only one foot?
                                                  4            0.6754                  37.41%                   44.40%                     19.55%

                                                  1            0.6609                  44.91%                   30.26%                     29.00%
                                                  2            0.6001                  43.80%                   28.33%                     31.94%
   MSD 40: Know his/her age and sex?
                                                  3            0.5543                  46.62%                   23.13%                     34.58%
                                                  4            0.6095                  46.79%                   26.11%                     31.45%

                                                  1            0.4614                  53.52%                   20.71%                     26.06%
                                                  2            0.3982                  54.93%                   24.01%                     21.37%
MSD 41: Say the names of at least 4 colors?
                                                  3            0.3798                  56.61%                   25.17%                     18.54%
                                                  4            0.4006                  59.23%                   23.86%                     17.24%

                                                  1            0.5850                  37.53%                   36.44%                     23.98%
                                                  2            0.5556                  35.00%                   38.37%                     24.71%
 MSD 42: Pedal a tricycle at least 10 feet?
                                                  3            0.5084                  37.60%                   41.93%                     18.42%
                                                  4            0.5732                  36.80%                   37.19%                     24.00%

                                                  1            1.0449                  23.34%                   44.37%                     32.28%
MSD 43: Do a somersault without help from         2            0.9270                  23.30%                   50.01%                     26.68%
               anybody?                           3            0.8430                  25.19%                   54.99%                     19.80%
                                                  4            1.0300                  22.75%                   45.01%                     32.22%

                                                  1            1.0351                  48.68%                   36.23%                     29.88%
   MSD 44: Wash and dry his/her hands
                                                  2            0.9623                  46.38%                   38.97%                     28.74%
  without any help except for turning the
                                                  3            0.8998                  48.76%                   41.68%                     24.37%
            water on and off?
                                                  4            0.9265                  52.25%                   40.48%                     23.14%
                                                  1            0.7304                  56.77%                   29.11%                     27.32%
MSD 45: Dress himself/herself without any         2            0.6617                  55.51%                   32.14%                     25.26%
      help except for tying shoes?                3            0.7090                  50.93%                   29.99%                     30.92%
                                                  4            0.8167                  48.78%                   26.04%                     36.53%

                                                  1            0.9599                  52.08%                   24.46%                     39.15%
                                                  2            0.8429                  52.53%                   27.85%                     35.43%
      MSD 46: Go to the toilet alone?
                                                  3            0.7411                  58.73%                   31.68%                     27.27%
                                                  4            0.7908                  60.73%                   29.68%                     27.87%

                                                  1            0.2819                  34.77%                   20.49%                     24.63%
                                                  2            0.2519                  34.47%                   22.94%                     22.66%
    MSD 47: Count out loud up to 10?
                                                  3            0.2320                  36.79%                   24.90%                     17.03%
                                                  4            0.2620                  35.94%                   22.05%                     21.22%

                                                  1            0.3671                  21.61%                   21.21%                     40.88%
MSD 48: Draw a picture of a man or woman
                                                  2            0.3179                  22.10%                   14.02%                     47.20%
 with at least 2 parts of the body besides a
                                                  3            0.3315                  20.84%                   18.16%                     45.28%
                    head?                         4            0.3677                  20.73%                   22.81%                     40.82%
                              Appendix Table A6
                            Using expectations data
                   Moments of  from stated choice data
Parental valuation of child development          Mean   Median Std Error
Lower triangular at 32 months                     1.06   0.43    1.41
Upper triangular at 32 months                     1.32   0.46    2.17
Lower triangular at 28 months                     1.11   0.46    1.71
Upper triangular at 28 months                     0.94   0.39    1.30
                         Not using expectations data
Parental valuation of child development        Mean    Median Std Error
Assuming = 0.199                           0.45   0.43    0.11
Assuming = 0.257                           0.35   0.33    0.09
Assuming = 0.283                           0.32   0.30    0.08
                                       Appendix Table A7
                 Objective Estimation of the Technology of Skill Formation
                            Random Coefficient Model for and
               Dependent variable: Natural log of skills around age 24 months1
                                                                       Overall Sample
                                                                      13 to 35 Months
                                     2
Natural logarithm of health at birth                                        0.535
                                                                           (0.410)


                                                                    Mean            Variance
                                                         3
Maternal specific natural logarithm of investments ()             0.190**           0.110
                                                                   (0.094)           (0.57)
Maternal specific intercept ()                                    1.949**           0.071
                                                                   (0.913)           (0.20)

Observations                                                                  303
Number of Mothers                                                             985
Standard errors are estimated by the bootstrap method. The regression has dummy
variables for the child's age at the time of the measurement of the dependent variable and
the child's birth order.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
1
 Skills are measured by the Motor‐Social Development Scale and are scaled in "mental" age
of development.
2
 Health at birth is captured by factor analyzing weight at birth, length at birth, gestational
age, and number of days in hospital. The scale and location of the factor are determined by
gestational age.
3
 Investments are measured by the components of the HOME‐SF instrument. We factor
analyze the items and set the location and the scale of the factor in months/year of direct
engagement between mother and child.
                                                         Appendix Figure B1
                                  Histograms of skills, health at birth, and investments




                                                                 1.5
0 .02 .04 .06 .08
          Density




                                                         Density




                                                                                                               Density
                                                                                                        .2 .4 .6 .8
                                                           1  .5
                                                              0




                                                                                                               0
                         -20      0         20      40                 -3 -2 -1 0         1                              -2       -1     0       1      2
                       Across family skills at 24 mo.                   Across family health at birth                         Across family investments
                                                              2.5




                                                                                                               1.5
                                                              2
0 .02 .04 .06 .08 .1




                                                                                                               1
          Density




                                                         Density




                                                                                                        Density
                                                         1  1.5




                                                                                                               .5
                                                              .5
                                                              0




                                                                                                               0
                         -20 -10 0 10 20                                 -2 -1 0         1     2                         -2       -1      0       1     2
                       Within family skills at 24 mo.                  Within family health at birth                          Within family investments
                                                                                Appendix Table B1
                                                                        CNLSY/79 Black and White Sample
                                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                          Hispanic                Black                  White                    Total
                                                                                  Number             %    Number           %      Number             %   Number            %

Total Sample                                                                       2,209       100.00%    3,187       100.00%     6,095      100.00%     11,491       100.00%


Children born in 1983 or later.                                                    1,520        68.81%    1,942       60.94%      4,259      69.88%      7,721        67.19%


Children born in 1983 or later and measures of health at birth are reported.       1,366        61.84%    1,760       55.22%      3,961      64.99%      7,087        61.67%


Children born in 1983 or later, measures of health at birth are reported, and
                                                                                    913         41.33%    1,182       37.09%      2,626      43.08%      4,721        41.08%
skills and investments between ages 13 and 35 months are observed.

Children born in 1983 or later, measures of health at birth are reported, and
                                                                                    685         31.01%     882        27.67%      1,948      31.96%      3,515        30.59%
skills and investments between ages 16 and 32 months are observed.

Children born in 1983 or later, measures of health at birth are reported, and
                                                                                    435         19.69%     548        17.19%      1,260      20.67%      2,243        19.52%
skills and investments between ages 19 and 29 months are observed.

Children born in 1983 or later, measures of health at birth are reported, and
                                                                                    184         8.33%      242            7.59%    588           9.65%   1,014            8.82%
skills and investments between ages 22 and 26 months are observed.
1
Non‐Hispanic and non‐black children.
                                                             Appendix Table B2
                                                            Descriptive Statistics
                                              Overall Sample          Hispanic Sample              Black Sample             White Sample
                                                N = 4,721                 N = 913                    N = 1,182               N = 2,626
                                            Mean       Std. Error     Mean       Std. Error     Mean       Std. Error     Mean       Std. Error
                             1
Skills around age 24 months                 25.50        10.96        24.07        10.31        26.42        10.85        25.59        11.18
                            2
Health conditions at birth                  9.04         0.44         9.07         0.44         8.95         0.48         9.08         0.41
               3
Investments                                 1.87         0.71         1.59         0.74         1.46         0.66         2.15         0.58
Age skill is measured                       27.80        4.75         27.89        4.91         27.12        4.82         28.08        4.64
Maternal age at birth                       0.49         0.50         0.49         0.50         0.50         0.50         0.49         0.50
Child is female                             0.35         0.48         0.29         0.45         0.28         0.45         0.41         0.49
Child is first born                         0.35         0.48         0.32         0.47         0.34         0.47         0.37         0.48
Child is second born                        0.18         0.39         0.21         0.41         0.21         0.41         0.16         0.37
Child is third born                          0.07         0.26         0.10         0.29         0.10         0.30         0.05         0.22
Child is fourth born                         0.04         0.20         0.08         0.27         0.06         0.24         0.02         0.13
Child is fifth born (or above)              24.59         6.62        24.81         6.63        25.11         6.57        24.28         6.62
1
Skills are measured by the Motor‐Social Development Scale and are scaled in "mental" age of development.

2
 Health conditions at birth are captured by factor analyzing weight at birth, length at birth, gestational age, and number of days at hospital.
The scale and location of the factor are determined by gestational age.

3
 Investments are measured by the components of the HOME‐SF instrument. We factor analyze the items and set the location and the scale
of the factor in months/year of direct engagement between mother and child.
                                                                               Appendix Table B3
                                                                   Descriptive Regressions of Key Variables
                                                                            1
                                               Skills around age 24 months                        Health at birth2                                  Investments3
                                             (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)                (7)            (8)            (9)
                                             OLS             OLS            FE             OLS           OLS            FE                 OLS            OLS            FE
Child is black                            2.017***        2.108***                    ‐0.121***     ‐0.0975***                        ‐0.0975***      ‐0.124***
                                           (0.368)         (0.454)                      (0.023)        (0.027)                           (0.035)        (0.038)
Child is white                            1.722***        1.741***                        0.012        ‐0.015                           0.473***       0.337***
                                           (0.308)         (0.385)                      (0.019)        (0.023)                           (0.030)        (0.034)
Child is female                           2.464***        2.490***      1.936***     ‐0.0513*** ‐0.0568***         ‐0.0361**          0.0707***       0.0877***     0.0733***
                                           (0.209)         (0.247)        (0.29)        (0.013)        (0.015)       (0.015)             (0.016)        (0.018)        (0.017)
Child is second born                     ‐1.523***       ‐1.478***     ‐2.001***          0.019       0.0299*        ‐0.018            ‐0.200***      ‐0.142***     ‐0.0846***
                                           (0.241)         (0.289)        (0.40)        (0.014)        (0.016)       (0.020)             (0.017)        (0.020)        (0.024)
Child is third born                      ‐2.378***       ‐2.262***     ‐3.567***       0.0345*        0.0440*         ‐0.040           ‐0.380***      ‐0.270***      ‐0.159***
                                           (0.291)         (0.372)        (0.64)        (0.018)        (0.023)       (0.035)             (0.024)        (0.030)        (0.041)
Child is fourth born                     ‐2.843***       ‐2.635***     ‐4.150***      0.0896***      0.0979***        ‐0.047           ‐0.493***      ‐0.339***       ‐0.141**
                                           (0.456)         (0.543)        (0.95)        (0.025)        (0.032)       (0.053)             (0.037)        (0.045)        (0.060)
Child is fifth born (or above)           ‐4.120***       ‐3.601***     ‐5.396***         ‐0.033         ‐0.015      ‐0.181**           ‐0.713***      ‐0.512***         ‐0.137
                                           (0.625)         (0.764)        (1.21)        (0.043)        (0.048)       (0.075)             (0.054)        (0.059)        (0.089)
Constant                                  20.20***        12.90***      25.66***       8.994***      8.737***       9.010***            2.214***        0.417*        2.256***
                                           (1.038)         (2.988)        (1.67)        (0.076)        (0.178)       (0.079)             (0.094)        (0.247)        (0.139)

Dummies for age at interview                 Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
Dummies for maternal age at birth            Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes            Yes
                                4
Dummies for maternal education               No             Yes           No (FE)          No              Yes          No (FE)           No             Yes           No (FE)
               5
Maternal skill                               No             Yes           No (FE)          No              Yes          No (FE)           No             Yes           No (FE)
                         6
Permanent family income                      No             Yes           No (FE)          No              Yes          No (FE)           No             Yes           No (FE)

Observations                                4,721          3,421           4,721          4,721           3,421          4,721          4,721           3,421          4,721
R‐squared                                   0.574          0.585           0.65           0.036           0.044          0.03           0.391           0.444          0.171
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

1
Skills are measured by the Motor‐Social Development Scale and are scaled in "mental" age of development.

2
 Health at birth is captured by factor analyzing weight at birth, length at birth, gestational age, and number of days in hospital. The scale and location of the factor are
determined by gestational age.
3
 Investments are measured by the components of the HOME‐SF instrument. We factor analyze the items and set the location and the scale of the factor in months/year of
direct engagement between mother and child.

4
We divide women into two levels of education measured at the time of the mother's first birth: high‐school dropout and GED (omitted), high‐school graduate or above.


5
AFQT (percentiles) and the scores on Rotter Locus of Control and Rosenberg Self‐Esteem Scale.

6
Permanent family income is the average family income between 1986 and 2010.
                                                      Appendix Table B4
                                  Objective Estimation of the Technology of Skill Formation
                               Dependent variable: Natural log of skills around age 24 months 1
                                                                   Maternal Fixed Effect Procedure
                                            13 to 35 Months      16 to 32 Months      19 to 29 Months         22 to 26 Months
                                                   (1)                    (2)                (5)                     (8)
                                     2
Natural logarithm of health at birth            0.563***             0.509***             0.600**                   0.19
                                                 (0.138)               (0.165)             (0.304)                 (0.488)
                                  3
Natural logarithm of investments                0.180***             0.199***             0.257***                0.283***
                                                 (0.020)               (0.027)             (0.038)                 (0.081)
Constant                                        1.822***             1.999***             1.702**                   0.92
                                                 (0.308)               (0.368)             (0.676)                 (1.703)
Observations                                       4,721                3,515                 2,243                 1,014
R‐squared                                          0.734                0.624                 0.516                 0.61
Number of Mothers                                  3,042                2,542                 1,814                  915
Robust standard errors in parentheses. All regressions have dummy variables for: (i) the child's gender, (ii) the child's birth
order, (iii) child's year of birth, (iv) the child's age at the time of the measurement of the MSD score, and (v) maternal age at
the time of the child's birth.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
1
Skills are measured by the Motor‐Social Development Scale and are scaled in "mental" age of development.

2
 Health at birth is captured by factor analyzing weight at birth, length at birth, gestational age, and number of days in
hospital. The scale and location of the factor are determined by gestational age.
3
 Investments are measured by the components of the HOME‐SF instrument. We factor analyze the items and set the
location and the scale of the factor in months/year of direct engagement between mother and child.
                           Appendix Figure C1
                    Scatterplot of score in MSD scale by age
      5
      0
Score by age
     -5
      -10
      -15




               0   10           20            30           40   50
                                 Age (in months)
                                     Appendix Figure C2
                                 Median score in MSD Scale by Age
           4        2
Median score by age
-4    -2   -6 0




                        0   10           20            30            40     50
                                          Age (in months)

                            Median score by age             Fitted values
                                                                                                          Appendix Table C1
                                                                                   Item Response Theory Analysis ‐ Motor‐Social Development Scale
                                                                               National Health And Nutrition Examination Survey ‐ 1988‐1994 (NHANES)
                                                                                                      Item                                                                                                            Item
                                                                                Item Location                                                                                                    Item Location
       Motor‐Social Development Scale Item Description                                           Discrimination           Motor‐Social Development Scale Item Description                                        Discrimination
                                                                                  Parameter                                                                                                        Parameter
                                                                                                   Parameter                                                                                                       Parameter

When lying on stomach on a flat surface, has child lifted head     Mean            4.1648           0.2860         Has your child ever walked at least 2 steps without holding on Mean              2.2288          1.7460
off the surface for a moment?                                      Std Error       0.5797           0.0950         to anything or another person?                                 Std Error         0.2287          0.2364

                                                                   Mean            4.1266           0.3000         Has your child ever shown that he/she wanted something by Mean                   1.6588          0.4191
When lying on stomach, has child ever turned head from side
                                                                                                                   pointing, pulling, or making pleasant sounds rather than crying
to side?                                                           Std Error       1.1818           0.1724                                                                         Std Error        0.0841          0.0599
                                                                                                                   or whining?
                                                                   Mean            5.0000           0.3500         Has your child ever said the name of a familiar object, such as a Mean           0.8479          0.7794
Have child's eyes ever followed a moving object?
                                                                   Std Error       0.0000           0.0000         ball?                                                             Std Error      0.0910          0.1095

Have child's eyes ever followed a moving object all the one        Mean            4.4841           0.4326                                                                          Mean            1.7643          0.8350
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever crawled up at least 2 stairs or steps?
from one side to the other?                                                        1.0742           0.1515                                                                                          0.1117          0.1159
                                                                   Std Error                                                                                                        Std Error

When lying on stomach, has child ever raised head and chest        Mean            2.7998           0.3517         Has your child ever said 2 recognizable words besides mama or Mean               1.1173          0.7985
from surface while resting weight on lower arms or hands?          Std Error       0.4542           0.0828         dada?                                                         Std Error          0.0940          0.1106

                                                                   Mean            4.5187           0.4515         Has your child ever let someone know, without crying, that       Mean            0.3771          0.6227
Has child ever turned head around to look at something?
                                                                   Std Error       1.0898           0.1544         wearing wet (soiled) pants or diapers bothers him or her?        Std Error       0.0677          0.0853
While lying on back and being pulled up to a sitting position,     Mean            2.2546           0.2669                                                                          Mean            1.0166          1.0534
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever walked up at least 2 stairs with one hand
has child ever held head stiffly so that it did not hang back as
                                                                   Std Error       0.3699           0.0661         held or holding the railing?                                     Std Error       0.1061          0.1355
he/she was pulled up?

Has your child ever laughed out loud without being tickled or      Mean            3.2142           0.3757                                                                          Mean            1.2824          1.6217
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever run?
touched?                                                           Std Error       0.2666           0.0634                                                                          Std Error       0.1687          0.2402

Has your child ever held in one hand a moderate size object        Mean            4.3798           0.5883                                                                          Mean            1.0777          0.6667
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever made a line with a crayon or pencil?
such as a block or a rattle?                                       Std Error       0.3061           0.0725                                                                          Std Error       0.0701          0.0862

                                                                   Mean            4.1177           0.6528         Has your child ever fed himself/herself with a spoon or fork     Mean            0.8683          0.7454
Has your child ever rolled over on his/her own on purpose?
                                                                   Std Error       0.2883           0.0888         without spilling much?                                           Std Error       0.0742          0.0942

Has your child ever looked around with eyes for a toy which        Mean            3.4538           0.6233         Has your child ever spoken a partial sentence of 3 words or      Mean           ‐0.1658          1.2167
was lost or not nearby?                                            Std Error       0.2394           0.0832         more?                                                            Std Error       0.1116          0.1471

Has child ever smiled at someone when that person talked to        Mean            3.0725           0.1825         Has your child ever said first and last name together without    Mean           ‐2.1577          1.1441
or smiled at (but did not touch) him or her?                       Std Error       0.1828           0.0421         someone's help?                                                  Std Error       0.1263          0.1373

Has your child ever seemed to enjoy looking in the mirror at       Mean            3.2592           0.4272         Has your child ever walked upstairs by himself/herself without Mean             ‐0.1634          0.6580
himself/herself?                                                   Std Error       0.1596           0.0557         holding on to a rail?                                          Std Error         0.0725          0.0806

Has your child ever picked up small objects such as raisins or     Mean            1.9412           0.5713                                                                          Mean           ‐1.2248          1.2132
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever counted 3 objects correctly?
cookie crumbs using only thumb and first finger?                   Std Error       0.1162           0.0694                                                                          Std Error       0.1277          0.1491
Has your child ever sat alone with no help except for leaning      Mean            3.3750           0.7811         Has your child ever walked up stairs by himself/herself with no Mean            ‐0.4666          0.6267
forward on his/her hands or with just a little help from
                                                                   Std Error       0.2010           0.0984         help, stepping on each step with only one foot?                 Std Error        0.0723          0.0768
someone else?

Has your child ever said recognizable words such as mama or        Mean            1.9950           0.6228                                                                          Mean           ‐1.5018          0.9739
                                                                                                                   Does your child know own age and sex?
dada?                                                              Std Error       0.1362           0.0792                                                                          Std Error       0.1060          0.1172

Has your child ever shown that he/she knows the names of           Mean            1.0182           0.3798                                                                          Mean           ‐1.5706          0.9296
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever said the names of at least 4 colors?
common objects when somebody names them out loud?                  Std Error       0.1081           0.0534                                                                          Std Error       0.1160          0.1150

Has your child ever walked at least 2 steps with one hand held Mean                2.4166           1.0086                                                                          Mean           ‐0.9240          0.6395
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever pedaled a tricycle at least 10 feet?
or holding on to something?                                    Std Error           0.1635           0.1253                                                                          Std Error       0.0822          0.0796

Has your child ever sat for 10 minutes without any support at      Mean            3.2201           0.9782         Has your child ever done a somersault without help from          Mean           ‐0.2674          0.3339
all?                                                               Std Error       0.1635           0.1184         anybody?                                                         Std Error       0.0548          0.0438

                                                                   Mean            3.1257           0.9306         Has your child ever washed and dried hands without any help      Mean            0.3236          0.5845
Has your child ever crawled when left lying on stomach?
                                                                   Std Error       0.1579           0.1123         except for turning the water on and off?                         Std Error       0.0826          0.0780

Has your child ever been pulled from a sitting to standing         Mean            2.7923           0.7174         Has your child ever dressed himself or herself without any help Mean            ‐0.6462          0.5930
position and supported own weight with legs stretched out?         Std Error       0.1373           0.0877         except for tying shoes (and buttoning the backs of dresses)?    Std Error        0.0830          0.0751

Has your child ever waved good‐bye without help from another Mean                  1.6965           0.7900                                                                          Mean           ‐0.5887          0.7900
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever gone to the toilet alone?
person?                                                      Std Error             0.1014           0.0936                                                                          Std Error       0.1010          0.1005

Has your child ever pulled himself/herself to a standing           Mean            3.2154           1.1867                                                                          Mean           ‐2.0115          0.8207
                                                                                                                   Has your child ever counted out loud up to 10?
position without help from another person?                         Std Error       0.2024           0.1571                                                                          Std Error       0.1246          0.1032

Has your child ever stood alone on his/her feet for 10 seconds Mean                2.6768           1.5675         Has your child ever drawn a picture of a man or woman with at Mean              ‐3.0515          0.8036
or more without holding on to anything or another person?      Std Error           0.2246           0.2017         least 2 parts of the body besides a head?                     Std Error          0.1525          0.1031
Appendix Figure D1
                                                                                 Appendix Table D1
                                                          Average probability by age 24 months by MSD item and scenario1
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                 Health condition at birth is "high"               Health condition at birth is "low"2
                                                                                                  Scenario 1             Scenario 3                Scenario 2             Scenario 4
                                                                                                    Investment is          Investment in          Investment is         Investment in
                                                                                  NHANES
                                                                                                       "high"3                 "low"3                "high"3                "low"3
MSD 30: Let someone know, without crying, that wearing wet or soiled
                                                                                  92.52%               78.56%                 70.11%                 54.56%                 51.40%
pants or diapers bothers him or her?

MSD 35: Speak a partial sentence of 3 words or more?                              88.54%               81.66%                 73.71%                 58.79%                 53.58%

MSD 37: Walk upstairs by himself/herself without holding on to a rail?            80.00%               75.90%                 69.20%                 51.39%                 51.52%

MSD 44: Wash and dry his/her hands without any help except for turning
                                                                                  75.79%               77.37%                 70.26%                 58.71%                 54.81%
the water on and off?
MSD 39: Walk upstairs by himself/herself with no help, stepping on each
                                                                                  62.11%               75.51%                 71.49%                 55.01%                 51.87%
step with only one foot?

MSD 38: Count 3 objects correctly?                                                50.00%               80.47%                 75.04%                 60.22%                 54.93%

MSD45: Dress himself/herself without any help except for tying shoes?             47.92%               73.52%                 68.58%                 54.15%                 50.65%

MSD 46: Go to the toilet alone?                                                   43.75%               78.69%                 69.03%                 56.79%                 51.56%

MSD 40: Know his/her age and sex?                                                 42.55%               82.03%                 75.96%                 58.83%                 56.41%

MSD 43: Do a somersault without help from anybody?                                42.11%               67.43%                 61.93%                 47.17%                 44.07%

MSD 42: Pedal a tricycle at least 10 feet?                                        33.33%               72.34%                 66.43%                 53.65%                 48.88%

MSD 41: Say the names of at least 4 colors?                                       32.98%               80.73%                 74.08%                 58.61%                 55.64%

MSD 36: Say his/her first and last name together without someone's help?          26.04%               76.92%                 69.62%                 59.30%                 54.48%

MSD 47: Count out loud up to 10?                                                  13.54%               80.28%                 75.02%                 58.38%                 53.49%

MSD 48: Draw a picture of a man or woman with at least 2 parts of the
                                                                                   2.08%               70.96%                 67.52%                 51.39%                 48.27%
body besides a head?
1
MSD items are listed in descending order with respect to the probability that children age 24 months are able to execute the task.
2
 Heath condition at birth is "high" if the baby weighs 8 pounds at birth, is 20 inches long at birth, and the gestational age is 9 months. It is "low" if the baby weighs 5 pounds at
birth, is 18 inches long at birth, and the gestational age is 7 months.
3
Investment is "high" when mother spends 6 hours/day interacting with the child and is "low" when the mother spends 2 hours/day.
