NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION DYNAMICS AND TIME-VARYING VOLATILITY:
NEW EVIDENCE AND AN SS INTERPRETATION
Joseph S. Vavra
Working Paper 19148
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19148

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

I would like to thank Eduardo Engel for invaluable advice. I also thank the editor Robert Barro, three
anonymous referees and my discussants John Leahy and Martin Eichenbaum. I would also like to
thank Rudi Bachmann, David Berger, Nick Bloom, Francois Gourio, Erik Hurst, Amy Meek, Giuseppe
Moscarini, Guillermo Ordonez, and Tony Smith. I am also grateful for comments from seminar participants
at various universities and conferences. This research received generous support from the Society
for Computing in Economics and Finance student paper prize. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Joseph S. Vavra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Inflation Dynamics and Time-Varying Volatility: New Evidence and an Ss Interpretation
Joseph S. Vavra
NBER Working Paper No. 19148
June 2013
JEL No. D8,E10,E30,E31,E50
ABSTRACT
Is monetary policy less effective at increasing real output during periods of high volatility than during
normal times? In this paper, I argue that greater volatility leads to an increase in aggregate price flexibility
so that nominal stimulus mostly generates inflation rather than output growth. To do this, I construct
price-setting models with "volatility shocks" and show these models match new facts in CPI micro
data that standard price-setting models miss. I then show that these models imply output responds
less to nominal stimulus during times of high volatility. Furthermore, since volatility is countercyclical,
this implies that nominal stimulus has smaller real effects during downturns. For example, the estimated
output response to additional nominal stimulus in September 1995, a time of low volatility, is 55 percent
larger than the response in October 2001, a time of high volatility.

Joseph S. Vavra
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
joseph.vavra@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Is there a link between volatility and the ability of monetary policy to stimulate the
economy? I argue that in price-setting models that are consistent with micro data,
greater volatility leads to greater aggregate price flexibility so that nominal stimulus
generates mostly inflation rather than real output growth. In addition, volatility is
strongly countercyclical. This in turn leads to a reduction in the ability of monetary
policy to stimulate the real economy at precisely the time it is needed most.
An explosion of micro data has led to a large literature studying aggregate priceflexibility through the lens of micro price-setting models. Midrigan (2011) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2010) show that Ss price-setting models where firms face a fixed
cost of price adjustment can capture a variety of micro facts while generating significant aggregate monetary non-neutrality. Furthermore, these models endogenize the
frequency of price adjustment and thus have scope to generate time-varying aggregate
price flexibility. However, it is well-known since Caplin and Spulber (1987) that the
frequency of adjustment is not enough to pin down aggregate price-flexibility in Ss
price-setting models, and Golosov and Lucas (2007) show this in a more quantitative
setting. In addition to the frequency of adjustment, it is necessary to track higher
moments of the distribution of firms’ desired price changes in order to determine the
aggregate price response to changing aggregate conditions.
Towards this end, I use the BLS micro data that underlies the CPI to directly
examine how the distribution of price changes moves over the business cycle. In
particular, I document two new facts: 1) The cross-sectional standard deviation of
price changes is strongly countercyclical: price changes become substantially more
disperse during recessions, when other measures of volatility typically rise. 2) The
standard deviation of price changes comoves strongly with the frequency of price
adjustment in the economy. That is, the dispersion of price changes (conditional on
adjustment) is high when more products are changing prices.
I next assess the ability of standard price-setting models with only aggregate first
moment shocks1 to match these new empirical facts. In particular, I focus on Ss
1

First moment shocks, such as changes in nominal output, shift all firms’ flexible price by the

2

price-setting models because they endogenize both the frequency of adjustment and
the distribution of price changes. While the simplest versions of these models are
easy to reject, more realistic versions such as Midrigan (2011) have had much more
empirical success.
In this paper, I show that my new facts are completely at odds with even sophisticated Ss models that only feature first moment shocks. This is because Ss models
with only first moment shocks imply an extremely robust counterfactual negative correlation between price change dispersion and the frequency of adjustment. I provide
intuition for this result using the analytical framework first developed in Barro (1972)
and then show that this counterfactual negative correlation also holds in more realistic, quantitative versions of the model. Ss models induce an inaction region within
which it is not worth paying the adjustment cost to change prices. I show that while
aggregate first moment shocks can push more firms out of the inaction region and
increase the frequency of adjustment, they must push all firms out of the inaction
region in the same direction, which lowers the dispersion of price changes. A similar negative relationship between price change dispersion and frequency also arises in
response to time-varying fixed costs or market power, so it is a quite general implication of these models. However, this robust implication is easily rejected by my new
empirical evidence.2
While Ss models with aggregate first moment shocks are inconsistent with the
empirical evidence, I show that a diﬀerent and empirically plausible type of shock can
reconcile Ss models with the data. In particular, increases in firm level volatility can
simultaneously increase both the frequency of adjustment and price change dispersion.
Furthermore, such time-variation in volatility is consistent with a growing empirical
literature documenting that volatility rises during recessions.3
Why do "second moment" shocks that increase idiosyncratic volatility lead to
positive comovement between frequency and price change dispersion? Increases in
volatility have two eﬀects: 1) An increase in volatility has a direct eﬀect that pushes
same amount.
2
In contrast, many existing tests of Ss models such as their implications for the duration hazard of
price adjustment are theoretically ambiguous and have led to conflicting empirical evidence. It’s also
worth noting that my evidence rejects other price-setting models for more trivial reasons: the Calvo
model features a constant frequency of adjustment and most pure information processing models
imply that all prices are adjusted every period so the frequency of adjustment is constant at 100%.
3
See Bloom (2009), Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2010), Bachmann and Bayer (2011b), and
Bloom, Floetotto, Jaimovich, Saporta-Eksten, and Terry (2012).

3

more firms to adjust for a given region of inaction. 2) An increase in volatility
increases the option value of waiting, which widens the size of the inaction region
and decreases price adjustment. It is well-known that in response to permanent
increases in volatility, the first eﬀect typically dominates so that both frequency and
price change dispersion grow. In this paper, I show that this "steady-state" intuition
holds in a more realistic environment with transitory increases in volatility. Thus,
Ss price-setting models with volatility shocks are able to match the new empirical
evidence that standard price-setting models miss.
Beyond matching the new facts, countercyclical volatility has important implications for the nominal transmission mechanism. I show that the aggregate price level
becomes much more responsive to nominal shocks during times of high volatility. This
increase in price flexibility then implies that real output responds much less to nominal
shocks in times of high volatility so that the inflation-output tradeoﬀ worsens. The
quantitative importance of this eﬀect is very large. For example, the total response
of real output to nominal stimulus in September 1995, a time of very low volatility,
is 55% larger than the response in October 2001, a time of very high volatility. In
contrast, in Ss models with only first moment shocks, the real response to nominal
shocks is acyclical.
Why does greater volatility lead to greater aggregate price flexibility? Caballero
and Engel (2007) show that in Ss models, the price response to nominal shocks can be
decomposed into two margins: the intensive and extensive margin. In response to a
positive nominal shock, the intensive margin is given by the extra amount that firms
who were already adjusting now raise their prices. The extensive margin is given by
the change in the mix of adjusters. When there is a positive nominal shock, some
firms that would otherwise have left their prices constant now raise prices, while some
firms that would have lowered prices now leave them constant.
When volatility increases, both margins become more important. The frequency
of adjustment rises, and more firms are pushed near the margin of adjustment by
the more volatile shock process. Overall, the price response on impact to a nominal
shock is 36% larger at the 90th percentile of volatility than it is at the 10th percentile of volatility. Eighty percent of this increase is driven by a more responsive
extensive margin rather than by increases in the frequency of adjustment. Thus the
model delivers large time-variation in price flexibility while remaining consistent with
empirically small movements in the frequency of adjustment over the business cycle.
4

For the majority of the quantitative sections of the paper, I focus on a version of
the Golosov and Lucas (2007) model with random menu costs as in Dotsey, King, and
Wolman (1999) and leptokurtic shocks as in Midrigan (2011). These model features
are important for two reasons. First, Golosov and Lucas (2007) shows that the
model without these features exhibits little non-neutrality. Second, as emphasized by
Midrigan (2011), the Golosov and Lucas (2007) model does a poor job of matching
the average distribution of price changes. Thus, my benchmark model captures the
important microeconomic features of the "second-generation state-dependent" models
that Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) argue are consistent with empirical patterns of pricesetting.
Nevertheless, the benchmark model is not without fault. In particular, it assumes
a particularly simple aggregate shock process, which means the model generates price
change dispersion that is moderately too countercyclical and fails to generate humpshaped impulse response functions. However, I enrich the aggregate shock process and
show that the insights of the benchmark model remain: all of the models with only
first moment shocks remain inconsistent with micro evidence while the models with
second moment shocks are consistent with this evidence. More importantly, aggregate
price flexibility continues to rise substantially with volatility. Thus, countercyclical
volatility improves the empirical fit of a wide class of price-setting models and has
important implications for the monetary transmission mechanism.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contains the empirical findings. Section 3 provides context for the empirical results using the menu
cost model popularized by Barro (1972) and Dixit (1991). I show that nearly all
potential shocks in this model induce a counterfactual negative correlation between
price change dispersion and the frequency of adjustment. Only changes in volatility
are consistent with the positive correlation observed in the data. However, while this
simple model provides useful intuition, it nevertheless relies on a number of very strong
assumptions. Section 4 shows that the results from the analytical model remain in an
empirically richer quantitative Ss model. In particular, the quantitative model with
second moment volatility shocks matches the empirical positive correlation between
price change dispersion and frequency while the model with only first moment shocks
continues to generate a counterfactual negative correlation. Section 5 discusses policy
implications of the second moment shocks. Section 6 shows results for extensions of
the benchmark model that allow for richer aggregate shocks, and Section 7 concludes.
5

2

Empirical Results

The restricted access CPI research database collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
(BLS) contains price observations for the thousands of non-shelter items underlying
the CPI from January 1988 through January 2012. Prices are only collected monthly
for the entire sample period in New York, Los Angeles and Chicago so my main
analysis is restricted to these cities.4 The database contains thousands of individual
"quote-lines" with price observations for many months. Quote-lines correspond to an
individual item at a particular outlet. For example, the type of quote-line collected in
the research database might be 2-liter "Brand-X" cola at a particular Chicago outlet.
See Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) for additional description.
This database has received a great deal of attention, beginning with the work of
Bils and Klenow (2004). While initial studies of this micro pricing data focused on
static first moments such as the average frequency and size of price changes, only
recently have more dynamic features of the data begun to receive attention. Klenow
and Malin (2011) provides brief evidence of the relationship between first and higher
moments of inflation and calls for additional attention to this topic. However, there
remains little empirical evidence on price-setting behavior across time.5
In this paper, I focus on the business cycle properties of the distribution of price
changes rather than the relationship between the distribution of price changes and
inflation. In particular, I will show that price change dispersion (the second moment
of the price change distribution) has robust, dynamic patterns with strong implications

be the log price change observed for
for models of price setting. Let  = log −1
6
item  at time . Then, using CPI aggregation weights provided by the BLS, it is
straightforward to compute the cross-sectional dispersion of log price changes for each
month and investigate how it varies over time.
For concreteness, all dispersion numbers condition on price adjustment and thus
exclude zeros. This is not an important restriction, since jointly matching the fre4
Using the full sample increase the sample size from around 15,000 prices per month to around
85,000 prices per month but does not qualitatively aﬀect the results. See Appendix 1.
5
See Klenow and Malin (2011) for more general summaries of the recent literature utilizing this
data.
6
Since there are occasional transcription errors in decimal places, I exclude price changes of greater
than 500%. In addition, the unit of price collection occasionally changes (e.g. One can vs. a six
pack) which can result in spurious price changes due to rounding. I thus exclude price changes less
than 0.1%. Finally, I exclude items with imputed prices and prices which are collected but not used
in the construction of the CPI. My results are not sensitive to these choices.

6

quency of adjustment and the distribution of price changes excluding zeros necessarily
implies matching the distribution of price changes including zeros. In addition, in my
benchmark results I exclude sales and product substitutions.7 Many recent papers
argue that the behavior of prices after excluding sales is likely to be more relevant for
monetary policy.8 Furthermore, Bils (2009) argues that product substitutions induce
a quantitatively significant source of measurement error into price series. Nevertheless, Appendix I discusses the construction of these statistics in more detail and shows
that all of my results are robust to various alternative treatments of the data.
Figure 1 shows the interquartile range of price changes as well as the median
frequency of adjustment. It is clear from this figure that there is a large increase
in the dispersion of price changes during recessions. Furthermore, there is a modest
rise in the frequency of adjustment during recessions. Since both series exhibit highfrequency noise and low-frequency trends, I bandpass filter the two series to leave
only the variation at business cycle frequencies.9 Figure 2 shows that at business
cycle frequencies, two clear patterns emerge. 1) The dispersion of price changes
is countercyclical. 2) There is strong positive comovement between price change
dispersion and the frequency of adjustment.
Tables I and II assess these patterns more formally. Table I shows the relationship
between price-setting statistics and diﬀerent measures of the business cycle. As
suggested by Figures 1 and 2, there is a strong and significant negative correlation
between price change dispersion and the business cycle. (For simplicity I report
Newey-West standard errors to account for autocorrelation. However, other methods
for computing standard errors produced similar results).10 The first row of Table 1
shows that the standard deviation of price changes as well as the interquartile range
both exhibit large negative correlations with the growth rate of industrial production.
The second row of Table I shows that this result is even stronger at business cycle
frequencies. Finally, the third row of Table I regresses price-setting statistics on
recession dummies. This regression shows that the standard deviation of price changes
7

See Appendix 1 for a discussion of the sales filter.
E.g. Eichenbaum, Jaimovich, and Rebelo (2009), Kehoe and Midrigan (2008) and Guimaraes
and Sheedy (2011).
9
See Appendix 1 for a discussion of alternative filtering procedures.
10
Newey-West standard errors may be understated for the business cycle results because they do
not account for the presence of errors induced by the bandpass filter. They can also have bad
small-sample properties. Nevertheless, I have explored various bootstrapping procedures to adjust
standard errors for this concern, and they did not significantly alter my results. Prais-Winsten and
Cochrane-Orcutt estimation also produce similar results.
8

7

increases by almost 25% and the interquartile range by more than 40% during NBER
recessions relative to the non-recession means displayed in row four.
The frequency of adjustment exhibits similar but weaker cyclical patterns. Both
the average and median frequency of adjustment are modestly countercyclical although
the significance varies across specifications. Finally, the kurtosis of price changes is
procyclical. Figure 3 provides a visual complement to the statistical results in Table
I. It compares the overall distribution of price changes during recessions to the distribution during non-recessions. Evident in this figure is the substantial reduction in
small price changes during recessions so that the overall distribution is more disperse.
The final column of Table I shows that in addition to being more countercyclical,
the dispersion of price changes rises more in recessions than the frequency of adjustment.11 In addition, measures of price change dispersion exhibit larger coeﬃcients
of variation, so they move more across time than the frequency of adjustment. This
implies that in price-setting models, movements in price flexibility should arise primarily from movements in price change dispersion rather than from movements in the
frequency of adjustment.
Table II confirms the positive relationship between price change dispersion and the
frequency of adjustment observed in Figure 2. Since my theoretical motivation focuses
on the business cycle dynamics of monetary policy it is worth noting that while there
is significant positive comovement in the raw data, the relationship is much stronger
at business cycle frequencies.
In principle, countercyclical price change dispersion and positive comovement between dispersion and frequency could be driven by compositional changes in the makeup of price changes over the business cycle. There are many potential sources of compositional change over the business cycle: Price decreases are more common during
recessions, and decreases are also larger and more disperse than price increases. The
sectoral composition of price changes might also vary over the business cycle, and it
is well known that there is pervasive heterogeneity in average price-setting behavior
across sectors. Finally, the patterns I document could potentially be driven by product entry and exit across time. For brevity I leave the detailed results for Appendix I,
but I do not find evidence that the aggregate relationships are driven by compositional
changes.
11

For brevity I only report results for IQR/Med. Point estimates for SD/Med, SD/Freq and
IQR/Freq are similar, but the results for SD/Med are insignificant or marginally significant depending
on the particular business cycle measure.

8

In particular, Appendix I shows that while the exact magnitude and statistical
significance varies somewhat, the aggregate results also hold within nearly all sectors,
and they hold separately for both price increases and decreases. Only raw food
exhibits statistically significant patterns that move in the opposite direction from the
aggregate results, and even then, not all specifications are reversed.12 In addition
to these individual sectoral results, I have also run panel regressions with sector level
fixed eﬀects, and they produced similar results. In addition to these sector level
results, following Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) I have recomputed all results using
"standardized price changes" that subtract the mean price change within each ELI and
divide by the average standard deviation of price changes within an ELI. These results
eliminate the possibility that my results are driven by a few sectors with particularly
volatile prices.
Finally, I also find similar results using a balanced panel of prices spanning recessions so that the results are unlikely to be driven by product entry and exit. This
suggests that the countercyclicality of price change dispersion and the positive relationship between price change dispersion and the frequency of adjustment are robust
facts that are common to the majority of items and price changes in the U.S. economy.
The remainder of the paper then takes these empirical facts as given and assesses
the extent to which they can be generated by Ss pricing models. In particular, I
will argue that when viewed through the lens of Ss models, these price-setting facts
strongly suggest that second moment shocks are an important feature of the economic
environment aﬀecting firms’ pricing decisions.

3

Analytical Results

In this section, I use the classic analytical menu cost model popularized by Barro
(1972) and Dixit (1991) to frame the empirical results in the previous section. In
particular, I will show that this model has strong predictions for the relationship
between the frequency of adjustment and the dispersion of price changes, and that
only changes in volatility are consistent with the empirical results.
Firms face a dynamic control problem with state variable  Departures of  from
12

Furthermore, as I will show in the following sections, even a "zero" correlation between price
change dispersion and frequency would still be strong evidence against Ss models with only first
moment shocks. These models will predict a strong negative correlation, for which there is no
empirical support.

9

zero entail a flow cost of  2 and firms discount payoﬀs at rate . When not adjusting,
 follows a Brownian motion. Assume for now that there is no drift so that  = ,
where  is the standard Wiener process. Firms must pay fixed cost  to adjust the
value of . This well-studied environment gives rise to a simple, symmetric  rule.
³ 2 ´14
,
Proposition 1 The optimal policy is no adjustment when ||   where  = 6

and adjusting  to zero when || ≥  In addition, the frequency of adjustment is given
¡  ¢12
 and the standard deviation of price changes is equal to .
by 6

Proof. See Barro (1972) for the first proof of these results (in an environment with
monopolistic competition rather than a quadratic loss function). Dixit (1991) and
Alvarez and Lippi (2012) provide proofs for the simplified quadratic loss function.
The outline of the proofs is reproduced in Appendix 2.
What does this imply for the relationship between the frequency and standard
deviation of price changes? In response to increases in the fixed cost , the frequency
of adjustment is falling while the standard deviation of price changes is rising. Thus,
changes in fixed costs induce a counterfactual negative relationship between price
change dispersion and frequency. Similarly, declines in the cost of deviating from
the optimal price, , also induce a fall in frequency and a rise in the dispersion of
price changes.13 Both parameter changes result in a larger "inaction" region which
increases the dispersion of price changes but reduces their frequency.
In contrast, increasing the volatility of shocks, , leads to a simultaneous increase
in both the standard deviation of price changes and the frequency of adjustment, as in
the data. In the presence of fixed adjustment costs, an increase in volatility increases
the size of the inaction region through a real options eﬀect, which leads to an increase
in the standard deviation of price changes and a decline in the frequency of adjustment.
However, the direct eﬀect of greater volatility means that firms will hit adjustment
bands of a given width more frequently. The two eﬀects work in opposite direction,
but Proposition 1 shows that in steady-state, the direct eﬀect of greater volatility
dominates so that frequency rises. A key question of the quantitative exercises that
follow will be assessing whether this simple result holds out of steady-state in an
environment with transitory shocks to volatility.
To provide additional intuition, Figure 4 shows the eﬀects of an increase in volatility in a discrete time version of the model. The upper panel shows the distribution
13

This parameter can capture, e.g. firm market power.

10

of "price gaps", the diﬀerence between a firm’s current price and the price it would
choose if it adjusts as well as the firms’ inaction region. The bottom panel shows the
implied distribution of observed price changes. Increases in volatility spread out the
distribution of price gaps and also increase the size of the inaction region. Figure
4 shows a case where the increase in the inaction region is small relative to the increase in volatility so that more firms adjust and both dispersion and frequency rise.
However, if the eﬀect on the inaction region was stronger, then the dispersion of price
changes would still rise but frequency might fall. Again, which of these two eﬀects
dominates in response to transitory changes in volatility is a quantitative question.
The above analysis shows that among the free parameters of the model, only
volatility is a promising candidate for explaining the positive empirical relationship
between frequency and price change dispersion. However, this model is explicitly built
to explain how firms respond to shocks to . Can aggregate shocks to  generate a
positive relationship between variance and frequency? I now show that they cannot.
Proposition 2 In an environment with zero inflation, small aggregate shocks to 
do not change either the frequency or standard deviation of price changes. In an
environment with positive trend inflation, small aggregate increases in  raise frequency
and decrease the standard deviation of price changes.
Proof. See Appendix 2.
I leave the proof to Appendix 2 and instead provide intuition with Figure 5, which
shows the eﬀects of positive first moment shock in a discrete time setting. In order to
increase the frequency of adjustment in an Ss model, more firms must be pushed out
of the inaction region. However, aggregate first moment shocks will, by definition,
aﬀect all firms’ desired price changes in the same way. Thus, firms must all be pushed
out of the inaction region in the same direction. While this leads to an increase in
the frequency of adjustment, more price changes are then in the same direction, which
leads to a decrease in price change dispersion.
The upper panel of Figure 5 shows the distribution of price gaps.14 After a first
moment shock that increases firms’ desired prices, price gaps shifts from the blue to
the green distribution. The lower panels show the eﬀect on the distribution of actual
price changes. After the first moment shock, the frequency of adjustment increases
since the additional mass of firms raising prices is greater than the reduction in mass
14

The distribution will be skewed in the presence of any positive trend inflation.

11

of firms decreasing prices. At the same time, the variance of price changes falls.
Thus, there is a negative correlation between the frequency of adjustment and price
change dispersion.
While the analytical results are quite strong, they rely on a model with many
simplifying assumptions. Most importantly, the comparative static result that greater
volatility leads to greater frequency of adjustment need only hold in steady-state after
a permanent increase in volatility. It is not obvious if this result will carry forward to
a more realistic environment with transitory shocks to volatility. In addition, in the
simple model, all price changes are of size ±, in contrast to the disperse distribution
of price changes in the data. Finally, since the simple model is partial equilibrium,
it is also less suited for studying time-variation in aggregate price flexibility.15 I now
move to a more empirically realistic Ss model, which I can take seriously to micro
data. Nevertheless, I will show that the result from the analytical model still holds:
Ss models with only first moment shocks imply a counterfactual negative correlation
between price change frequency and dispersion while Ss models with second moment
shocks are able to match the empirical positive correlation.

4

Quantitative Ss models

The baseline quantitative model follows Golosov and Lucas (2007), with the addition
of several features emphasized by Midrigan (2011). The economy is composed of a
representative household and a continuum of monopolistically competitive firms. I
first discuss the household problem, and I then present the firm problem and define
equilibrium.

4.1

Households

Households allocate income and labor to maximize a Dixit-Stiglitz consumption aggregate subject to indivisible labor supply
max 0

∞
X
=0

  [log  −  ] 

15

Capturing interactions between endogenous aggregate price flexibility and individual firm’s pricing decisions requires general equilibrium.

12

subject to

Z

0

where

1

  

+  [+1 +1 ] ≤  +   +

 =

µZ

1

0

Z

1

Π 

0


¶ −1
¡  ¢ −1
  

is a Dixit-Stiglitz aggregator of consumption goods  ,  is the price of good ,  is
the household’s labor supply,  is the disutility of labor,  is the nominal wage, Π
is nominal profits the household receives from owning firm , and  is the elasticity of
substitution. A complete set of Arrow-Debreu state-contigent claims is traded in the
economy so that +1 is a random variable that delivers payoﬀs in period  + 1 from

is the stochastic discount
financial assets purchased in period  and +1 =  +1
factor used to price these claims.

4.2

Firms

Firms produce output using a linear technology in labor
 =    
I discuss the evolution of idiosyncratic productivity  in the following sub-section.
Aggregate productivity  evolves according to
log  =  log −1 +    ;

 ∼ (0 1)

and  is labor rented by firm . After choosing prices, firms fulfill consumer demand:


=

µ




¶−

 

where  is the Dixit-Stiglitz price index
 =

µZ

0

1

1
¶ 1−
¡  ¢1−




13

Nominal aggregate spending  =   follows a random walk with drift in logs:16
log  =  + log −1 +    ;

 ∼ (0 1)

Firms must pay a fixed cost  in units of labor in order to adjust their nominal price.
To match the presence of small price changes, I assume that  = 0 with some 
probability each period.17 Given these constraints, firm ’s problem is then to choose
prices to maximize discounted profits

max



∞
X

+1  

=0

where flow profits are given by
 

=

µ



− 
   

¶µ




¶−

 − 


  
  6=−1

and  6=−1 is an indicator function for nominal price changes.

4.3

Idiosyncratic Productivity

Firm ’s idiosyncratic productivity  evolves according to an AR process in logs, but
following Gertler and Leahy (2008) and Midrigan (2011), I assume that shocks to firm
’s idiosyncratic productivity  arrive infrequently, according to a Poisson process
log 

=

(


+     ;  ∼ (0 1) with probability 
 log −1

log −1
with probability 1- 

This specification nests that in Golosov and Lucas (2007) but allows the model to
better match the fat-tailed empirical distribution of price changes. Motivated by the
analytical model in Section 3 as well as mounting empirical evidence that volatility
moves across time, the standard deviation of firm level idiosyncratic productivity
shocks  itself evolves as
log  =  log −1 +    ;  ∼ (0 1)
16

This is a computational simplification that reduces the aggregate state-space by one dimension.
In Section 6 I relax this assumption.
17
This is basically a reduced form for the multiproduct firms in Midrigan (2011).

14

Thus, firms face idiosyncratic shocks with common standard deviation  , and this
standard deviation is itself time-varying. Since it is idiosyncratic productivity differences across firms that generate price dispersion through variation in markups,
it is natural to increase the standard deviation of productivity in order to increase
price change dispersion. Nevertheless, any mechanism that generates countercyclical
markup dispersion so that firms have greater desire to adjust prices during recessions
should generate similar results.18
For computational simplicity, I initially make the assumption that aggregate productivity and  are perfectly negatively correlated. That is,
 = 
 = − 
While this is a strong assumption, it provides computational advantages by reducing the state-space by one dimension. The true correlation between first and second
moment shocks is likely to be negative but not perfectly so. For example, using German micro data, Bachmann and Bayer (2011b) finds that the cross-sectional standard
deviation of firm-level Solow residuals is strongly counter-cyclical with a correlation
of -.48 with detrended output. In addition, a number of recent papers such as Bloom
et al. (2012) and Gilchrist et al. (2010) build models where increases in volatility
endogenously lead to declines in aggregate productivity.
The assumption that aggregate productivity and volatility are perfectly negatively
correlated captures this empirical and theoretical relationship in the simplest way
possible. In addition, in Section 6 I show that more empirically realistic specifications
for the relationship between productivity and volatility barely change my conclusions,
and they further complicate the model.

4.4

Computing the Equilibrium

In order to bound the state-space of the problem, all nominal variables are normalized
by current nominal spending in the economy. The firm’s idiosyncratic states are given
by its previous nominal price −1 and its current level of productivity  . Under the
simplifying assumption that volatility is perfectly negatively correlated with aggregate
productivity, the aggregate state of the economy can be summarized by the current
18

For example Bachmann and Moscarini (2011) or countercyclical volatility of demand.

15

level of nominal spending  , the value of aggregate productivity  , and the joint
¢
¡
distribution of idiosyncratic states  −1       Since the evolution of aggregate
state variables depends on this joint distribution, the state-space of the problem is
thus infinite dimensional. Following Krusell and Smith (1998) and its application to
Ss models in Midrigan (2011), I conjecture that the decomposition of changes in 
into changes in  is given by the following forecasting rule:
log


=  0 +  1 log  + [ 2 +  3 log  ] 1


where 1 = log −1
+ log  . Given this conjecture, I then search for a value of

the transition coeﬃcients, γ so that the true law of motion in the economy is well
approximated by the conjectured law of motion. At this point, a regression of the
actual law of motion on the conjectured law of motion gives 2 in excess of 99%.
Furthermore, adding an additional moment (the cross-sectional variance of price gaps)
to the forecasting rule did not change the qualitative conclusions. Finally, rather
than comparing the conjectured law of motion to the actual law of motion periodby-period as is implied by the linear regression, a series of aggregate variables can
be computed entirely from the conjectured law of motion and compared to results
computed directly from the simulated model as suggested by Den Haan (2010). The
approximation errors remain extremely small.
Given the conjectured law of motion, the firm problem can be written recursively
as
µ 
¶
∙
¶
¸
µ 
−1 
−1  

 

    ; 1   = max 
  ; 1     (   ; 1  )



where the value of not adjusting and adjusting are given respectively by




µ

¶
¶
µ 
¶
µ
∙
¸

−1 
−1 
−1

0
0
0
0

  ; 1   = 
  ; 1   +  0  exp log
− ( +  )     ; 1  



0

and

" µ
¶#
¶
µ
∙
¸






+max 
   ; 1   +  0  exp log − ( +  )   0   0 ; 01  0

  (     ; 1  ) = − 
 log 


0



16

and firm flow profits can be written as
µ
¶ µ  ¶− µ ¶−2
¶ µ 

 



− 
 log   ; 1   =






For more details on this representation as well as for expanded expressions for the law
of motion for these variables see Appendix 3.

4.5

Calibration and Results

The model period is one month, so I set the discount factor  = 997. The calibration
of the nominal shock process follows Nakamura and Steinsson (2010). Since there
is no long-run real growth in the model economy, I set  = 002 to match the mean
growth rate of nominal GDP minus real GDP, and I set  = 0037 to match the standard deviation of nominal GDP growth, over the period 1998-2012. The production
function is linear in labor, the sole factor of production, so I calibrate the aggregate
productivity process with  = 91 and  = 006 so that the model matches the
quarterly persistence and standard deviation of average labor productivity.19
I calibrate the size of volatility shocks   using external evidence on movements in
idiosyncratic volatility. In particular, I pick the standard deviation of idiosyncratic
volatility to match U.S. Census data in Bloom et al. (2012). Bloom et al. (2012)
computes the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm level TFP for each year from
1972-2009, and I target the time-series variation in this measure of productivity dispersion. For the years corresponding to the BLS pricing sample, Bloom et al. (2012)
finds an annual coeﬃcient of variation for the standard deviation of firm level TFP
equal to 1.01, and this is the value I calibrate my model to match.
However, it should be noted that my data and model are about the dispersion of
product level shocks for a broad swathe of the U.S. economy while the data in Bloom
et al. (2012) comes from plant level manufacturing data. Since the two measures of
volatility may not coincide, and since Bachmann and Bayer (2011b) argues for smaller
values using German data, I also investigate the sensitivity of my analysis to changes
in the size of volatility shocks, results of which are described in Section 5.
The remaining parameters are calibrated to match various micro data moments.
19

As measured by non-farm business output per hour. Alternatively, calibrating the productivity
process in the model to match TFP would imply higher persistence. Increasing the persistence of
productivity in the model did not change the qualitative conclusions.

17

There are six remaining parameters: the elasticity of substitution , the persistence
and standard deviation of idiosyncratic productivity,  and   , the fixed cost  , the
probability of being hit with a productivity shock   and the probability of drawing
a fixed cost of zero. These parameters are selected to fit six moments from the data:
the average frequency of adjustment, the average size of increases, the average size of
decreases, and the fraction of price changes that are increases, the fraction of small
price changes20 , and the excess kurtosis of the price change distribution. For more
details on the calibration procedure as well as a discussion of alternative moments and
estimation schemes, see Appendix 3.
Table III shows the model’s best fit parameters and Table IV the resulting moments. The parameters of the model are in line with recent literature. The elasticity
of substitution of 6.8 is between the values used by Golosov and Lucas (2007) and
Nakamura and Steinsson (2010). The specification for the fixed cost implies that total
adjustment costs in the economy represent just under 0.5% of steady-state monthly
revenues.21 The persistence of productivity is relatively low, with a monthly persistence of 0.62. This low persistence is largely driven by matching the large and
relatively frequent price changes observed in the data. Again, the productivity parameters are roughly in line with previous estimates in the menu cost literature.
Unsurprisingly, the model can match the frequency of adjustment and fraction of
price changes that are increases. The model also does a good job of matching the
distribution of price changes, although it slightly underpredicts the average size of
price changes.22 A main reason for using Ss models (with the features emphasized by
Midrigan (2011)) is their ability to endogenously match these micro moments.
Most importantly, the model with second moment shocks implies a correlation
between the frequency and standard deviation of price changes that is positive and
closely in line with the empirical data. This confirms that the intuition from the
steady-state model in Section 3 extends to more realistic transitory shocks to volatility.
Even with these transitory shocks, the direct eﬀect of greater volatility dominates the
real options eﬀect so that the frequency of adjustment rises with volatility.
I define a small price change as | |  12 ||
This measure of the fixed cost is given by  ∗ (  −  =0 ) ∗ −1
   The cost conditional on
adjustment is around 4% of revenues, which is in line with the estimates in Zbaracki, Ritson, Levy,
Dutta, and Bergen (2004).
22
Diﬀerences between average size in the model and data are largely driven by extreme outliers in
the data. The model does a good job of replicating all but the most extreme percentiles of the price
change distribution.
20
21

18

In addition, the model also does a good job of replicating the fact that price
change dispersion moves more with volatility than the frequency of adjustment. This
is driven by the behavior of two sets of firms. 1) Firms with very large price gaps
will always adjust, regardless of the level of volatility. However, as volatility rises,
the variance of these price changes rises. Thus, these firms contribute to greater
price change dispersion but not to greater frequency. 2) Similarly, the random fixed
costs of adjustment mean that some firms will adjust regardless of their price gap.
Greater volatility increases the variance of these price changes without increasing
their frequency. Appendix I and Figure 3 provide additional evidence that the model
is a good fit for the distribution of price changes more generally across time.
Finally, it is interesting to note that the interaction between the volatility eﬀect and
the real options eﬀect implies that the frequency of large (absolute) price changes grows
with volatility while the frequency of small changes declines. I find support for this in
the BLS CPI micro data. The overall frequency of adjustment is countercyclical, but
this hides compositional diﬀerences: the frequency of large price changes is strongly
countercyclical while the frequency of small price changes is actually procyclical.23
I next show that the model without second moment shocks fails to match the
empirical evidence. The third column of Table IV shows results for the model after
setting   ≡ 0. As predicted by the analytical model, the Ss model with first moment
shocks generates an extremely strong negative correlation between the frequency of
adjustment and the cross-sectional dispersion of price changes. This is in contrast to
the strong empirical positive correlation.24
In addition, the model with only first moment shocks generates essentially no correlation between other moments of the distribution of price changes and the business
cycle. This is because recessions in the model tend to occur when both productivity
and nominal demand fall, but these aggregate shocks have oﬀsetting eﬀects on firms’
desired prices so the distribution of price changes is essentially acyclical. While it is
possible to get greater movements in the distribution of price changes by amplifying
the size of one of the first moment shocks, this comes at the cost of an even worse fit
for the correlation between frequency and dispersion. The inability to match the pos23

I use a cutoﬀ of 5% as the threshold between large and small and get the following numbers: the
correlation of large changes with industrial production is -0.39 while the corresponding correlation
with small price changes is 0.4. The correlation of total frequency with industrial production is
-0.28. I arrive at similar numbers using a threshold of "small" price changes of 2.5% and 1%.
24
Previous versions of this paper explicitly targeted the empirical correlation, and no configuration
of parameters generates a positive correlation for the model with only first moment shocks.

19

itive correlation between dispersion and variance is an extremely robust implication
of versions of the model with only first moment shocks.

5

Policy Implications

I now show that time-varying volatility has important implications for the transmission
of nominal shocks to the real economy. In times of high volatility, the real eﬀects
of nominal shocks are substantially reduced. Table V shows the response of log real
output and inflation to a permanent increase in log nominal output of .002, computed
for diﬀerent levels of volatility.25 This shock corresponds to a one-month doubling of
the nominal output growth rate.
At the 90th percentile of volatility, a permanent increase in log nominal output
of .002 leads to an increase in log real output on impact of .00121. Thus, 60.7% of
the nominal shock goes into output on impact. At the 10th percentile of volatility,
the real output response to the same nominal shock is .00142 so that 70.1% of the
shock goes into real output on impact. This implies that when volatility is reduced
from the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile the real eﬀect on impact of the same
nominal shock is increased by roughly 20%.
In addition to these diﬀerences on impact, the real eﬀects of nominal shocks become
more persistent when volatility falls: the half-life of the real response is increased by
about 20% when reducing volatility from the 90th to the 10th percentile. This means
that the cumulative eﬀects on real output are more sensitive to volatility than are the
impact eﬀects. At the 90th percentile of volatility, the cumulative increase in log real
output to a shock to log nominal output of size .002 is .0065 so that real output is
increased by 325% more than the nominal shock. At the 10th percentile of volatility,
the cumulative increase in log real output to the same nominal shock is .00836 so that
real output is increased by 418% more than the nominal shock. Thus, the cumulative
output impulse response increases by 29% when moving from the 90th to the 10th
percentile of volatility.
25

In an Ss environment, the size of the nominal shock is not innocuous. Large changes in  will
∆
. Thus, the level of the output IRF cannot be defined
cause more firms to adjust, increasing ∆
independently of the size of the change in . However, the random menu costs in my model move it
closer towards Calvo and reduce the importance of shock size. Within a reasonable range, changing
∆
and does not alter my conclusions about the relationship
the size of ∆ has only modest eﬀects on ∆
∆
between ∆ and volatility. For concreteness, all results in the this section are reported for ∆ = 002,
comparable to a one month doubling of the nominal output growth rate.

20

It is also informative to look at how the price response on impact diﬀers with
volatility. Since  =   , the fraction of the nominal shock that does not generate
real output growth instead generates inflation, so that the tradeoﬀ between inflation
and output worsens as volatility increases. In particular, when volatility is large,
getting the same increase in real output requires much greater nominal stimulus, and
more of this increase in nominal output goes into  rather than  . I find that getting
the same increase in real output on impact at the 90th percentile of volatility as at
the 10th percentile of volatility requires 60% more inflation.26
Why does aggregate price flexibility increase with volatility? To provide intuition
for this result, it is helpful to introduce the framework developed in Caballero and
Engel (2007). First, I present their result that the price response on impact in Ss
models can be decomposed into two distinct margins.27 I then show how these margins
interact with volatility.
Let  = log(∗ −1 ) be the diﬀerence between a firm’s current price and the price
it will choose if it adjusts. Let the economy-wide distribution of price gaps be given
by  (), and assume that firms have an adjustment probability that is increasing in
their price gap Λ ()  This implies that inflation will be given by
=

Z

Λ ()  () 

If there is a positive shock ∆ to firms’ desired prices, inflation will be given by
 (∆) =

Z

( + ∆) Λ ( + ∆)  () 

Taking a first-order Taylor approximation of  (∆) around ∆ = 0, rearranging
and taking the limit as ∆ → 0 gives that the price response on impact is
∆
=
lim
∆→0 ∆

Z

Z

Λ ()  ()  + Λ0 ()  () 
|
{z
} |
{z
}

Intensive Margin≡Freq

Extensive Margin

This price response on impact is the sum of two components: 1) The intensive
26

In an Ss environment, the required inflation change is very mildly sensitive to the size of the
baseline shock (see previous footnote). But the required change in inflation is increasing in the size
of the nominal shock over quantitatively relevant ranges, so the reported results are conservative.
27
While their analytical environment is not identical to mine, it is quite similar and I have verified
that these formulas provide extremely close approximations to my quantitative results.

21

margin gives the inflation contribution of items whose prices would have adjusted
without the aggregate shock. These firms adjust to the aggregate shock by changing
the size of their adjustment. 2) The extensive margin gives the additional inflation
contribution of firms whose decision to adjust is either triggered or canceled by the
aggregate shock.
When will each of these margins be more important? Inspecting the expression
for the intensive margin shows that this component is equal to the frequency of adjustment. The more firms that are adjusting absent the aggregate shock, the greater
the aggregate price response to that shock through the intensive margin.
The extensive margin grows with the number of firms near the margin of adjustment (firms with large Λ0 ()). In addition, the extensive margin is amplified if firms
near the margin of adjustment also have large values of ||: if the diﬀerence between
adjusting and not adjusting grows, then triggering firms to switch their adjustment
decisions will have a bigger eﬀect on the overall price level.
Table VI decomposes the price responses shown in Table V into the intensive and
extensive margin contributions and shows that during times of high volatility, both
margins become more important on impact.28 Adding both margins we again see
that the price response increases from 28.9% to 39.3% as volatility increases. The
intensive margin contribution grows because greater volatility increases the frequency
of adjustment. The extensive margin grows because greater volatility simultaneously
leads to a wider inaction region and pushes more firms near the margin of adjustment.
That is, greater volatility means there are more firms with both large Λ0 () and large
desired price gaps. While both margins become more important as volatility rises,
the increase in the extensive margin is substantially larger than the increase in the
intensive margin and accounts for four-fifths of the overall increase in price flexibility. Thus, even with small and empirically plausible movements in the frequency of
adjustment, the model still delivers large variation in price flexibility across time.29
Second moment volatility shocks are the driving feature of this time-varying re28

While the Caballero and Engel (2007) results provides an extremely good approximation for the
price response on impact, the cumulative price response is substantially more complicated and cannot
be characterized analytically. Nevertheless, similar intuition should apply in periods after the initial
nominal shock.
29
Since the intensive margin is equal to the frequency of adjustment, it is easy to measure empirically. Unfortunately, no such empirical counterpart exists for the extensive margin. Nevertheless,
the model is consistent with empirical movements in the distribution of price changes across time,
which suggests that it should produce reasonable movements in the extensive margin.

22

sponse. In the model with only first moment shocks, there is no relationship between
the real impact of nominal shocks and the business cycle. In contrast, if I solve
a version of the model with second moment shocks but no aggregate productivity
shocks, time-varying policy responses remain, with price flexibility continuing to rise
substantially with volatility.30
Finally, it is instructive to map the model mechanism more directly to specific
episodes in the U.S. economy. Following Bachmann, Caballero, and Engel (2010), I
can back out aggregate shocks from the model to fit U.S. time-series data and then
compute how the output response to nominal shocks varies across time.31 Given the
sequence of aggregate shocks, I can then calculate the output impulse response for
the simulated U.S. economy to the same .002 log nominal output shock at each date
from 1988-2012. Figure 6 shows the output impulse response in September 1995 and
October 2001. These are times of very low, and very high volatility, respectively.
The model with second moment shocks implies that the total response of real output
to a nominal shock in September 1995 is approximately 55% larger than the response
in October 2001. In contrast, there are essentially no diﬀerences for the model with
only first moment shocks.

6

More Realistic Aggregate Shocks

The benchmark model illustrates the quantitative importance of volatility in a setting
with simple aggregate shocks. This section argues that my results are robust to more
empirically realistic specifications. I relax the strong assumptions on the evolution of
volatility and then consider a more realistic process for nominal output shocks.32
My baseline model features cross-sectional volatility that is perfectly negatively
correlated with aggregate productivity. While there is now substantial evidence
30

It is important to note that when there are only second moment shocks in the model, price
change dispersion becomes procyclical. However, as noted in the previous section, this specification
is inconsistent with the strong empirical and theoretical negative relationship between productivity
and volatility.
31
In order to compute the sequence of shocks that best explains the observed data, I begin from
the ergodic distribution and pick the value of the nominal shock as well as the value of aggregate
productivity in order to match CPI inflation and industrial production growth in each month.
32
For brevity, I concentrate on the implications of more realistic aggregate shocks for time-varying
price flexibility. In all cases, the models without second moment shocks continue to generate counterfactual negative relationships between dispersion and frequency while the models with second
moment shocks generate more realistic positive correlations.

23

that volatility is countercyclical, there is not a perfect negative correlation in the
data. Furthermore, the baseline model generates price change dispersion that is too
countercyclical. In particular, the benchmark model implies a correlation between
price change dispersion and output of -0.6 while in the data this correlation is only
-0.41. In this section, I relax the assumption that aggregate productivity is perfectly
negatively correlated with volatility to assess the robustness of my results. Instead
I assume that volatility is the sum of two components, the first of which is perfectly
negatively correlated with productivity, and the second of which is orthogonal to
productivity. By picking the relative variance of these two components, I can match
the empirical cyclicality of volatility. In addition, once I relax the perfect negative
correlation with productivity, I can also study the eﬀects of volatility persistence.
Table VII summarizes how price flexibility varies with the business cycle and with
volatility in these models. The first row shows how much price flexibility increases
during recessions (as we move from the 90th to the 10th percentile of output). The
second row shows how much price flexibility increases as we move from the 10th
percentile of volatility to the 90th percentile of volatility. For example, for the benchmark model the earlier results in Table V show that the price response on impact
is 578 × 10−4 (= 289 × 002) at the 10th percentile of volatility and 786 × 10−4
(= 393 × 002) at the 90th percentile of volatility. Thus, there is a 36% increase in
the price response on impact as volatility moves from the 10th to the 90th percentile,
which is summarized in Table VII.
The first thing to note in Table VII is that in all cases, price flexibility varies more
with volatility than it does with the business cycle. This is because it is time-varying
volatility that generates greater price flexibility rather than the business cycle per se.
That the model generates countercyclical price flexibility is only because volatility is
negatively correlated with productivity.33
Matching the empirical correlation between volatility and productivity moderately
reduces cyclical price flexibility, but significant variation remains. Similarly, reducing
the persistence of volatility only mildly dampens time-variation in price flexibility.
Finally, given the debate in the literature over the empirical size of volatility shocks,
in the last column of Table VII, I show that time-variation in price flexibility is roughly
linear in the size of volatility shocks. Halving the size of volatility shocks roughly
33

Note that even in the baseline case when volatility is perfectly negatively correlated with productivity, volatility is not perfectly countercyclical since there are also aggregate nominal shocks.

24

halves the time-variation in price flexibility. But even at this overly conservative
lower bound, I still find substantial time-variation in the inflation-output tradeoﬀ.
Generating the same short-run increase in output at the 90th percentile of volatility
requires 25% more inflation than at the 10th percentile of volatility.
In addition to volatility that is perfectly negatively correlated with productivity,
my benchmark model assumes that nominal output follows a random walk with drift.
I now extend the model to allow for autocorrelated nominal output growth shocks.
This is a more empirically realistic specification, and it allows the model to generate
hump-shaped impulse response functions. As in Midrigan (2011), I assume that the
growth rate of nominal spending follows an autoregressive process which I calibrate
to have persistence 0.61 and standard deviation .0037.
Figure 7 shows that the model with autocorrelated nominal output growth shocks
is able to generate an empirically realistic hump-shaped output IRF. Furthermore,
autocorrelated nominal output shocks amplify the importance of volatility. This is
because when volatility increases, the real options eﬀect reduces price flexibility on
impact as the inaction region widens, and it takes one to two months for the volatility
eﬀect to push more firms to adjust. With autocorrelated nominal output shocks, the
eﬀect of an additional impulse to nominal output builds up over several months so
that the peak response of nominal output occurs exactly when the volatility eﬀect is
strongest. The cumulative output IRF is now 45% larger at the 10th percentile of
volatility than at the 90th percentile of volatility relative to the 29% increase in the
baseline model.
Thus, more realistic nominal output shocks amplify time-varying price flexibility
relative to the baseline model while more realistic volatility shocks moderately dampen
this time-variation. This suggests that a model with both aggregate shock extensions
would deliver large time-variation similar to the baseline model.34

7

Conclusions

There is mounting empirical evidence that volatility rises during recessions. In the
presence of adjustment frictions, this can have important implications for the transmission of aggregate shocks. Bloom et al. (2012) argues that a fall in investment
34

Solving the model with both aggregate shocks simultaneously would two state variables to the
baseline problem and complicate the Krusell-Smith forecasting rule, so solving such a model would
be substantially more complicated.

25

following an increase in volatility may be an important source of business cycle fluctuations. Furthermore, stabilization policies to stimulate investment may have reduced
eﬀectiveness when volatility is large.
While there is a growing literature that studies the eﬀects of volatility in real business cycle models, the implications for monetary policy have received less attention.
In this paper, I argue that countercyclical volatility can explain a number of micro
price-setting facts that standard price-setting models otherwise miss. Furthermore,
fixed costs of price adjustment and volatility have important interactions that generate time-varying real responses to nominal shocks. During times of high volatility,
firms have greater desired price changes, which in turn lead the aggregate price level
to become more responsive (and output less responsive) to nominal stimulus. This
means that achieving a given increase in real output requires a greater increase in
inflation during times of high volatility.
Increases in volatility mean that firms become more responsive on the price margin
so that monetary policy of normal magnitude becomes less eﬀective at influencing
output. Since volatility rises during recessions, monetary policy faces much worse
tradeoﬀs at precisely the time when it is needed most. Nominal stimulus would have
50% greater impacts on real output during the calm of the mid-nineties as at the
height of volatility during recent recessions.

26

References
Alvarez, F., M. Gonzalez-Rozada, A. Neumeyer, and M. Beraja (2011). From hyperinflation to stable prices: Argentina’s evidence on menu cost models.
Alvarez, F., L. Guiso, and F. Lippi (2011). Optimal price setting with observation
and menu costs. Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (4).
Alvarez, F. and F. Lippi (2012). Price setting with menu cost for multi-product firms.
Ashley, R. and R. J. Verbrugge (2007). Mis-specification in phillips curve regressions:
Quantifying frequency dependence in this relationship while allowing for feedback.
Mimeo.
Bachmann, R. and C. Bayer (2011a). Investment dispersion and the business cycle.
Nber Working Paper 16861 .
Bachmann, R. and C. Bayer (2011b). Uncertainty business cycles - really? NBER
Working Paper 16862 .
Bachmann, R., R. J. Caballero, and E. M. Engel (2010). Aggregate implications of
lumpy investment: New evidence and a DSGE model. Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper.
Bachmann, R. and G. Moscarini (2011). Business cycles and endogenous uncertainty.
Barro, R. (1972). A theory of monopolistic price adjustment. Review of Economic
Studies 39 (1).
Bils, M. (2009). Do higher prices for new goods reflect quality growth or inflation?
Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (2).
Bils, M. and P. Klenow (2004). Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices.
Journal of Political Economy 112 (5).
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77 (3).
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2012). Really
uncertain business cycles. NBER Working Paper 18245 .
Caballero, R. J. and E. M. Engel (2007, September). Price stickiness in ss models:
New interpretations of old results. Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (Supp 1).
Caplin, A. S. and D. F. Spulber (1987). Menu costs and the neutrality of money. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (4).
Danziger, L. (1999). A dynamic economy with costly price adjustments. American
Economic Review 89 (4).
27

Den Haan, W. J. (2010). Assessing the accuracy of the aggregate law of motion in models with heterogeneous agents. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34 (1).
Dixit, A. (1991). Analytic approximations in models of hysteresis. Review of Economic
Studies 58 (1).
Dotsey, M., R. King, and A. Wolman (1999). State-dependent pricing and the
general equilibrium dynamics of money and output. Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (2).
Eichenbaum, M., N. Jaimovich, and S. Rebelo (2009). Reference prices, costs and
nominal rigidities. American Economic Review.
Gertler, M. and J. Leahy (2008). A phillips curve with an ss foundation. Journal of
Political Economy 116 (3).
Gilchrist, S., J. Sim, and E. Zakrajsek (2010). Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
investment dynamics. Mimeo.
Golosov, M. and R. E. Lucas (2007). Menu costs and phillips curves. Journal of
Political Economy 115 (2).
Guimaraes, B. and K. Sheedy (2011). Sales and monetary policy. American Economic
Review 101 (2).
Hassler, J. (1996). Variations in risk and fluctuations in demand: A theoretical model.
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 20 (6).
Kehoe, P. J. and V. Midrigan (2008, October). Temporary price changes and the real
eﬀects of monetary policy. NBER Working Paper 14392 .
Khan, A. and J. Thomas (2008). Idiosyncratic shocks and the role of nonconvexities
in plant and aggregate investment dynamics. Econometrica 76 (2).
Klenow, P. and O. Kryvtsov (2008). State-dependent or time-dependent pricing: Does
it matter for recent U.S. inflation? The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (3).
Klenow, P. and B. Malin (2011). Microeconomic evidence on price-setting. Handbook
of Monetary Economics 3A.
Knotek, E. S. K. and S. Terry (2008). Alternative methods of solving state-dependent
pricing models. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Working Paper No. 08-10 .
Krusell, P. and A. A. Smith (1998). Income and wealth heterogeneity in the macroeconomy. The Journal of Political Economy 106 (5).
Midrigan, V. (2011). Menu costs, multi-product firms and aggregate fluctuations.
Econometrica 79 (4).
28

Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2008). Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of
menu cost models. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4).
Nakamura, E. and J. Steinsson (2010, August). Monetary non-neutrality in a multisector menu cost model. Quarterly Journal of Economics 154 (4).
Stokey, N. L. (2009). The Economics of Inaction: Stochastic Control Models with
Fixed Costs. Princeton University Press.
Tauchen, G. (1986). Finite state markov-chain approximations to univariate and
vector autoregressions. Economics Letters 20 (2).
Zbaracki, M. J., M. Ritson, D. Levy, S. Dutta, and M. Bergen (2004). Managerial and
customer costs of price adjustment: Direct evidence from industrial markets. The
Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2).

29

8

Appendix 1: Empirical Results

This appendix discusses a number of robustness checks for the main empirical results
of the paper and also discusses additional dynamic features of the distribution of price
changes in the data and models. The correlations in row 2 of Table I were computed
using Baxter-King (18,96,33) bandpass filtered, seasonally adjusted data. The bandpass filter was chosen because it eliminates high-frequency noise in the price dispersion
and frequency data. However, despite their widespread use, Ashley and Verbrugge
(2007) argue that two-sided bandpass filters may produce inconsistent estimates of
the frequency components of interest. Recomputing statistics using their alternative
one-sided bandpass filter nevertheless produced similar results. In addition, similar
results were obtained when using a moving average smoothed version of the series as
well as when comparing raw correlations of series’ growth rates and regressions on
recession dummies (the latter two relationships are shown in Table 1).
In addition to these statistical relationships, the top-left panel of Figure 3 shows
the overall distribution of price changes conditional on the state of the economy. The
recession distribution shows only price changes during NBER recession months. The
non-recession distribution shows the distribution of price changes for 3-9 months before
and 3-9 months after these recessions. It is clear even in this raw, unadjusted data
that there is a spreading of the distribution of price changes during recessions.
For the reasons addressed in the body of the paper, I exclude sales and product
substitutions from my benchmark results. To identify sales I use a 2-step approach
as in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). I first exclude all price changes marked as
sales by BLS price collectors. However, many sales prices are not flagged by price
collectors, so I then also exclude "v-shaped" price changes of less than 3 months.
While I exclude these price changes in my benchmark results, the fourth row of Table
A-I shows that all of my results are robust to using posted prices.
In my benchmark results I also focus on the monthly data available in the top 3
metro areas. Using monthly data reduces measurement error in the timing of price
changes across time. Nevertheless, Table A-I shows that my results are robust to
using the full sample. While the magnitude of the results is slightly weakend, this
is likely due to misattributing the timing of price changes within these two month
periods, which will attenuate time-series correlations.
Finally, my benchmark results exclude zeros from the measures of price change

30

dispersion. This is not a strong restriction since I am interested in jointly matching the
frequency of adjustment and distribution of price-changes conditional on adjusting.
Matching these two series implies that I will also match the distribution of price
changes including the zeros. Nevertheless, the top half of Table A-I shows that my
conclusions are robust to all of these restrictions. This table shows the correlations
between various statistics of interest for diﬀerent sample restrictions.
Both the median and mean frequency are positively correlated with the standard
deviation and interquartile range of price changes across all specifications. In addition, both measures of price-change dispersion are countercyclical. The frequency
of adjustment is moderately countercyclical across all specifications but it moves less
than the dispersion of price changes (I will return to the implications of the model for
the frequency of adjustment at the end of this section).
In principle, these results could be driven by compositional changes in the mix of
items adjusting prices over the business cycle rather than being characteristic of the
behavior of individual price-setters. I explore this issue in a number of ways. The
bottom panel of Table A-I recomputes statistics for a number of subsamples. First,
the dispersion of both price increases and price decreases is countercyclical. Thus,
it does not appear that countercyclical price change dispersion is driven by a switch
from price increases (which are smaller in absolute value on average) to price decreases
over the business cycle.35
The row labeled "standardized" recomputes my benchmark statistics after standardizing each price change. That is, following Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) before
−
where  is
computing the distribution of price changes I set  = 

the average price change within an ELI and  is the standard deviation of
these price changes. This standardization reduces the possibility that my results are
driven by a few sectors with particularly volatile prices. While sectors with particularly volatile prices would receive outsized weight in the raw statistics, this is not the
case when using standardized price changes. Table A-I shows that standardizing the
distribution of price changes does not qualitatively aﬀect my conclusions.
The next rows of Table A-I show that for the vast majority of product categories,
35

Ss models do not have strong implications for the relationship between frequency and dispersion
after conditioning on the sign of the price change, so the fact that there is not a strong relationship
between these statistics in the data is not a concern. The strong implications of Ss models are for the
total frequency and total dispersion of price changes, rather than separate relationships for increases
and decreases.

31

price change dispersion is countercyclical and comoves with the frequency of adjustment. Across the 13 listed sub-samples, 2 measures of frequency and 2 measures of
price dispersion, there are 39 significant positive relationships between dispersion and
frequency out of a possible 52. In addition, there are another 10 positive but insignificant dispersion-frequency relationships. Only one product category (raw food)
exhibits significant negative correlations between frequency and price change dispersion (and only for one measure of price change dispersion). In addition, using the
2 measures of price change dispersion and the 13 subsamples, there are a total of 24
out of a possible 26 significant negative correlations between dispersion and industrial production. The remaining two point estimates are also negative although only
marginally significant. The frequency of adjustment within product categories is also
mildly countercyclical with 17 out of 26 correlations significantly negative, another 8
exhibiting an insignificant negative correlation and only one exhibiting an insignificant
positive correlation. In addition to these sector level results, I have also run panel
regressions with sector level fixed eﬀects. Since there are only 11-major groups, I am
unable to cluster by major group, but my results were essentially unchanged when
using various other procedures for correcting standard errors. Thus, it appears that
the empirical facts are not driven by compositional changes in the product categories
over the business cycle and hold within various sectors, although within major sectors
the results are necessarily noiser as sample sizes are reduced.
A final concern is that product entry and exit over the business cycle may potentially be driving my conclusions (for example if there is more product entry during
booms and if new products exhibit less frequent price changes). The structure of
the CPI sampling limits the ability to recompute my main statistics using a balanced
sample since products are rotated out of the database after a maximum of roughly
four years. Nevertheless, it is possible to get a rough sense for whether this is likely
to be a concern by restricting the analysis to only include items that span at least
one recession. I can then compare the distribution of price changes for this balanced
panel during recession months to non-recession months. More precisely, I include
only items which are observed in the database from 9 months before a recession until
9 months after a recession. I then compare the distribution of price changes during
the recession to the distribution 3-9 months before or after the recession. The upper
right panel of Figure 3 shows that restricting to the balanced panel does not change
the qualitative conclusions, so my results do not appear to be driven by product entry
32

and exit.
While I focus mostly on the second moment of price changes, it is straightforward
to compute higher moments of the distribution of price changes. Table A-I shows that
in contrast to the second moment of price changes, there is little robust relationship
between the skewness of price changes and the business cycle. There are many
subsamples with significant positive relationships and many others with significant
negative relationships, and a substantial fraction exhibit no significant relationship.
In contrast, there does appear to be a relationship between the kurtosis (4th moment)
of price changes and the business cycle. The vast majority of samples exhibit a
positive correlation between kurtosis and the business cycle: there is more excess
kurtosis during booms than during recessions. My model introduces Poisson shocks
to match the average kurtosis observed in the data, but I do not impose any exogenous
time-variation in this Poisson probability. Nevertheless, the model exhibits mildly
procyclical kurtosis: during times of high volatility, firms that are adjusting are less
likely to have a desired price change extremely close to zero. At the same time, the
low persistence of idiosyncratic shocks limits the model’s ability to generate very fat
tails even during times of high volatility. However, this eﬀect is quantitatively small
and matching the kurtosis observed in the data would require the introduction of
shocks with time-varying kurtosis. For simplicity I do not explore this extension, but
it is likely to reinforce my results. Midrigan (2011) shows that greater kurtosis leads
to a reduction in price flexibility. In the data, kurtosis is procyclical, so matching
this fact would make price flexibility even more countercyclical.
Overall the model in Section 3 does a good job of matching the distribution of
price changes, both on average and across recessions. The bottom panel of Figure 3
shows that the distribution of price changes for the model lines up well with that in
the data.
Finally, I briefly explore the implications of my model for the decompositions of
inflation in Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008). Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008) decomposes
the variance of inflation into intensive and extensive margin contributions. Using
their terminology, the extensive margin contribution to inflation is the contribution
of changes across time in the frequency of adjustment to changes in inflation (which
is diﬀerent from the extensive margin response to an aggregate shock, as described
and used in previous sections). While the latter concept is unobservable and requires
a model, the former is observable, and we can decompose inflation using a Taylor
33

expansion
 (  ) =  (   )
2

=  ( ) ∗   + (  ) ∗  + 2 ∗  ∗ (   ) +  
{z
} |
{z
}
|




I find that in the model with random menu costs and leptokurtic shocks, the IM
contributes 83% of the variance of inflation, which is in line with the IM contribution
of 91% reported by Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008).
In summary, across a variety of empirical specifications, I find that countercyclical
price change dispersion and a positive comovement between price change dispersion
and frequency are robust features of the data. In addition to being able to match this
fact, the empirical extensions of the model are able to also match higher moments of
the distribution of price changes as well as the decomposition across time of inflation
into changes in frequency and changes in the size of adjustment. More importantly,
all the models still prescribe an important role for volatility shocks, both for matching
micro price facts and for their role in the monetary transmission mechanism.

9

Appendix 2: Analytical Model

Firms face a dynamic control problem with a single state variable  At each point
in continuous time, the ideal value of  is zero and departures from zero entail a flow
cost of  2 and firms discount payoﬀs at rate . When not adjusting,  follows a
Brownian motion. Assume for now that there is no drift so that  = , where
 is the standard Wiener process. (Note that for the study of aggregate shocks, it
is convenient to break shocks into some idiosyncratic and some aggregate component
 =   +   , which is without loss of generality in partial equilibrium). Firms can
adjust the value of  subject to a fixed cost . This environment has been wellstudied, and it gives rise to a simple, symmetric  rule with a closed form solution.
In particular,
Proposition 3 Firms’ optimal policy is to not adjust when ||   where  =
³ 2 ´14
6
, and to adjust  to zero when || ≥  In addition, the frequency of ad
¡  ¢12
 and the standard deviation of price changes is given by
justment is given by 6
.
34

Proof. A version of this problem was first solved by Barro (1972), and the simplified
version solved here is first described in Dixit (1991). As the solution method is now
standard, I only sketch the basic outline. This firm problem yields a Bellman equation
of the form  () = 12  2  00 () +  2 when not adjusting together with value matching
conditions at the adjustment threshold  ()− (0) =  and smooth pasting condition
 0 () = 0 The solution to this diﬀerential yields a value for the threshold that (for
³ 2 ´14
small ) is given by  = 6
 The expected time to hit the boundary of the

2

inaction region starting from zero is given by  = 2 , so that the average number of
¡  ¢12
 Finally, the symmetry of the problem
price adjustments is given by 1 = 6
q
delivers a standard deviation equal to 12 ( − 0)2 + 12 (− − 0)2 = 
Proposition 4 In an environment with zero inflation, small aggregate shocks to 
do not change either the frequency or standard deviation of price changes. In an
environment with positive trend inflation, small aggregate increases in  raise frequency
and decrease the standard deviation of price changes.

Proof. For the first part of the proof, see Alvarez and Lippi (2012). They show

|=0 = 
|
≡ 0 . At the zero inflation
that when  = − +  then 
 =0
steady-state, marginal increases in  do not aﬀect the frequency or variance of price
changes. Since the model is partial equilibrium, changes in  are the same as any
other aggregate shock to all firms’ . Now consider an environment with positive
trend inflation. First note that with strictly positive trend inflation firms’ optimal
price-setting policies imply     Furthermore, since firms’ optimal adjustment
thresholds already account for aggregate shocks to  ( =  +   ), these thresholds
will not change in response to aggregate shocks, and only the distribution of  within
these thresholds will change. Let the optimal thresholds and return point when
e 
e . By subtracting  from both thresholds neither the
adjusting be given by 
frequency of adjustment nor variance of price changes will be aﬀected, so without loss
of generality we can renormalize the optimal policy to be given by   with firms
raising prices by  when they reach the left threshold and lowering prices by  when
they reach the right threshold. Given the stochastic process for  and adjustment
thresholds   Stokey (2009) Chapter 5 provides formulas for the ergodic distribution
of  as well as the relative probability of price increases and the implied frequency of

35

adjustment. In particular, formula 5.16 gives probabilities:
1 − 
 − 
 − 1
= 
 − 

 =

and formula 5.23 gives the frequency:

£ 
¤
 − 
2

 = −
2 ( − ) −   +  
with  = 2 2  Using formula 5.16 it is straightforward to calculate that the variance
of price changes is given by
 = (1 −  )  [ − ] 
We are then interested in how the frequency and variance of price changes respond
to aggregate shocks to . Positive shocks to  are equivalent to negative shocks to
, and vice versa, so we can calculate the response of the frequency and variance to
a first moment shock by taking their derivative with respect to . (Here it is again
worth noting that these derivatives will be taken holding   constant, which will be
true for aggregate shocks but not for permanent changes in  since permanent changes
in  will shift the optimal policy). Taking these derivatives, it is straightforward to
show that   0. Since the variance is maximized at  = 12 (which will hold
when  = 0), the variance of price changes is falling in . Taking the derivative of

 0 if  +   2. Furthermore,  +   2 ⇐⇒
frequency yields that 
   , which again will hold in an environment with positive inflation. Thus,
we get that frequency and variance move in opposite directions in response to first
moment shocks.
Finally, it is of interest to compute how frequency and variance move in response
to steady-state changes in  rather than to shocks to . (That is, allowing for optimal
policy to change in response to changes in ). To my knowledge, closed form solutions
to the system of diﬀerential equations that determine the optimal thresholds do not
exist for  6= 0 However, it is straightforward to solve the system of diﬀerential
equations numerically. Although I do not have a proof, these results suggest that the
above proposition also holds when   change in response to . That is, starting
36

from positive inflation, increases to trend inflation raise the frequency of adjustment
and lower the variance of price changes.

10
10.1

Appendix 3: Computational Procedure
Computing the model

Let  be a firm’s nominal price after adjustment,  be the price level,  be the
disutility of labor,  be aggregate real demand,  be a firm’s productivity and  be
the elasticity of substitution. Then current real profits are given by36
¶³ ´
 −
 ( ;  ) =


¶µ
¶−
µ



−

=



µ



−



Now, note that by assumption  =  . In general, the price level will depend on
the current value of the aggregate shocks and the joint distribution of idiosyncratic
firm states, but I conjecture that
log


=  0 +  1 log  + [ 2 +  3 log ] 


with the mean price flexible price gap: 1 ≡ log −1 + log . This implies that
=


= −( 0 + 1 log +[ 2 + 3 log ]1 ) 


Substituting into the profit function and using  as the idiosyncratic price state,
we can write real profits as
³
´
()− ( 0 + 1 log +[ 2 + 3 log ]1 )(−2) 
 ( ; 1 ) =  −

Finally, it is straightforward to calculate transition rules for these variables. Since
 follows a random walk in logs we get
36

Note that the household labor supply problem implies that the real wage is equal to 

37

log

0

= log − ( +  ) 
0



By assumption,
log  0 =

(

 log  +     with probability 
log  with probability 1- 

and
log 0 =  log  +    
and
01 =  0 +  1 log  + [ 2 +  3 log ] 1 − ( +  ) + log 0 
In addition, each period firms draw iid cost of adjustment  with probability 
and 0 with probability 1 −   Thus, we can write the firm ’s value function as


³
´
h
´
i
 −1

   ; 1   = max 
 ; 1     ( ; 1  ) 



³

−1

with
´
³
´
³
−1
−1
  log
 log ; 1  log  = 
 ; 1  


⎛
+

 

⎜
⎜
  0  ⎜
⎜
⎝



0
log −1
 − ( +  )   log  +  ()      ;

 0 +  1 log  + [ 2 +  3 log ] 1
− ( +  ) +  log  +    
 log  +   

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

and
  (log   ; 1  log ) = −−( 0 + 1 log +[ 2 + 3 log ]1 )
⎡

⎢ ³
´
⎢

+ max ⎢

;

+     0 

1
 ⎢
⎣ 

38

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

log  − ( +  )   log  +  ()    
 0 ;  0 +  1 log  + [ 2 +  3 log ] 1
− ( +  ) +  log  +    
 log  +   

⎞⎤

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠⎦

−( + log +[ + log ] )

3
1
where  =  −(0 +1 log 0 +{2 +3 log00 }{1 0 +1 log2 +[
is the stochas
0
2 + 3 log ]1 −(+ )+log  })

tic discount factor and −( 0 + 1 log +[ 2 + 3 log ]1 ) is the real wage.
Given this recursive representation, I then solve the problem using value function
iteration on a grid. Knotek and Terry (2008) argues that discretizing fixed adjustment cost models has robustness advantages versus collocation or other interpolation
methods. Nevertheless, earlier versions of my model were solved using cubic spline
interpolation and the results were unchanged. The random variables are discretized
using the method of Tauchen (1986). In the benchmark analysis I used 171 grid
points for the pricing grid, 21 grid points for the idiosyncratic productivity grid, 14
grid points for the 1 grid and 5 grid points for the aggregate productivity grid. Although not a state, expectations must be computed for  , and it was discretized using
7 grid points. Results were unchanged when more grid points were added.
Once the model is solved for a given conjecture for γ, a panel of 5000 firms37 is
simulated for 14,400 months38 with a 100 month burnin. The law of motion

log


=  0 +  1 log  + [ 2 +  3 log ] 1


is then updated by regressing these variables on the simulated data. The solution
and simulation is then repeated until convergence. In the benchmark analysis, the
standard for convergence is a less than 1% change in any of the γ coeﬃcients across
iterations. Higher standards of convergence did not change the qualitative results.
In addition, at the best fit parameters, I recomputed a version of the model with
significantly greater precision and more thoroughly tested the accuracy of aggregate
transition rules. Using the method proposed by Den Haan (2010), I computed the
maximum error between the conjectured and simulated law of motion over 10,000
periods. Even over this extremely long time frame the maximum diﬀerence between
aggregate variables computed using only simulation and those computed only using
the conjectured law of motion is less than 0.1%, and the average error is much lower.
Results suggest that forecasting errors can be made arbitrarily small by increasing
grid sizes and simulations. Finally, errors in the forecasting equation are unrelated
to output and to volatility in the model. None of the qualitative conclusions of the
model are changed when precision is increased from the benchmark analysis.
37
38

I investigated panels of up to 500,000 firms. Results were unchanged.
14,400 is 50 replications of the length of the empirical sample window.

39

While this version of the paper calibrates the parameters of the model, previous
versions of this paper estimated simpler versions of the quantitative model more formally and all of the qualitative conclusions were similar. I explored identification of
the micro parameters fairly extensively in this simpler model. The relative size of
increases and decreases identifies the elasticity of substitution, the fraction increases
identifies the persistence of productivity, the average size and frequency identify the
standard deviation of productivity and the size of fixed costs. As mentioned in the
body of the text, in the version of the model with random fixed costs and leptokurtic
shocks I use data on the frequency of small price changes and the kurtosis of price
changes to identify these additional parameters.

40

Table I: Business Cycle Properties of Price-Setting
Dependent Variable

S.D.

IQR

Freq

Med

Skew

Kurt

IQR/Med

(1) Cor. IP growth

-0.367***
(0.063)

-0.328***
(0.083)

-0.108
(0.068)

-0.235***
(0.061)

0.051
(.056)

0.111**
(0.045)

-0.243***
(0.069)

(2) Cor. IP (Bandpass)

-0.410***
(0.143)

-0.393***
(0.119)

-0.282***
(0.098)

-0.268
(0.165)

0.251
(0.200)

0.279***
(0.093)

-0.345**
(0.156)

0.017***
(0.004)

0.030***
(0.008)

0.012***
(0.004)

0.013***
(0.004)

-0.122 -1.129***
(0.092) (0.396)

0.174**
(0.078)

(3) Recession

Mean of Dep. Var. Non-Recession:

0.073

0.069

0.148

0.107

0.133

6.549

0.648

Mean of Dep. Var.:

0.075

0.073

0.150

0.109

0.117

6.403

0.671

Coeﬃcient of Variation

0.231

0.354

0.108

0.120

6.72

0.361

0.331

Each column reports a time-series correlation of a price-setting statistic with a measure of the business cycle. Row 3 is a regression on recession dummies. For comparison,
Mean of Dep. Var. Non-Recession shows the mean of these variables outside of recessions. Mean of Dep. Var displays the overall variable means including both recessions
and non-recessions. Zeros are excluded when computing dispersion. All statistics exclude sales and product substitutions. All data is seasonally adjusted using 12 monthly
dummies. Regressions in rows (1) and (3) include a quadratic time-trend.

All data for regressions in row 2 are bandpass filtered using a Baxter-King (18,96,33) filter.

IP=Industrial Production, Recessions use NBER data, S.D.=Standard Deviation, IQR=Interquartile Range, Freq=Average frequency of adjustment, Med=Median Frequency
of Adjustment, IQR/Med Freq is the ratio of those statistics. Skew=Skewness, Kurt-Kurtosis.
n=222 for row 2, n=288 for rows 1 and 3.

***=at least 1% significance. **=5% significance (Newey-West standard errors in parentheses)

41

Table II: Correlation Between Frequency and Dispersion
Dep. Variable

1. S.D.

2. IQR

3. S.D. (Bandpass)

4. IQR (Bandpass)

Freq

0.134*
(0.063)

0.162***
(0.051)

0.506***
(0.106)

0.660***
(0.085)

Med

0.244***
(0.058)

0.276***
(0.057)

0.610***
(0.112)

0.676***
(0.080)

This table reports correlations between measures of frequency and price change dispersion. (Newey-West standard errors
in parentheses). Zeros are excluded when computing dispersion. Excluding sales and product substitutions. All data is
seasonally adjusted using 12 monthly dummies. Regressions in columns (1) and (2) include a quadratic time-trend. All data
for regressions in columns 3 and 4 are bandpass filtered using a Baxter King (18,96,33) filter. S.D.=Standard Deviation,
IQR=Interquartile Range, Freq=Average frequency of adjustment, Med=Median frequency of Adjustment.
n=288 for columns 1 and 2. n=222 for columns 3 and 4.

***=at least 1% significance.

Table III
Model Parameter Values
Parameter

Value

Elasticity of Substitution
Productivity Persistence
Productivity Standard Deviation
Poisson Probability of Prod. Shock
Fixed Cost (If positive)
Probability Zero Adjustment Cost

6.8
.62
.08
.13
.09
.09

42

Table IV
Model Fit
Data First+Second Only First

Moments Targeted
Frequency
Fraction Up
Size Up
Size Down
Fraction Small
Kurtosis

.11
.65
.07
.09
.33
6.4

.11
.66
.055
.064
.34
7.2

.11
.67
.055
.061
.34
7.3

.61
-.41
-.27
-.30

.62
-.60
-.24
-.39

-.58
.14
-.07
.11

Moments Not Targeted
Correlation Dispersion and Frequency
Correlation Dispersion and Y
Correlation Freq and Y
Correlation Dispersion/Freq and Y

Table V
Volatility

Impulse Response: Baseline Model
Price IRF on Impact Output IRF on Impact Total Output IRF

10th percentile
50th percentile
90th percentile

28.9%
35.0%
39.3%

71.1%
65.0%
60.7%

418.0%
360.8%
325.0%

Output Impulse as a percent of nominal shock. The nominal shock is a 1 month doubling of nominal output
growth from .002 to .004

43

Table VI
Price Impulse Response: Baseline Model
Volatility
Intensive Margin Extensive Margin
10th percentile 10.2%
90th percentile 12.2%

18.7%
27.1%

Price Impulse contributions on impact as a percent of total nominal shock.
The shock doubles nominal output growth from .002 to .004 for one month

Table VII
Increase in Price Impulse Response on Impact
Business Cycle
Baseline Match Corr Match Corr-Pers Small Volatility
90th to 10th Percentile of Output
10th to 90th Percentile of Volatility

33%
36%

25%
30%

22%
25%

13%
17%

90th to 10th percentile of output shows percentage increase in price response as output falls. 10th to 90th percentile of volatility
shows percentage increase in price response as volatility rises. The nominal shock is a 1 month doubling of nominal output growth.
Baseline model is the model with volatility shocks in Section 3. Match Corr keeps the persistence of volatility the same as TFP but
matches the cyclicality of price dispersion. Match Corr-Pers lowers the persistence of volatility to match that of price dispersion.
Small volatility halves the size of the volatility shocks in the baseline model. The first 3 columns all feature volatility shocks of the
same size. The impulse response is an increase of the nominal output growth rate from .002 to .004 for one month

44

Table A-I
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Freq,Y

Med,Y

XSD,Y

IQR,Y

Skew,Y

Kurt,Y

Freq,XSD

Freq,IQR

Med,XSD

Med,IQR

Benchmark

-.28***

-.27***

-.41***

-.39***

.25

.28***

.51***

.66***

.61***

.68***

Standardized

-.28***

-.27***

-.33***

-.42***

-.02

.39***

.35***

.51***

.43***

.51***

Bimonthly

-.06

-.10

-.47***

-.43***

.16

.28***

.20***

.38***

.47***

.51***

In-SaleSub

-.38***

-.55***

-.54***

-.44***

-.35***

.40***

.13*

.44***

.17**

.35***

No-Seasonal

-.28***

-.29***

-.40***

-.38***

.26***

.28***

.50***

.67***

.62***

.71***

In-Zeros

-.28***

-.27***

-.36***

-.36***

.41***

.12*

.72***

.84***

.74***

.73***

Decreases

-.33***

-.58***

-.33***

-.33***

-.50***

.53***

.11

.08

.12*

.28***

Increases

.25***

.38***

-.15**

-.14**

.18***

.14**

-.16**

.24***

.32***

Core

-.24***

-.32***

-.13*

-.43***

.16**

.24***

.10

.24***

.32***

.36***

Durable

-.09

-.24***

-.19***

-.28***

.01

.42***

.20***

.13**

.15**

.11*

Non-Durable

-.11

-.04

-.33***

-.40***

-.02

.37***

.45***

.60***

.60***

.57***

Services

-.20***

.01

-.42***

-.17**

.11

-.05

.20***

.22***

.22***

.30***

Process. Food

-.08

-.04

-.22***

-.45***

.19***

.34***

.50***

.10

.27***

.03

Raw Food

-.29***

-.26***

-.54***

-.47***

-.52***

.21***

.05

-.25***

.17**

-.31***

HH Furnish.

-.20***

-.17***

-.42***

-.30***

.23***

.31***

.23***

-.05

.46***

.38***

Apparel

-.06

-.22***

-.14**

-.32***

-.02

.43***

.32***

.18***

.59***

.71***

Transportation

-.26***

-.25***

-.11*

-.34***

.20***

.07

.32***

.14**

.33***

.16**

Recreation

-.32***

-.17**

-.22***

-.21***

-.31***

.15**

.15**

.08

.19***

.10

Other

-.28***

-.23***

-.21***

-.13**

-.12

.12*

.29***

.05

.36***

.27***

Vehicle Fuel

-.03

-.06

-.31***

-.36***

.13

-.03

.46***

.15**

.52***

.19***

Travel

-.30***

-.24***

-.29***

-.28***

-.12

.09

.07

.20***

.10

.23***

Series

-.20***

Freq is average frequency of adjustment, Med is median frequency, XSD is std deviation of price changes,
IQR is interquartile range, Skew is skewness, Kurt is kurtosis, Y is industrial production. Benchmark uses
monthly data excluding sales, substitutions, zeros. It is seasonally adjusted using 12 monthly dummies.
All-Series are similar except where noted. Standardized subtracts ELI means from each price change and
divides by ELI standard deviation. Bimonthly uses the full bimonthly sample. In-SaleSub includes sales
and product substitutions. No-Seasonal has no seasonal adjustment. In-Zeros includes zeros.
Decreases and Increases include only price changes of neg and pos sign. Core restricts to items in
core CPI. Durable restricts to durable goods, non-durable restricts to non-durable goods. Sample period
1988m1-2012m1. All series are bandpass filtered using a Baxter-King(18,96,33) filter.
***=1%, **=5%, *=10%.

45

Figure 1: Price Changes Across Time
0.2

Recession
Frequency
Interquartile Range

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Data is seasonally adjusted using 12 monthly dummies and smoothed with a 6 month moving average.
Frequency is the Median Frequency of Adjustment.

Figure 2: Price Changes Over the Business Cycle

0.1

0.5
Industrial Production (Left-Scale)
Frequency (Right-Scale)
Interquartile Range (Right-Scale)

Log Deviation from Trend

0.05

0.25

0

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.25

1995
2000
2005
Log frequency and interquartile range are seasoanlly adjusted using monthly dummies. All series are bandpass
filtered with a Baxter-King (18,96,33) filter

46

-0.5

Figure 3: Price Change Distributions
Data

n recession = 86205
n non-recession = 103019

-0.2

-0.1

Data (Balanced Panel)
Recessions
Non-Recessions

0
p

0.1

0.2

n recession = 35217
n non-recession = 36534

Model

-0.2

-0.1

Recessions
Non-Recessions

-0.2

-0.1

0
p

47

0.1

0.2

0
p

Recessions
Non-Recessions

0.1

0.2

Figure 4: Greater Volatility Can Induce Greater Frequency and Price Change Dispersion

Distribution of Price Gaps
9
8

Low Volatility
High Volatility

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.1

0.15

0.2

Distribution of Price Changes
2

1

0
-0.2

-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

Figure 5: Negative Correlation Between Frequency and Price Change Dispersion
Distribution of Price Gaps
8
6

Raise
Price

Lower
Price

4
2
0
-0.15

-0.1

-0.05

0

Initial Distribution of Price Changes

0.05

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Distribution of Price Changes After First Moment Shift

4

0
-0.15

0.1

0
-0.15

0.15

48

-0.1

-0.05

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

Figure 6: Real Output Impulse Response to Nominal Shock

With Volatility Shocks
1

No Volatility Shocks
1

October, 2001
September, 1995

0.9

0.9
0.8
Output Impulse Response
(As Fraction of Nominal Shock)

0.8
Output Impulse Response
(As Fraction of Nominal Shock)

October, 2001
September, 1995

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0
1

2

3

4

5

0
1

6

2

3

Month

4

5

6

Month
In all cases, the shock to log nominal output is .002, equal to a one-month doubling of nominal output growth

Figure 7: Real Output Response to Autocorrelated Nominal Shock

0.9

90th Percentile of Volatility
10th Percentile of Volatility

0.8

Output Impulse Response
(As Fraction of Nominal Shock)

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

2

4

6

8

10

12
Month

14

16

18

20

22

24

The shock is a .002 increase in the nominal output growth rate on impact

49

