NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOOD PRICES AND BODY FATNESS AMONG YOUTHS
Michael Grossman
Erdal Tekin
Roy Wada
Working Paper 19143
http://www.nber.org/papers/w19143
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2013

Research for this paper was supported by grant #65068 from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper was presented at the Eighth World Congress
of the International Health Economics Association and at the Sixth Annual Meeting of the Robert
Wood Johnson Foundation Healthy Eating Research Program. We are grateful to John Cawley who
discussed our paper at the first forum just mentioned, to the other participants in both forums, and
to Jesse Margolis for helpful comments and suggestions. We also wish to thank Jesse, Ryan Conrad,
and Ben Padd for research assistance. We are indebted to Karen Davis, formerly a health scientist
at the National Center for Health Statistics Research Data Center (RDC); Stephanie Robinson, a health
scientist at the NCHS RDC; Frances McCarty, a senior service research fellow at the NCHS RDC;
and Frank Limehouse, RDC Administrator at the Chicago Bureau of the Census RDC, for their assistance
in helping us to gain access to and work with restricted files from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey at the Chicago RDC. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2013 by Michael Grossman, Erdal Tekin, and Roy Wada. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Food Prices and Body Fatness among Youths
Michael Grossman, Erdal Tekin, and Roy Wada
NBER Working Paper No. 19143
June 2013, Revised July 2013
JEL No. I1,I18
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine the effect of food prices on clinical measures of obesity, including body
mass index (BMI) and percentage body fat (PBF) measures derived from bioelectrical impedance analysis
(BIA) and dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA), among youths ages 12 through 18. The empirical
analyses employ data from various waves of the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) merged with several food prices measured by county and year. This is the first study to
consider clinically measured levels of body composition rather than BMI to investigate the effects
of food prices on obesity among youths. We also examine whether the effects of food prices on body
composition differ by gender and race/ethnicity. Our findings suggest that increases in the real price
of one calorie in food for home consumption and the real price of fast-food restaurant food lead to
improvements in obesity outcomes among youths. We also find that an increase in the real price of
fruits and vegetables has negative consequences for these outcomes. Finally, our results indicate that
measures of PBF derived from BIA and DXA are no less sensitive and in some cases more sensitive
to the prices just mentioned than BMI.
Michael Grossman
Ph.D. Program in Economics
City University of New York Graduate Center
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
and NBER
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu
Erdal Tekin
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy Studies
Georgia State University
P.O. Box 3992
Atlanta, GA 30302-3992
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu

Roy Wada
Institute for Health Research and Policy
University of Illinois at Chicago
1747 West Roosevelt Road
Chicago, IL 60608
University of Illinois at Chicago
roywada@uic.edu

1. Introduction
The prevalence of childhood obesity has increased at an alarming rate in the U.S. over the
last three decades. Since the mid-1970s, the proportion of children aged 12-19 who are obese
has grown from 5.0 to 18.1 percent and has grown more rapidly among non-Hispanic black
adolescents than among Hispanic or non-Hispanic white adolescents (Ogden et al. 2010). The
growing prevalence and the racial/ethnic disparities in childhood obesity are of major concern to
public health, given that obese children are more likely to develop health problems, such as high
blood pressure, hypertension, gallbladder disease, and Type 2 diabetes as early as adolescence
(Serdula et al. 1993; Freedman et al. 1999; 2007; Hill, Catenacci, and Wyatt 2006).
Furthermore, obese children are more likely to experience negative long-term psychological and
labor market outcomes ranging from poor self-esteem and depression to discrimination and
lower wages (Daniels 2006; Mocan and Tekin 2011; Dietz 1998; Strauss 2000). Wang and Dietz
(2002) estimate that hospital expenditures related to childhood obesity rose from $35 million in
the late-1980s to $127 million (in 2001 constant dollars) in the late-1990s. Both the Institute of
Medicine (2004) and Healthy People 2020 (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
2010) identify the prevention of childhood obesity, particularly among disadvantaged groups, as
a top public health priority.
Public interventions for improving child and adolescent health typically take the form of
policies that limit access and provide price incentives and disincentives (Grossman 2005).
Raising price through taxation has been shown to be highly effective at reducing substance use
among adolescents (e.g., Grossman 2005; Brownell and Frieden 2009; Engelhard, Garson, and
Dorn 2009). Likewise, selective applications of taxation and subsidies may shift food
consumption away from unhealthy food and towards healthier alternatives (Cawley 2010; Powell

1

and Chaloupka 2009). The falling real cost of food has been suspected of being a contributing
factor in the recent epidemic of obesity (e.g. Lakdawalla and Philipson 2002; Chou, Grossman,
and Saffer 2004; Chou, Rashad, and Grossman 2008). In general, empirical studies that recently
examined the effects of prices on obesity (e.g., Chou, Grossman, and Saffer 2004; Rashad, Chou,
and Grossman 2006; Chou, Rashad, and Grossman 2008; Powell and Yanjun 2007; Powell 2009;
Powell, Chaloupka and Bao 2007; Auld and Powell 2009; Sturm and Datar 2005) found larger
and more significant effects than studies that examined the effects of food taxes (Powell,
Chriqui, and Chaloupka 2009; Fletcher, Frisvold, and Tefft 2010).
These studies typically attach location and year-specific prices or taxes to a variety of
micro data sets and further include location and year fixed effects in regression analyses. The
geographic unit of analysis is mostly states, but several studies focus on counties, cities, or even
zip codes. These price variables usually include price indices of meals in fast-food and fullservice restaurants, and an index of the price of food prepared at home. Prices of foods for
consumption at home are decomposed into prices of foods with low energy densities, defined as
low calories per pound of consumption (for example, fruits and vegetables) and those with high
energy densities (for example, fast food). There is reasonably consistent evidence that fruit and
vegetable prices, particularly non-starch variety, are associated with lower weight outcomes
while fast-food prices are associated with higher weight outcomes for the adolescent population
(Powell et al. 2013). These effects tend to be larger for minorities, children in lower-income
families, and children whose mothers have less than a high school education. Some, but not all,
of these results are based on BMI-measures of obesity calculated from self- or parental-reports of
height and weight. An obese child or youth is classified as one having a BMI at or above the 95th
percentile based on age- and gender-specific growth charts.

2

However, none of these results are based on clinically measured levels of body fatness.
BMI, defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared, is easy to calculate and
readily available from many social science datasets but its reliability for use in epidemiological
studies has come into question recently. Some of the weak or mixed results found by studies
using BMI may be due to its limited ability to correctly distinguish body fat from lean body mass
(e.g., Yusuf et al. 2004, 2005; Romero-Corral et al. 2006, 2007). Since it is body fat (and not
fat-free mass) that is responsible for the detrimental health effects of obesity, several studies
caution against a sole reliance on BMI and point to a need for using direct measures of body
composition in obesity studies (e.g. Smalley et al. 1990; Romero-Corral et al. 2006).
These concerns of reliability are particularly relevant for children and adolescents due to
the gender differences in physical growth as well as the gender and racial differences in the
association of BMI with a child’s body fatness (e.g. Daniels et al. 1997). Consequently, several
studies tested whether measures other than BMI can be used as valid measures for the detection
of the degree of obesity in obese children and adolescents. Widhalm et al. (2001) used
regression methods to assess the relationship between the percentage body fat and BMI along
with several demographic characteristics from a sample of 105 obese boys and 99 obese girls.
The authors concluded that BMI provides only limited insight to the degree of obesity for
children ages 10 and over. Skybo et al. (2003) recommend the use of body fat percentage for
identification of overweight status in school-age children.
Another related limitation of the previous studies is using BMI calculated from selfreported values of height and weight may induce its own bias. Previous studies show
considerable evidence of misreporting in weight and height (Rowland 1989; Gorber et al. 2007).
In an effort to determine the degree of agreement between self-reported and measured values of

3

height and weight, Gorber et al. (2007) reviewed 64 studies and conclude that there is evidence
for under-reporting for weight and BMI and over-reporting for height that varies between men
and women.
In this paper, we use clinically obtained body composition measures to conduct a
comprehensive analysis of the effects of various food prices on body fatness among youths ages
12 through 18 and compare the sensitivity of our findings against results using BMI. This is the
first study to consider clinically measured levels of body composition to investigate the effects of
food prices on body fatness among youths. The body composition measure that we employ is
the percentage body fat (PBF).1 The PBF measure is derived from three separate sources, two of
which rely upon bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) and one of which relies upon dual
energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA). We also employ clinically measured height and weight to
estimate the effects of prices on BMI. We employ data from the restricted-use versions of
NHANES to merge various county-level time-varying price variables.
Our findings have implications for the optimal targeting of public policies designed to
prevent or reduce childhood obesity, including the extent to which changes in farm, tax, and
subsidy policies might affect consumption patterns. Furthermore, the precision of alternative
body fat measurements for the quantification of body fat and the correct identification of the
degree of obesity in youths are important for the assessment of risk factors associated with
obesity and its detection among youths. The rest of the paper is laid out as follows. We discuss
our data and the way body fat measures are constructed in Section 2. We describe the empirical
methodology in Section 3 and summarize our results in Section 4. We provide a brief conclusion
in Section 5.

1

Note that PBF  100 * BF  100 * W  FFM , where W is weight, BF is body fat and FFM is fat-free mass.
W
W
4

2. Data
The data for the empirical analyses are drawn from several waves of the National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), a program of the National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS).2 The NHANES is a series of cross-sectional nationally representative surveys
designed to assess the health and nutritional status of adults and children in the U.S. The surveys
are unique in that they combine interviews and physical examinations administered by trained
nurses and technicians. The NHANES is ideal for the purposes of our paper because it is the
only set of nationally representative health surveys that contains measures of body composition
(body fat and fat-free mass) or information necessary for calculating these measures. In the
NHANES surveys, these measures were obtained by using readings from BIA and DXA. In this
paper, we use data from NHANES 1999-2000, NHANES 2001-2002, and NHANES 2003-2004
since all three measures of obesity outcomes we use are available only in these rounds.
2.1 Construction of Measures of Percentage Body Fat and Obesity
Body composition has been used for a long time by nutritionists and physiologists for the
purpose of studying nutrition, physical growth, and physical performance (Forbes 1999).
However, recent improvements in clinical measurements and the rising tide of obesity have led
to a renewed interest in body composition. In multivariate analyses, body composition has been
shown to be significantly better at explaining individual variations in strength, health, and
physical performance than body size (Björntorp 2001; Institute of Medicine 2004). Furthermore,
it has been demonstrated that fat-free mass (FFM) has a positive effect on health and physical
performance, while body fat (BF) has a negative effect (e.g., Heitmann et al. 2000; Allison et al.
2002). One potential obstacle to wide adoption of body composition in studying obesity is that it
is considerably more difficult and costly to obtain than BMI. However, advancements in various
2

See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes.htm for more information.
5

measurement technologies have reduced the cost of obtaining measures of body composition
considerably, which has led to their incorporation in the NHANES.
Advancements in measurement technology have resulted in the development of
alternative methods of measuring obesity and physical fitness, including body composition
derived from bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) and dual energy x-ray absorptiometry
(DXA).3 Although clinical researchers have been using these alternative measures for some
time, social scientists have only recently begun to take advantage of them in studying obesity,
primarily due to the lack of clinical data in large-scale social science datasets. Exceptions
include Burkhauser and Cawley (2008), Johansson et al. (2009), and Wada and Tekin (2010),
who studied labor market outcomes by using direct measurements or developing a method for
imputing body composition in social science datasets. In a recent paper, Grossman, Tekin, and
Wada (2012) examine the effects of fast-food restaurant advertising on television on the body
composition of adolescents as measured by percentage body fat and assess the sensitivity of
these effects compared to using conventional measures of obesity based on BMI.
One particular methodology developed by clinical investigators to measure body
composition is based on bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) (Kushner et al. 1990; Roubenoff
et al. 1995; Sun et al. 2005; Chumlea et al. 2002). In BIA, body composition is estimated by
measuring the electrical resistance of a body to a weak electrical current (National Institutes of
Health 1994). FFM registers a lower electrical resistance due to its high water content, but in
contrast, BF does not conduct electricity well (Chumlea et al. 2002; Sun et al. 2005). The
observed electrical resistance is then converted into FFM by entering it into a predetermined
equation obtained from a multiple regression analysis along with a set of easily acquired

3

See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/bc.pdf for more information.
6

characteristics of individuals such as weight, height, age, and gender. Once FFM is predicted,
BF is computed from the following identity:
BF  W – FFM.

(1)

We make use of two alternative measures of FFM contained in the NHANES 1999-2000,
NHANES 2001-2002, and NHANES 2003-2004. One of these measures was obtained from a
prediction equation developed by Chumlea (2002) for particular use with the NHANES III, while
the other was obtained from a prediction equation developed by Boileau (1996). For males,
Chumlea’s prediction equation is
FFM = -10.678 + 0.262 weight + 0.652 height2/resistance + 0.015 resistance,

(2)

where resistance is obtained from BIA. The corresponding equation for females is
FFM = - 9.529 + 0.168 weight + 0.696 height2/resistance + 0.016 resistance.

(3)

Boileau’s equation, which he developed specifically to measure FFM in children ages 8 through
16, is
FFM = 4.138 + 0.657height2/resistance + 0.16 weight - 1.31 male,

(4)

where male is a binary indicator that takes on the value of 1 if the individual is a male, and 0
otherwise.
Finally, we constructed PBF measures of obesity from dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry
(DXA) as an alternative to the two BIA-based measures of PBF described above. As opposed to
BIA, DXA does not rely on a specific prediction equation and yields direct measures of body fat
and fat-free mass. It is also one of the most widely adopted methods of measuring body
composition (Centers for Disease Control, 2008). DXA has long been used as a method to
measure bone mineral content and bone mineral density and considered to be a highly reliable
method because of its precision, accuracy, and low radiation exposure (Njeh et al. 1999; Wahner

7

et al. 1994; World Health Organization 1994; Genant et al. 1996).4 It is also increasingly being
used as a criterion method for body composition assessment for children (Cameron et al. 2004;
Eisenmann et al. 2004; Elberg et al. 2004; Frisard et al. 2005; Okasora et al. 1999; Lazzer et al.
2008; Eisenkolbl et al. 2001). Recent scientific developments in the DXA hardware along with
fan-beam technology have led to new software development for a body composition assessment,
which has allowed its incorporation into large surveys (Tylavsky et al. 2003).
In DXA, a complete body scan is administered with two low dose x-rays absorbed at
different rates of energies by bone and soft tissue mass. The participants are positioned supine
on the tabletop with their feet in neutral position and hands flat by their side. Each administered
scan of the NHANES subjects was analyzed by the Radiology Department at the University of
California, San Francisco using special software, standard radiologic techniques, and specific
protocols developed for the NHANES to produce assessments of various body components, such
as bone mineral content and density, fat mass, lean mass with and without bone mineral content,
and percentage body fat. 5 Because DXA was collected multiple times per person, all estimations
associated with DXA were carried out using a multiple-imputation methodology as
recommended by the NHANES technical documentation (NCHS 2008).
In addition to these three PBF measures developed by body composition analyses based
on BIA and DXA, we also estimate all of our models using clinically measured BMI. Typically,
an indicator of obesity is employed as an additional outcome. The indicator is equal to one if a
youth’s BMI is at or above the 95th percentile based on age-gender specific CDC growth charts.

4

See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/dxa/dxa_techdoc.pdf for more information on DXA.
Hologic software version 8:26:a3 is used to administer the scans (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2008). More detail on the NHANES DXA examination and protocol features can be found at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/dxa/dxx_c.pdf.

5

8

We do not employ that indicator because PBF is a continuous measure and because obesity
cutoffs based on PBF are not well developed.6
2.2 Food Prices
We make use of three separate measures of county- and year-specific food prices in our
analysis. These are the real price of a calorie of food consumed at home, the real price of fast
food consumed in restaurants, and the real price of fruits and vegetables consumed at home.
These prices are obtained from the Council of Community and Economic Research (C2ER) Cost
of Living Index, which has been published quarterly since 1968 for between 250 and 300 cities.7
Researchers have made extensive use of the C2ER prices in studying obesity (Chou, Rashad, and
Grossman 2008; Chou, Grossman, and Saffer, 2004; Powell 2009).
The C2ER collected prices of 44 different items during the period spanned by our
NHANES data (1999-2004) and also reported the weight of each item in the typical budget of a
household whose head holds a mid-management position. Included were the prices of 21 foods
for consumption at home and three food items sold by fast-food restaurants for consumption on
or off the premise.8 We computed annual averages of each price and developed an algorithm to
assign a relevant set of prices to each of the 3,114 counties in the U.S. In a number of cases,
counties were assigned prices based on the prices of the geographically nearest within-state
county for which price data were available. The measurement was based on the distance from
the geographic center point of one county to another.
6

See Section 5 for more details.
C2ER was formerly referred to as ACCRA and before that as the American Chamber of Commerce Researchers
Association.
8
The 21 prices of foods for consumption at home pertain to the following items: a pound of t-bone steak, a pound of
ground beef, a pound of Jimmy Dean or similar sausage, a pound of whole chicken, a 6 ounce can of tuna, a half
gallon of milk, a dozen large eggs, a 1 pound tub of butter, 8 ounces of Kraft parmesan, a 10 pound sack of potatoes,
a pound of bananas, a head of iceberg lettuce, a 24 ounce loaf of white bread, a 12 ounce can of coffee, a 4 pound
bag of sugar, an 18 ounce box of Kellogg’s corn flakes, a 16 ounce can of peas, a 30 ounce can of peaches, a 3
pound can of Crisco shortening, a 16 ounce can of corn, and a 2 liter bottle of Coke. The fast-food restaurant prices
are specified in the text.
7

9

The 21 foods for consumption at home were used to construct a Laspeyres index of the
price of one calorie for home consumption. The index is given by
21

L ijt 



ijt

C ib
.

i 1
21

 C
ib

(5)

ib

i 1

In this equation ijt is the price of one calorie in food type i in county j in year t, Cib is total
calories consumed from food type i in the base year (b) in the U.S. as a whole, and ib is the
price of one calorie in food type i in the base year in the U.S. as a whole. The index can be
rewritten as
21

L ijt 


i 1

  ijt

  ib
21


 ib C ib

.

 C
ib

(6)

ib

i 1

Let pib be the price of one gram of food type i in the base year in the U.S. as a whole, let qib be
the number of calories in one gram of that food type, and let Xib be the number of grams
consumed. Then
ib = (pib/qib)

(7)

Cib = qibXib

(8)

ibCib = pibXib

(9)

 ib C ib
21


i 1

ib

C ib



p ib X ib
21

p

ib

 k ib .

(10)

X ib

i 1

Note that kib in the last equation is the fraction of total food outlays spent on food item i in the
base year in the U.S. as a whole.

10

Given equation (10), equation (6) can be rewritten as
21

L ijt 


i 1

  ijt
k ib 
  ib


 


21

k
i 1

ib

 p ijt

 p ib

 c ib

 c it


.


(11)

Equation (11) contains the reasonable assumption that the number of calories in one gram of
each food item does not vary among counties in a given year. The U.S. Department of
Agriculture National Nutrient Database reports the number of calories in one gram of each food
item at a moment in time for the U.S. as a whole. There are, however, no data on variations in ci
over time. Therefore, we make a second reasonable assumption that ci is the same in each year.
This yields the final formula for Lijt:
21

L ijt 


i 1

 p ijt
k ib 
 p ib


 


21

k

(12)

r .

ib ijt

i 1

In equation (12), rijt = pijt/pib is a simple price relative: the price of item i in county j in year t
relative to the price of that item in the base period in the U.S. as a whole.
Equation (12) indicates that a Laspeyres index of the price of one calorie of food for
home consumption coincides with a Laspeyres index of the price of food for home consumption.
We compute it by first expressing each of the 21 food items as a simple price relative in which
the denominator is the average nationwide nominal price of that item in 2000.9 We take the
fractions of food outlays spent on each food item (kib) for the same year. We then deflate by the
annual Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index (CPI, 2000 = 1) for all goods and
services for the U.S. as a whole to convert the price of a calorie into real terms.
In addition to the price just described, we include a fast-food restaurant price in all of our
models. That price is computed from the prices of a McDonald’s Quarter-Pounder with cheese,

9

Each simple price relative is adjusted so that the trend in it between 1988 and 2006 is the same as the trend in the
comparable item in the Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index.
11

a thin-crusted cheese pizza at Pizza Hut or Pizza Inn, and fried chicken at Kentucky Fried
Chicken or Church’s. In each case, the price is expressed as a simple relative as in equation (12).
Then a weighted average of these simple price relatives is computed, where the weights are the
shares of outlays on each item in total outlays on the three combined in 2000. The resulting
price is deflated by the CPI. Finally, we compute a fruits and vegetables price from a subset of
the prices of six items purchased for consumption at home: potatoes, bananas, lettuce, peas,
peaches, and corn. The methodology is the same as that employed for the fast-food price.
Simple price relatives are obtained and then averaged using as weights the shares of each item in
total expenditures on fruits and vegetables in 2000. Finally the resulting price is deflated by the
CPI.
3. Empirical Implementation

Our goal is to estimate the effects of various types of food prices on obesity outcomes of
youths. To accomplish this goal, we specify a regression equation in the following form:
Yijt = α0 + α1Realcalaijt + α2Realfastaijt + α3Zijt + µt + νj + εijt.

(13)

In equation (13), Yijt is one of the obesity outcomes for youth i in county j surveyed in
year t. The key regressors are the price of a calorie in food for home consumption (Realcalaijt)
and the real price of food sold by fast-food restaurants (Realfastijt). The vector Zijt consists of
youth and household specific characteristics. These include indicators for race and ethnicity, age
in months, indicators for the ratio of income to the family’s appropriate poverty threshold (less
than 1.35, between 1.35 and 3, and between 3 and 5, and income missing) indicators for the
living situation of the youth (in a married household, in a household headed with a female, in a
household headed by a male, and living situation missing), household size, indicators for the

12

education of the household head (less than 8th grade, 9th to 11th grade, high school or GED, some
college, college or higher).
The equation also includes controls for year fixed effects, µt, that account for unmeasured
variables that vary over time at the national level and that are correlated with obesity outcomes
and their determinants. Finally, the model includes county fixed effects, νj, to account for timeinvariant, area-specific unmeasured factors that are correlated with the prices and weight. For
example, locations with a high proportion of minority and low-income populations may have a
higher concentration of fast-food restaurants, which may push the price of food in these
restaurants down. These areas may also have a higher concentration of obese individuals if low
socio-economic status and poverty are positively associated with obesity. Then a failure to
control for county fixed effects may result in a biased estimate of the effect of food prices on
youth obesity. Finally, the variable εijt is an idiosyncratic error term.
We predict that α1 and α2 should be negative. We realize, however, that the effects of
increases in the two food prices are not unambiguous. For example, an increase in the price of
one calorie in food consumed at home can lead to an increase in food consumed at fast-food
restaurants. To cite another example, dense convenience food prepared and consumed at home
could rise in response to an increase in the price of fast food obtained in restaurants. Since we
employ body composition rather than the consumption of certain foods as outcomes, our
estimates will reflect these types of substitutions. In that sense, they are more informative than a
regression in which the only outcome is fast-food restaurant consumption or consumption of
convenience food. Note that the identification of the two price coefficients in the regression
comes from within county changes in prices over time.

13

Obviously not all foods are unhealthy in the sense that increases in their consumption
lead to weight gains. Therefore, we also estimate a version of equation (13), in which the calorie
price is replaced by the fruits and vegetables price. We continue to include the fast-food
restaurant price in that specification. Here our prediction is that the coefficient of the fruits and
vegetables price should be positive. This reflects a substitution away from “healthy” foods and
towards “unhealthy” foods in response to an increase in the price of the former. The
specification takes into account an important point made by Auld and Powell (2009). They show
that an increase in the price of foods with high energy densities (for example, food consumed at
fast-food restaurants), with the price of foods with low energy densities (for example, fruits and
vegetables) held constant, will result in a reduction in total calories consumed if the price of
dense food is cheaper per calorie consumed than the price of non-dense food also per calorie
consumed.
The Auld-Powell model highlights another reason why the signs of the price coefficients
in equation (13) are ambiguous. In that equation, the price of one calorie in food for home
consumption is held constant when the price of food consumed in fast-food restaurants varies.
But that does not guarantee that the prices of dense and non-dense food consumed at home are
fixed. Moreover, when the price of one calorie consumed at home varies, with the price of fastfood restaurant food held constant, prices of dense and non-dense food may be changing. In
theory, one would want to include the calorie prices of many different types of food in the
regression. Multicollinearity among these prices makes that approach infeasible, however.
Intercorrelations among the three prices that we do use are fairly high. That is another reason for
the two alternative specifications and also is a reason for interpreting the results with caution.

14

We estimate all of our models separately for males and females because Chumlea’s
measure is based on formulae developed separately for each gender. Furthermore, body
structures may exhibit major differences in size, shape, composition, and function during
puberty. For example, most girls begin puberty between the ages of 9 and 13, while most boys
experience puberty later between the ages of 10 and 16. This suggests that a pooled specification
may not fully account for gender-specific differences in body growth. Finally, in light of the
well-known health disparities between whites and minorities, we also present estimates from
regressions that are estimated separately for each gender and race/ethnicity combination. Doing
so will allow us to assess the extent to which the food price-body composition relationship
differs by race/ethnicity.
4. Results

Definitions, means and standard deviations of all variables used in the empirical analysis
are reported in Table 1. Means and standard deviations are weighted using the medical
examination sampling weights provided in the NHANES. Note that nonwhites are oversampled,
which is why there are more observations for nonwhites in the columns that contain data by
gender and race/ethnicity.
All three measures of PBF indicate that females possess a higher percentage of their total
weight as body fat than males. Furthermore, the means for PBF from the measures developed
from the prediction equations of Boileau and Chumlea are very close to each other. Those
generated by DXA are somewhat larger, but not far from the other two measures of PBF. Note
that both Boileau and Chumlea are based on BIA, while DXA is based on x-ray imaging. While
the PBF figures are indicative of a higher percentage body fat among females than males, this
pattern does not hold if we focus on BMI. Nonwhites have higher values of PBF than whites for

15

both males and females. One exception to this pattern is DXA measured for males, where the
difference is quite small. While the differences are perhaps not as striking as one might expect,
nonwhite adolescents and especially adults exhibit higher rates of obesity than whites (Flegal et
al. 2012; Ogden et al. 2012). Since obese youths are likely to become obese adults, this
motivates, in part, the gender and race/ethnicity-specific regression analysis later in this section.
Additionally, the means for control variables follow patterns that are usually consistent
with one’s expectations. For example, heads in households where minority children live are
more likely to have lower education, more likely to be in poverty, less likely to be married, and
more likely to be female.
Table 2 presents pairwise correlations among our outcome measures. Consistent with the
means presented in Table 1, there is a high degree of correlation among our three body
composition measures. For example, the four gender and race/ethnicity-specific correlation
coefficients between PBF from Boileau and Chumlea are at least as large as 0.98. The eight
pairwise correlations between the PBF measure from DXA and the PBF measures from Boileau
and Chumlea are somewhat lower, ranging from 0.83 to 0.92. The twelve pairwise correlation
coefficients between BMI and each measure of PBF are smaller, falling into an interval from
0.67 through 0.88. Similar conclusions hold within each of the four gender-majority/minorityspecific groups.
We present our regression results in Tables 3-5. In Table 3, Columns 1 and 2 show the
results for all males and columns 3 and 4 show them for all females. Columns 1 and 3 present
estimates from the model specifications that include the real price of one calorie of food for
home consumption and the real price of food sold by fast-food restaurants. Columns 2 and 4
show estimates from the model specifications that replace the real price of one calorie of food for

16

home consumption with the real price of fruits and vegetables. Finally, Table 2 contains four
panels, each presenting the price estimates for one of the outcomes: PBF based on Boileau, PBF
based on Chumlea, PBF based on DXA, and BMI. 10 Note that all the regressions are weighted
using the appropriate sampling weights and the standard errors are clustered by county.11 This
allows the error term to be correlated among different youths in the same county both at a
moment in time and over time.
Focusing on the first panel (PBF-Boileau), we find that the price of one calorie of food
consumed at home is associated with a decrease in PBF for both genders, but the male estimate is
smaller in magnitude than the female estimate and is not statistically significant. Evaluated at
sample means, the male elasticity of -0.87 is slightly larger in absolute value than the female
elasticity of -0.76. That is a 10 percent increase in the price of one calorie in food for home
consumption lowers PBF for males by approximately 9 percent and lowers PBF for females by
approximately 8 percent.
The fast-food restaurant price coefficient in the first panel is sensitive to the specific
model that is being estimated. When the price of a calorie is held constant, the coefficient is
negative and significant for both genders (see columns one and three). On the other hand, the
coefficient is smaller and not significant but still negative when the price of fruits and vegetables
is held constant (see columns two and four). These results are due in part to multicollinearity,
and we interpret them with caution. Here and in the remainder of the paper, we summarize the
magnitude of the fast-food price effect based on an average elasticity implied by the two
10

In the interest of space, we only provide a discussion of the price coefficients in the paper. However, the
estimates on other covariates are usually consistent with those documented in the relevant literature. The full results
for the models with each of the outcomes are available from the authors upon request.
11
Note that the sample sizes in the four panels of Table 3 vary with the outcome variables, depending on the
availability of these outcome measures in various NHANES rounds. In order to assess whether the differences in
the price effects in the table are due to the differences in the sample sizes, we investigated the results for all these
models limiting the analyses to the same sample size. These results are very similar to those presented here and are
available from the authors upon request.
17

specifications. For males the figure is -1.73 and for females, it is -0.76. When PBF is measured
by the Boileau formula, the coefficient on the price of fruits and vegetables is positive for both
genders (see columns 2 and 4 of panel 1) but significant only for females. The female elasticity
of 0.88 is larger than the male elasticity of 0.72.
Taken as a whole, the results in the first panel of Table 3 suggest that the price of healthy
food, measured by the price of fruits and vegetables, is a more important determinant of female
PBF than of male PBF. When this price rises by 10 percent, PBF rises by 9 percent for females
but by 7 percent for males, and the estimate is significant only for females. On the other hand,
the price of a calorie in food consumed at home or in fast-food restaurants plays a more
important role, as reflected by elasticities, in male than in female body fatness. For example, a
10 percent reduction in the price of fast-food restaurant food is associated with a 17 percent
increase in PBF for males, which is much larger than the 8 percent reduction for females. This
result and the corresponding result for the food at home price may reflect a greater willingness of
girls to substitute towards healthy food when the price of unhealthy food rises.
In general, the results for the other three outcomes (PBF-Chumlea, PBF-DXA, and BMI)
tell a similar story. Male calorie price elasticities range from -0.68 in the case of PBF-DXA to
-1.00 in the case of BMI. The corresponding range for female elasticities is -0.52 for BMI to
-0.84 for PBF-Boileau. Male fast-food price elasticities range from -0.76 (PBF DXA) to -1.73
(PBF-Boileau). Female fast-food price elasticities are all negative only for the Boileau-PBF and
Chumlea-PBF (-0.76 for the former and -0.50 for the latter). The only negative and significant
effect of this variable for females is obtained in the model that includes the price of a calorie in
food consumed at home. The price of fruits and vegetables never has a significant effect on male

18

PBF. For females, the effect always is positive and significant, and the elasticities lie in a fairly
tight range from 0.79 for BMI to 0.88 for PBF-Boileau.
In Tables 4 and 5, we investigate whether the effects of food prices on PBF differ
between adolescents from different racial and ethnic backgrounds. To do this, we estimate our
gender-specific models for whites in the former table and for nonwhites (blacks and Hispanics)
in the latter table. Before these results are discussed, it is useful to point to some factors that
might generate differences.
An overarching consideration is that nonwhite youths come from families with lower
incomes than white youths. To be sure, such proxies for family income, and the education of the
head of the household, and indicators for income to poverty ratios are included as regressors.
But these variables are held constant at lower levels for nonwhites than for whites in the
estimation of food price effects. Hence, in a fundamental sense, differences in price effects can
be traced to interactions between family income and price.12
Components that contribute to the “full” price of consuming food in addition to the
money price may also contribute to differences in observed money price elasticities between
youths from low-income families and other youths. One of these components is the time price.
Shopping time (the sum of the time spent traveling to and from a food outlet and waiting in line
to pay for the purchase) is required to obtain food for consumption at home. Travel and waiting
time also are required to consume food at restaurants. The time price of food consumption,
defined as time required to purchase and consume it multiplied by the value of time, is
negatively related to the per capita availability of food outlets. A one percent change in the

12

We do not estimate separate regressions by gender, race, and income because the resulting estimates would be
based on a small number of observations in each group.
19

money price of food amounts to a smaller percentage change in the full price and hence to a
smaller percentage change in consumption the larger the time price component.
Another component of the full price of food consumption is the monetary value of the
future health consequences of that consumption. This component is positive in the case of food
served in fast-food restaurants and acts as a tax on its consumption. On the other hand, the
component is negative in the case of fruits and vegetables and acts as a subsidy to its
consumption. A one percent change in money price results in a larger percentage in full price the
smaller are the future health costs or the larger are the future health benefits.
The time price of consuming food is likely to be smaller for low-income families who
have lower wage rates and hence a lower value of time. This effect is reinforced if fast-food
restaurants are more likely to locate in poor areas, but weakened if supermarkets and grocery
stores are less likely to locate in these areas. While previous research has documented these
locational patterns, Lee (2012) finds that both fast-food restaurants and large-scale grocery stores
are more prevalent in poor neighborhoods.13 These considerations suggest that minorities may
be more sensitive to fast-food restaurant prices while leaving differences in the sensitivity of
responses to fruits and vegetables prices an open issue.
Future costs should be less important to parents and youths in poorer, less educated
families, and future benefits should be more important to parents and youths in richer, moreeducated families. Future costs and benefits are smaller for poor parents who have low wage
rates and plausibly expect their children to have low wage rates as adults. Another factor is that
the poor and the less educated are likely to have lower time discount factors (higher rates of time
preference for the present) than the rich and more educated (Becker and Mulligan 1997).

13

Lee’s data are at the census-track level, but it is not clear how many tracts are represented.
20

Variations in the evaluation of future costs and benefits imply larger fast-food price elasticities
for the poor but smaller fruits and vegetables price elasticities.
Turning to the results in Tables 4 and 5, one sees that that the eight fruits and vegetables
price coefficients are positive for whites and six of the eight coefficients are significant. In Table
4, for white females, the elasticity is approximately 2 for BMI, and PBF-Boileau and PBFChumlea, while it is lower at 0.42 for PBF-DXA. The range for white males is from 3.58 for
PBF-Boileau to 0.74 for BMI. The pattern is very different for nonwhites in Table 5. Only one
coefficient is positive and significant (female PBF-DXA), and all four male coefficients are
negative. These results are consistent with an explanation that stresses higher rates of time
preference for the present and lower expected future wage rates among nonwhite youths and
their parents than among white youths.
The fast-food price results tell a somewhat similar story, although here the evidence is
less conclusive. Focusing on a comparison of white and nonwhite males, one sees that the eight
fast-food restaurant coefficients are negative and significant for the latter group, while only four
of the eight coefficients are negative and significant for the former group. Moreover, two of the
coefficients are positive (for BMI and PBF-DXA) for white males. The average elasticity range
for non-whites (between -1.12 for BMI and -1.74 for PBF-Boileau) is much tighter than for
whites (between -0.28 in the case of PBF-DXA and -2.20 in the case of PBF-Boileau). These
findings are consistent with the lower future costs and benefits hypothesis, but they also are
consistent with an explanation that stresses lower time costs for nonwhite youths or their parents.
For both white and nonwhite females, the price of fast food plays a much less important
role in body composition outcomes than for white and nonwhite males. Only one of the
nonwhite female coefficients is negative. Two of the eight coefficients are positive for white

21

females, and only three of the six positive coefficients are significant. These results mirror the
gender difference in the fast-food restaurant price obtained from non-race specific regressions. It
is puzzling, however, that the price elasticity for nonwhite females never is negative.
Finally, male body composition outcomes continue to be more responsive to changes in
the price of a calorie in food consumed at home than female outcomes when separate estimates
are obtained for whites and nonwhites. While the elasticities are bigger for white males than for
nonwhite males, the coefficients on which they are based are estimated more precisely for the
latter group. For example, the PBF-DXA coefficient is not significant for white males. A
similar conclusion emerges when the estimates for white and nonwhite females are compared.
Except in the case of PBF-Boileau, the white female elasticity is bigger than the nonwhite female
elasticity. But the calorie price coefficient never is significant for the former group, while three
of the four coefficients are significant for the latter group.
5. Conclusions

The proportion of children who are obese has reached epidemic levels in the last three
decades. The rising prevalence of childhood obesity is a source of concern among public health
officials because of the well-documented health problems tied to obesity for both children and
adults. There are a large number of policy efforts under way to stop or reverse this trend. For
example, the Child Nutrition and Women Infants and Children (WIC) Reauthorization Act of
2004 required that all local education agencies participating in the National School Lunch
Program create local wellness policies no later than July 2006. The Kids Walk-to-School
Program developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) aims to increase
opportunities for daily physical activity by encouraging children to walk to and from school in
groups accompanied by adults. An increasing number of schools are limiting access to foods

22

high in fats and sugars by banning soda machines and snack bars in cafeterias and school stores.
The School Breakfast and the National School Lunch Programs are two federal entitlement
programs that provide nutritionally balanced, low-cost or free breakfasts and lunches to millions
of children each school day.
Regulating the prices of healthy and unhealthy foods is a promising option for
influencing obesity outcomes among youths. Previous studies of the analysis of the effect of
prices on obesity outcomes of youths have exclusively used BMI or BMI-based indicators of
obesity. However, obesity is defined as excess of body fat, and it is body fat (and not fat-free
mass) that is responsible for the detrimental health effects of obesity. Therefore, an increasing
number of studies point to the limitation of BMI in distinguishing fat from fat-free mass. They
caution against a sole reliance on BMI and point to a need for developing alternative measures of
obesity.
In this study, we consider alternative measures of obesity based on body composition
rather than a BMI-based measure to investigate the effects of food prices on obesity among
children and to assess their performance relative to BMI. In particular, we estimate the effects of
the prices of various types of food on percentage body fat outcomes derived from BIA and DXA
using data from various waves of NHANES. We also examine whether the effects of food prices
on these outcomes differ between nonwhite and white adolescents and motivate this analysis by
the lower socioeconomic background that characterizes nonwhites.
Our findings suggest that increases in the real price of one calorie in food for home
consumption and the real price of fast-food restaurant food lead to improvements in body
composition outcomes among youths. We also find that an increase in the price of fruits and
vegetables has negative consequences for these outcomes. The former effects are more

23

important for males compared to females, for nonwhite males compared to white males and in
the case of the calorie price for nonwhite females compared to white females. The “healthy
food” price effect, reflected by the price of fruits and vegetables, is more important for whites
compared to nonwhites.
There are two important implications of our study. One pertains to future research with
such measures of body composition as the PBF and the other pertains to public policy. With
regard to the first issue, many of our estimates suggest that the PBF is at least as sensitive to
prices as BMI and in some instances more sensitive to prices than BMI. Given that, it would be
useful to employ an obesity indicator defined by PBF as an additional outcome. We have placed
this issue on an agenda for future research because obesity cutoffs based on PBF result in an
implausibly large percentage of youths being classified as obese. For example, Boreham, Twisk,
and Savage (1997) classify adolescent boys with PBF greater than 20 percent as obese and
adolescent girls with PBF greater than 24 percent as obese. Grossman, Tekin, and Wada (2012)
show that if these cutoffs are applied to their NLSY97 data, approximately 50 percent of males
and 90 percent of females are classified as obese. Even if the cutoffs for adults recommended by
the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (2006) for adults of greater
than 25 percent for males and greater than 30 percent for females are used, approximately 22
percent of males and 60 percent of females are identified as obese. The development of more
reasonable cutoffs deserves high priority on an agenda for future research. Part of that
undertaking should involve an examination of the characteristics of individuals classified as
obese by one measure but not the other and vice versa. It also is valuable to obtain PBF cutoffs
that result in the same percentage of obese youths as BMI cutoffs.

24

With regard to the policy implications of our research, “fat taxes” or taxes on foods with
high caloric content have received a considerable amount of recent attention in the so-called
“war on obesity.” One specific version is a tax on sugar-sweetened beverages (soda). Research
summarized by Grossman and Mocan (2011) finds that soda taxes have very modest effects on
calories consumed from soda on BMI. Indeed, Fletcher, Frisvold, and Tefft (2010) find the
modest decline in soda-based calories is completely offset by increases in the consumption of
other high-calorie drinks such as juice and milk. Our results do not directly speak to the
potential impacts of a soda tax, but they do suggest that a tax on meals purchased in fast-food
restaurants or a subsidy to the consumption of fruits and vegetables would lead to better obesity
outcomes among adolescents. These findings take account of any adverse effects due to
substitution towards or away from other food items in response to taxes and subsidies.
Of course, we also find that an increase in the price of a calorie regardless of its source
would improve obesity outcomes. Clearly, a food tax could be imposed to increase the price of a
calorie. If it took the form of a specific excise tax (fixed amount per calorie in a gram of each
food type), it would have the desirable effect of raising the relative prices of foods that are cheap
sources of calories. An ad valorem tax (fixed percentage of price) would not have that effect
because it would not alter the relative price of dense food. But the latter tax would be much
easier to impose and administer. Taken at face value, our results suggest that such a tax might be
an effective tool in the war on obesity.
A good deal of caution is required here. Taxes are blunt instruments that impose
significant welfare costs on individuals who consume food in moderation. Moreover, in the case
of adolescents, an additional issue is that parents may more easily and immediately affect the
choices made by their children than the government. Indeed, some of our results point to higher

25

rates of time preference and lower expected future wage rates among nonwhite parents and
youths as explanations of why minorities are more sensitive to fast-food prices and less sensitive
to fruits and vegetables prices than whites. These interpretations add to the wide range of
benefits to early childhood intervention programs emphasized by Heckman and colleagues (for
example, Conti and Heckman 2012). These programs aim to improve the cognitive and noncognitive skills of minorities and perhaps to give them more of a future orientation as well.
Hence, we view our contribution as an input into the policy debate concerning the most effective
ways to reverse the upward trend in obesity. We have shown that selective taxes or subsidies
may be able to accomplish part of this goal. We also have shown that uniform increases or
decreases in the price of food do have the expected impacts on body weight. An integrated
approach to nutrition could be more focused and effective than the current approach used by the
federal and states governments in taxing and subsidizing nutritional goods and allocating food
stamps, which currently involves little or no consideration of the impact of these decisions on
youth obesity. We leave it to others to evaluate the external costs and benefits of policies to
combat obesity.

26

References

Allison, D.B., Zhu, S.K., Plankey, M., Faith, M.S., and Heo, M. (2002). “Differential
Associations of Body Mass Index and Adiposity with All-cause Mortality among Men in
the First and Second National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys (NHANES I
and NHANES II) Follow-up Studies.” International Journal of Obesity 26(3):410-16.
Auld, M.C. and Powell, L.M. (2009). “Economics of Food Energy Density and Adolescent
Body Weight.” Economica 76(304):719-740.
Becker, G. S., and Mulligan, C.B. (1997). “The Endogenous Determination of Time
Preference.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3): 729-758.
Björntorp, P. (2001). “Do Stress Reactions Cause Abdominal Obesity and Comorbidities?”
Obesity Reviews 2(2):73-86.
Boileau, R.A. (1996). “Body Composition Assessment in Children and Youths.” In
Encyclopedia of Sports Medicine. The Child and Adolescent Athlete, International
Olympic Committee, Volume VI. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Science, pp. 523–537.
Boreham, C. A., Twisk J., and, Savage, M.J. (1997). “Physical Activity, Sports Participation,
and Risk Factors in Adolescents.” Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise
29(6):788-793.
Brownell, K. and Frieden, T.R. (2009). Ounces of Prevention — The Public Policy Case for
Taxes on Sugared Beverages. New England Journal of Medicine 360(18):1805-08.
Burkhauser, R.V. and Cawley, J. (2008). “Beyond BMI: The Value of More Accurate Measures
of Fatness and Obesity in Social Science Research.” Journal of Health Economics
27(2):519-529.
Cameron N., Griffiths, P.L., Wright, M.M., Blencowe, C., Davis, N.C., Pettifor, J.M., and
Norris, S.N. (2004). “Regression Equations to Estimate Percentage Body Fat in African
Prepubertal Children Aged 9 y.” Am J Clin Nutr 2004; 80:70–75.
Cawley, J. (2010). “The Economics of Childhood Obesity.” Health Affairs 29(3): 364-371.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2008). National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey 2003-2004. Documentation, Codebook, and Frequencies: Dual-Energy X-ray
Absorptiometry. January. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/dxa/dxx_c.pdf
Chou, S.Y., Rashad, I. and Grossman, M. (2008). “Fast-Food Restaurant Advertising on
Television and Its Influence on Childhood Obesity.” Journal of Law & Economics
51(4):599-618.

27

Chou, S.Y., Grossman, M. and Saffer , H.(2004). “An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity:
Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” Journal of Health
Economics 23(3):565-587.
Chumlea, W.C., Guo, S.S., Kuczmarski, R.J., Flegal, K.M., Johnson, C.L., Heymsfield, S.B.,
Lukaski, H.C., Friedl, K., and Hubbard, V.S. (2002). “Body Composition Estimates
from NHANES III Bioelectrical Impedance Data.” International Journal of Obesity
26(12):1596-1609.
Conti, G. and Heckman , J.J. (2012). “The Economics of Child Well-Being.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 18466, October.
Daniels, S.R. (2006). “The Consequences of Childhood Overweight and Obesity.” The Future
of Children 16(1):47-67.
Daniels, S.R., Khoury, P.R. and Morrison, J.A. (1997). “The Utility of Body Mass Index as a
Measure of Body Fatness in Children and Adolescents: Differences by Race and
Gender.” Pediatrics 99(6):804-807.
Dietz, W.H. (1998). “Health Consequences of Obesity in Youth: Childhood Predictors of Adult
Disease.” Pediatrics 101(3 Pt 2):518-525.
Eisenkölbl, J., Kartasurya, M. and Widhalm, K. (2001). “Underestimation of Percentage Fat
Mass Measured by Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis Compared to Dual Energy X-ray
Absorptiometry Method in Obese Children.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition
55:423–429.
Eisenmann JC, Heelan KA, Welk GJ. (2004). “Assessing Body Composition among 3- to 8-yearold Children: Anthropometry, BIA, and DXA.” Obes Res 2004;12:1633–1640.
Elberg J, McDuffie JR, Sebring NG et al. (2004). “Comparison of Methods to Assess Change in
Children’s Body Composition.” Am J Clin Nutr 2004;80:64–69.
Engelhard, C., Garson, A., and Dorn, S. (2009). Reducing Obesity: Policy Strategies from the
Tobacco Wars. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute.
Flegal, K.M., Carroll, M.D., Kit, B.K. and Ogden, C.L. (2012). “Prevalence of Obesity and
Trends in the Distribution of Body Mass Index among US Adults.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 307(5): 491-497.
Fletcher, J.M., Frisvold, D.E. and Tefft, N. (2010). “The Effects of Soft Drink Taxes on Child
and Adolescent Consumption and Weight Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics
94(11-12):967-974.
Forbes, A. (1999). “Body Composition: Influence of Nutrition, Physical Activity, Growth and
Aging.” In M. Shils et al. (eds.) Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 9th edition.
Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, pp. 789-809.

28

Freedman, D.S., Dietz, W.H., Srinivasan, S.R. and Berenson, G.S. (1999). “The Relation of
Overweight to Cardiovascular Risk Factors among Children and Adolescents: The
Bogalusa Heart Study.” Pediatrics 103(6 Pt 1):1175–82.
Freedman, D., Mei, Z., Srinivasan, S., Berenson, G. and Dietz , W.(2007). “Cardiovascular Risk
Factors and Excess Adiposity among Overweight Children and Adolescents: The
Bogalusa Heart Study.” Journal of Pediatrics 150(1):12–17.e2.
Frisard MI, Greenway FL, Delany JP. (2005). “Comparison of Methods to Assess Body
Composition Changes during a Period of Weight Loss.” Obes Res 2005;13:845–854.
Genant, H.K., Engelke, K., Fuerst, T., Güer, C-C., Grampp, S., Harris, S.T., Jergas, M., Lang, T.,
Lu, Y., Majumdar, S., Mathur, A. and Takada, M. (1996). “Noninvasive Assessment of
Bone Mineral and Structure: State of the Art.” J Bone Miner Res 11(6):707-30.
Gorber, S. Connor, Tremblay, M., Moher, D. and Gorber, B. (2007). “A Comparison of Direct
vs. Self-report Measures for Assessing Height, Weight, and Body Mass Index: A
Systematic Review.” Obesity Reviews 8(4): 307-326.
Grossman, M. (2005). “Individual Behaviors and Substance Use: The Role of Price.” In
Lindgren, B. and Grossman, M. (eds.) Substance Use: Individual Behaviors, Social
Interactions, Markets and Politics. Volume 16 of Advances in Health Economics and
Health Services Research. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 15-39.
Grossman, M., and Mocan, N. (2011). “The Obesity Epidemic: Causes and Current Policy
Perspectives.” Baker Institute Policy Report. Rice University: James A. Baker III
Institute for Public Policy 46:1-11.
Grossman, M., Tekin, E., Wada, R. (2012). “Fast-Food Restaurant Advertising on Television
and Its Influence on Youth Body Composition.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 18640, December.
Heitmann, B.L., Erikson, H., Ellsinger, B.M., Mikkelsen, K.L. and Larsson, B. (2000).
“Mortality Associated with Body Fat, Fat-free Mass and Body Mass Index among 60year-old Swedish Men - A 22-year Follow-up: The Study of Men Born in 1913.” Int J
Obes 24(1):33-37.
Hill, J.O., Catenacci, V.A. and Wyatt, H.R. (2006). “Obesity: Etiology.” In Shils, M., et
al.(eds.) Modern Nutrition in Health and Disease, 9th edition. Baltimore: Williams and
Wilkins:1013-1028.
Institute of Medicine (2004). Preventing Childhood Obesity: Health in the Balance.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.

29

Johansson, E., Böckerman, P., Kiiskinen, U., Heliövaara, M. (2009). “Obesity and Labour
Market Success in Finland: The Difference Between Having a High BMI and Being Fat.”
Economics and Human Biology 7(1): 36–45.
Kumanyika, S. and Grier, S. (2006). “Targeting Interventions for Ethnic Minority and LowIncome Populations.” The Future of Children 16(1):187-207.
Kushner, R.F., Kunigk, A., Alspaugh, M., Andronia, P.T., Leitch, C.A., and Schoeller, D.A.
(1990). “Validation of Bioelectrical-Impedance Analysis as a Measurement of Change in
Body Composition in Obesity.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 52(2): 219-223.
Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. (2002). “The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change: A
Theoretical and Empirical Examination.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 8946.
Lazzer, S., Bedogni, G., Agosti, F., Agosti, F., De Col, A., Mornati, D., and Sartorio, A. (2008).
“Comparison of Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry, Air Displacement Plethysmography
and Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis for the Assessment of Body Composition in
Severely Obese Caucasian Children and Adolescents.” British Journal of Nutrition
100(4):918-924.
Lee, H. (2012). “The Role of Local Food Availability in Explaining Obesity Risk among Young
School-aged Children.” Social Science & Medicine 74(8):1193-1203.
McKinnon, R.A, Orleans, C.T., Kumanyika, S.K. , Haire-Joshu, D., Krebs-Smith, S.M.,
Finkelstein, E. A., Brownell, K.D., Thompson, J.W., and Ballard-Barbash, R. (2009).
“Considerations for an Obesity Policy Research Agenda.” American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 36(4):351-7.
Mocan, N.H. and Tekin, E. (2011). “Obesity, Self-esteem and Wages.” In Grossman, M., and
Mocan, N. (eds.) Economic Aspects of Obesity. University of Chicago Press, pp. 349-380.
National Center for Health Statistics (2008). “Technical Documentation for the 1999-2004 Dual
Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry (DXA) Multiple Imputation Data File”
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhanes/dxa/dxa_techdoc.pdf .
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (2006). “Weight Control
Information Network.”
http://win.niddk.nih.gov/publications/understanding.htm#distribution.
National Institutes of Health (1994). Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis in Body Composition
Measurement. National Institutes of Health Technology Assessment Conference
Statement, December 12-14,
http://consensus.nih.gov/1994/1994BioelecticImpedanceBodyta015PDF.pdf

30

Njeh, C.F., Fuerst, T., Hans, D., Blake, G.M. and Genant, H.K.(1999). “Radiation Exposure in
Bone Mineral Density Assessment.” Appl Radiat Isot 50(1):215-36.
Ogden, C.L, Carroll, M.(2010). Prevalence of Obesity Among Children and Adolescents:
United States, Trends 1963-1965 Through 2007-2008. National Center for Health
Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Ogden,C.L., Carroll,M.D., Curtin,L.R., Lamb,M.M., and Flegal,K.M. (2010). Prevalence of
High Body Mass Index in US Children and Adolescents, 2007-2008. JAMA: The Journal
of the American Medical Association 303(3), 242-249.
Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D, Kit, B.K. and Flegal, K.M. (2012). “Prevalence of Obesity and
Trends in Body Mass Index among US Children and Adolescents, 1999-2010.” Journal
of the American Medical Association 307(5):483-490.
Okasora, K., Takaya, R., Tokuda, M., Fukunaga, Y., Oguni, T., Tanaka, H., Konishi, K., and
Tamai, H. (1999). “Comparison of Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis and Dual Energy
X-ray Absorptiometry for Assessment of Body Composition in Children.” Pediatrics
International 41(2):121–125.
Powell, L.M. (2009). “Fast Food Costs and Adolescent Body Mass Index: Evidence from Panel
Data.” Journal of Health Economics 28(5):963-70.
Powell, L.M. and Yanjun , B.(2007). “Food Prices, Access to Food Outlets and Child Weight
Outcomes.” Presented at the Seventh World Congress of the International Health
Economics Association, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Powell, L.M., Chaloupka, F.J. and Bao, Y. (2007). “The Availability of Fast-food and Fullservice Restaurants in the United States: Associations with Neighborhood
Characteristics.” American Journal of Preventative Medicine 33(4 Suppl):S240-S245.
Powell, L.M., and Chaloupka, F.J. “Food prices and obesity: evidence and policy implications
for taxes and subsidies. Milbank Q 2009; 87: 229–257.
Powell, L.M., Chriqui, J., and Chaloupka, F.J., 2009 Associations between State-level Soda
Taxes and Adolescent Body Mass Index. Journal of Adolescent Health 45, S57-S63.
Powell, L.M., Chriqui, J., Khan, T., Wada, R., and Chaloupka, F. (2013). “Assessing the
Potential Effectiveness of Food and Beverage Taxes and Subsidies for Improving Public
Health: A Systematic Review of Prices, Demand and Weight Outcomes,” Obesity
Reviews 14(2): 110-28.
Rashad, I., Chou, S.-Y. and Grossman, M. (2006). “The Super Size of America: An Economic
Estimation of Body Mass Index and Obesity in Adults.” Eastern Economic Journal
32(1,Winter):133-148.

31

Romero-Corral, A., Montori, V.M., Somers, V.K., Korinek, J., Thomas, R.J., Allison, T.G.,
Mookadam, F., and Lopez-Jimenez, F. (2006). “Association of Bodyweight with Total
Mortality and with Cardiovascular Events in Coronary Artery Disease: A Systematic
Review of Cohort Studies.” The Lancet 368(9536):666-678.
Romero-Corral, A., Somers, V.K., Sierra-Johnson, J., Jensen, M.D., Thomas, R.J., Squires,
R.W., Allison, T.J., Korinek, J. and Lopez-Jimenez, F. (2007). “Diagnostic Performance
of Body Mass Index to Detect Obesity with Coronary Artery Disease.” European Heart
Journal 28(17):2087-2093.
Roubenoff, R., Dallal, G.E. and Wilson, P.W. (1995). “Predicting Body Fatness: The Body
Mass Index Vs. Estimation by Bioelectrical Impedance.” American Journal of Public
Health 85(8 Pt ):1063.
Rowland, M. L. (1989). “Reporting Bias in Height and Weight Data.” Statistical Bulletin,
70(2): 2-11.
Serdula, M. K., Ivery, D., Coates, R., Freedman, D. S., Williamson, D. F. and Byers, T. (1993).
“Do Obese Children Become Obese Adults? A Review of the Literature.” Preventive
Medicine 22(2):167-77.
Skybo, T. and Ryan-Wenger , N. (2003). “Measures of Overweight Status in School-Age
Children.” The Journal of School Nursing 19(3):172-180.
Smalley, K.J., Knerr, A.N., Kendrick, Z.V., Colliver, J.A. and Owen, O.E. (1990).
“Reassessment of Body Mass Indices.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
52(3):405-408.
Strauss, R.S. (2000). “Childhood Obesity and Self-Esteem.” Pediatrics 105(1):e15.
Sturm, R. and Datar, A. (2005). “Body Mass Index in Elementary School Children,
Metropolitan Area Food Prices and Food Outlet Density.” Public Health 119(12):105968.
Sun, G., French, C.R., Martin, G.R., Younghusband, B., Green, R.C., Xie, Y.G., Mathews, M.,
Barron, J.R., Fitzpatrick, D.G., Gulliver, W., Zhang, H. (2005). “Comparison of
Multifrequency Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis with Dual-energy X-ray
Absorptiometry for Assessment of Percentage Body Fat in a Large, Healthy Population.”
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 81(1):74-78.
Tylavsky, F., Lohman, T., Blunt, B.A., Schoeller, D.A., Fuerst, T., Cauley, J.A., Nevitt, M.C.,
Visser, M. and Harris, T.B. for the Health ABC Study. (2003). “ QDR 4500A DXA
Overestimates Fat-free Mass Compared with Criterion Methods.” Journal of Applied
Physiology 94(3):959-965.

32

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2010). Healthy People 2020. HHS announces
the nation’s new health promotion and disease prevention agenda. Press release:
http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/DefaultPressRelease.pdf.
Wada, R. and Tekin, E. (2010). “Body Composition and Wages.” Economics and Human
Biology 8(2):242-254.
Wahner, H.W. and Fogelman, I. (1994). The Evaluation of Osteoporosis: Dual Energy X-ray
Absorptiometry in Clinical Practice. Martin Dunitz Ltd., London.
Wang, G. and Dietz, W.H. (2002). “Economic Burden of Obesity in Youths Aged 6 to 17 Years:
1979–1999.” Pediatrics 109(5):e81-e86.
Whitaker, R., Wright, J., Pepe, M., Seidel, K. and Dietz , W. (1997). “Predicting Obesity in
Young Adulthood from Childhood and Parental Obesity.” The New England Journal of
Medicine 337(13):926-7.
White House Task Force on Childhood Obesity: Solving the Problem of Childhood Obesity.
2010.
http://www.letsmove.gov/sites/letsmove.gov/files/TaskForce_on_Childhood_Obesity_M
ay2010_FullReport.pdf.
Widhalm, K., Schönegger, K., Huemer, C. and Auterith, A. (2001). “Does the BMI Reflect
Body Fat in Obese Children and Adolescents? A Study Using the TOBEC Method.”
International Journal of Obesity 25(2):279-85.
World Health Organization (1994). “Assessment of Fracture Risk and its Application to
Screening for Post Menopausal Osteoporosis.” Report of a WHO Study Group. World
Health Organ Tech Rep Ser. 843:1-129.
Yusuf, S., Hawken, S., Ounpuu, S., Bautista, L., Franzosi, M-G, Commerford, P., Lang, C.C.,
Rumboldt, Z., Onen, C.L., Lisheng, L., Tanomsup, S., Wangai Jr., P., Razak, F., Sharma,
A.M and Anand, S.S. (2004). “Effect of Potentially Modifiable Risk Factors Associated
with Myocardial Infarction in 52 Countries (the INTERHEART Study): Case-Control
Study.” The Lancet 364(9438):937-952.
Yusuf, S., Hawken, S., Ounpuu, S., Bautista, L., Franzosi, M.G., Commerford, P., Lang, C.C.,
Rumboldt, Z., Onen, C.L., Lisheng, L., Tanomsup, S., Wangai Jr., P., Razak, F., Sharma,
A.M., Anand, S.S.; INTERHEART Study Investigators (2005). “Obesity and the Risk of
Myocardial Infarction in 27,000 Participants from 52 Countries: A Case-control Study.”
The Lancet 366(9497):1640-1649.

33

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
All

Whites
Females

Variable

Males

Females

Males

PBF-Boileau1

19.847
(9.359)
20.322
(7.777)
24.158
(7.872)
23.171
(5.474)
1.056
(0.136)
1.010
(0.074)
1.029
(0.153)
0.663
(0.473)
0.153
(0.360)
0.184
(0.388)
15.836
(2.302)
0.433
(0.480)
0.180
(0.371)
0.387
(0.476)
0.062
(0.241)
4.328
(1.387)
0.636
(0.456)
0.418
(0.493)
0.582
(0.493)
0.099

29.401
(8.575)
31.024
(8.410)
33.742
(7.082)
23.465
(5.692)
1.057
(0.139)
1.013
(0.074)
1.033
(0.158)
0.652
(0.477)
0.158
(0.365)
0.190
(0.393)
15.829
(2.268)
0.450
(0.480)
0.184
(0.374)
0.365
(0.469)
0.070
(0.255)
4.306
(1.354)
0.609
(0.461)
0.491
(0.500)
0.509
(0.500)
0.107

19.306
(9.262)
19.815
(7.686)
24.344
(7.642)
23.021
(5.259)
1.041
(0.135)
1.008
(0.0717)
1.013
(0.156)

PBF-Chumlea1
PBF-DXA1
BMI
Price of a calorie of food
for home consumption
Price of fast-food
Price of fruits and vegetables
White
Black
Hispanic
Age
0.00 ≤ PIR* < 1.85
1.85 ≤ PIR ≤ 3.00
3.00 < PIR ≤ 5.00
PIR is missing
Household size
Household head married
Household head female
Household head male
Household head

34

15.87
(2.309)
0.333
(0.460)
0.180
(0.375)
0.487
(0.492)
0.0463
(0.210)
4.167
(1.295)
0.695
(0.436)
0.368
(0.482)
0.632
(0.482)
0.0916

Nonwhites
Males
Females

28.371
(8.574)
30.055
(8.385)
33.522
(6.976)
22.935
(5.260)
1.044
(0.142)
1.011
(0.0723)
1.017
(0.164)

20.916
(9.467)
21.329
(7.865)
23.793
(8.298)
23.457
(5.866)
1.085
(0.134)
1.015
(0.0779)
1.061
(0.143)

31.355
(8.238)
32.862
(8.154)
34.188
(7.279)
24.465
(6.307)
1.082
(0.129)
1.017
(0.0775)
1.062
(0.142)

15.86
(2.256)
0.356
(0.462)
0.192
(0.381)
0.452
(0.486)
0.0647
(0.246)
4.165
(1.264)
0.663
(0.445)
0.452
(0.498)
0.548
(0.498)
0.106

0.454
(0.498)
0.546
(0.498)
15.77
(2.287)
0.630
(0.459)
0.179
(0.365)
0.191
(0.372)
0.0927
(0.290)
4.646
(1.503)
0.520
(0.471)
0.516
(0.500)
0.484
(0.500)
0.115

0.454
(0.498)
0.546
(0.498)
15.76
(2.293)
0.627
(0.463)
0.170
(0.359)
0.203
(0.384)
0.0797
(0.271)
4.570
(1.472)
0.507
(0.473)
0.564
(0.496)
0.436
(0.496)
0.109

living situation missing
HH education<8th grade
HH education: 9-11 grade
HH education:
high school/GED
HH education: some
college
HH Education: college
or higher
Year: 1999
Year: 2000
Year: 2001
Year: 2002
Year: 2003
Year: 2004

(0.299)
0.083
(0.267)
0.150
(0.348)
0.270
(0.435)
0.300
(0.451)
0.198
(0.393)
0.111
(0.314)
0.185
(0.388)
0.193
(0.395)
0.163
(0.369)
0.168
(0.374)
0.180
(0.384)

(0.309)
0.086
(0.272)
0.151
(0.351)
0.280
(0.442)
0.301
(0.452)
0.182
(0.381)
0.110
(0.312)
0.182
(0.386)
0.194
(0.395)
0.169
(0.374)
0.173
(0.378)
0.173
(0.378)

(0.289)
0.0394
(0.184)
0.0966
(0.288)
0.276
(0.441)
0.333
(0.467)
0.255
(0.433)
0.0974
(0.297)
0.184
(0.388)
0.208
(0.406)
0.157
(0.364)
0.158
(0.365)
0.196
(0.397)

(0.308)
0.0405
(0.185)
0.101
(0.293)
0.295
(0.449)
0.325
(0.463)
0.239
(0.422)
0.0986
(0.298)
0.166
(0.372)
0.212
(0.409)
0.164
(0.371)
0.167
(0.373)
0.192
(0.394)

(0.319)
0.170
(0.365)
0.253
(0.424)
0.257
(0.424)
0.234
(0.411)
0.0857
(0.268)
0.138
(0.345)
0.187
(0.390)
0.165
(0.371)
0.173
(0.378)
0.189
(0.391)
0.148
(0.355)

(0.312)
0.171
(0.369)
0.246
(0.424)
0.251
(0.425)
0.255
(0.429)
0.0769
(0.259)
0.130
(0.337)
0.213
(0.410)
0.160
(0.366)
0.177
(0.381)
0.184
(0.387)
0.136
(0.343)

Observations1
3,348
3,084
898
827
2,450
2,257
Notes: Standard deviations are in parentheses. Means and standard deviations are weighted using the NHANES
sampling weights. All the prices are in real terms. * PIR stands for poverty-income ratios. 1 Because observation
sizes differ slightly by the outcome, the mean and the observations sizes are reported for BMI, which had the
maximum observation size. Observations sizes for PBF-Boileau, PBF-Chumlea, PBF-DXA are slightly less. They
are available from authors upon request.

35

Table 2
Pairwise Correlations among Body Fat and BMI Measures
All Males
PBF-Boileau
PBF-Chumlea
BMI
PBF-DXA

PBF-Boileau
1.000
0.987
0.797
0.827

PBF-Chumlea

BMI

PBF-DXA

1.000
0.787
0.857

1.000
0.681

1.000

PBF-Chumlea

BMI

PBF-DXA

1.000
0.890
0.910

1.000
0.847

1.000

PBF-Chumlea

BMI

PBF-DXA

1.000
0.786
0.863

1.000
0.671

1.000

PBF-Chumlea

BMI

PBF-DXA

1.000
0.897
0.921

1.000
0.861

1.000

PBF-Chumlea

BMI

PBF-DXA

1.000
0.792
0.867

1.000
0.702

1.000

PBF-Chumlea

BMI

PBF-DXA

1.000
0.882
0.902

1.000
0.828

1.000

All Females
PBF-Boileau
PBF-Chumlea
BMI
PBF-DXA

PBF-Boileau
1.000
0.983
0.826
0.887

White Males
PBF-Boileau
PBF-Chumlea
BMI
PBF-DXA

PBF-Boileau
1.000
0.986
0.802
0.829

White Females
PBF-Boileau
PBF-Chumlea
BMI
PBF-DXA

PBF-Boileau
1.000
0.984
0.835
0.898

Nonwhite males
PBF-Boileau
PBF-Chumlea
BMI
PBF-DXA

PBF-Boileau
1.000
0.988
0.790
0.841

Nonwhite females
PBF-Boileau
PBF-Chumlea
BMI
PBF-DXA

PBF-Boileau
1.000
0.981
0.811
0.881

Notes: Sample sizes for pairwise correlations range between 2865 and 3023 for males, 1949 and 2759
for females, 772 to 898 for white males, 577 and 827 for white females, 2098 and 2453 for nonwhite
males, and 1372 and 2258 for nonwhite males. Correlations are weighted using the NHANES
sampling weights.
36

Table 3
Estimates of the Effect of Food Prices on Body Composition by Gender
All Males
PBF - Boileau
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

-16.436 (-1.397)
[-0.874]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-38.742** (-2.596)
[-1.970]

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

-21.063* (-1.770)
[-0.755]
-29.383 (-1.614)
[-1.490]

-29.441* (-1.824)
[-1.010]

13.839 (0.883)
[0.717]

R-squared
Observations
PBF - Chumlea
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

-16.515 (-1.645)
[-0.857]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-28.825*** (-2.717)
[-1.430]

0.114
2,993

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

0.113
2,993

-15.650* (-1.909)
[-0.684]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-21.770** (-2.411)
[-0.910]

0.213
2,759

-20.886 (-1.567)
[-1.030]

-23.396 (-1.387)
[-0.762]

0.110
3,002

-22.020*** (-4.843)
[-1.000]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-22.109*** (-4.973)
[-0.963]

-7.575 (-0.490)
[-0.246]
25.720* (1.946)
[0.854]

0.1989
2,759

0.198
2,759

-22.520** (-2.031)
[-0.707]
-14.600 (-1.304)
[-0.610]

16.182 (0.918)
[0.484]

7.403 (0.827)
[0.315]

R-squared
Observations
BMI
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

0.213
2,759

-24.636* (-1.950)
[-0.837]

0.110
3,002

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

-14.818 (-0.985)
[-0.509]
25.079* (1.960)
[0.878]

9.687 (0.754)
[0.490]

R-squared
Observations
PBF - DXA
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

All Females

0.125
3,368

0.125
3,368

34.553* (1.884)
[1.032]
26.623** (2.254)
[0.819]

0.150
2,257

0.160
2,257

-11.618 (-1.389)
[-0.523]
-17.378** (-2.329)
[-0.757]
-4.978 (0.793)
[-0.221]

-4.744 (-0.553)
[-0.204]

4.585 (0.674)
[0.198]
17.862** (2.609)
[0.7861]

R-squared
0.138
0.137
0.152
0.153
Observations
3,351
3,351
3,085
3,085
Notes: All regressions are weighted using the NHANES sampling weights. t-statistics reported in parentheses are based on
standard errors that are clustered at the county level. All the prices are in real terms. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Elasticities reported in brackets are computed at sample means.
37

Table 4
Estimates of the Effect of Food Prices on Body Composition, Whites by Gender
White Males
PBF – Boileau
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

-58.178** (-2.322)
[-3.130]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-77.68*** (-3.947)
[-4.050]

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

-21.036 (-0.370)
[-0.771]
-6.773 (-0.199)
[-0.353]

-53.001** (-2.160)
[-1.880]

68.24** (2.601)
[3.576]

R-squared
Observations
PBF - Chumlea
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

-58.494*** (-3.584)
[-3.070]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-64.407*** (-3.872)
[-3.270]

0.171
807

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

0.173
807

-37.198 (-1.622)
[-1.590]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-31.046* (-1.770)
[-1.280]

0.261
754

-3.167 (-0.119)
[-0.160]

-50.057* (-1.967)
[-1.670]

0.163
811

-31.888*** (-3.548)
[-1.440]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-21.792** (-2.255)
[-0.953]

6.183 (0.168)
[0.207]
59.697* (1.773)
[2.012]

0.246
754

0.247
754

-41.502 (-0.678)
[-1.290]
17.33 (0.928)
[0.717]

-81.770** (-2.613)
[-2.450]

48.29** (2.489)
[2.001]

R-squared
Observations
BMI
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

0.263
754

-35.780 (-0.631)
[-1.230]

0.162
811

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

-5.299 (-0.141)
[-0.188]
58.551* (1.683)
[2.090]

49.720** (2.232)
[2.537]

R-squared
Observations
PBF – DXA
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

White Females

0.168
902

0.170
902

-41.472 (-0.565)
[-1.240]
13.896 (0.374)
[0.422]

0.221
652

0.221
652

-31.492 (-0.893)
[-1.430]
6.224 (0.506)
[0.272]
16.892 (1.382)
[0.744]

-18.869 (-1.113)
[-0.831]

27.027 (1.570)
[1.190]
45.164*** (3.246)
[2.002]

R-squared
0.221
0.221
0.206
0.209
Observations
898
898
827
827
Notes: All regressions are weighted using the NHANES sampling weights. t-statistics reported in parentheses are based on
standard errors that are clustered at the county level. All the prices are in real terms. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Elasticities reported in brackets are computed at sample means.
38

Table 5
Estimates of the Effect of Food Prices on Body Composition, Nonwhites by Gender
Nonwhite Males
PBF – Boileau
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

-21.106*** (-3.669)
[-1.090]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-35.546*** (-4.747)
[-1.720]

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

-33.477*** (-4.087)
[-1.154]
-36.131*** (-3.436)
[-1.750]

0.981 (0.088)
[0.032]

-15.579* (-1.913)
[-0.790]

R-squared
Observations
PBF – Chumlea
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

-17.675** (-2.965)
[-0.899]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-27.530*** (-5.192)
[-1.310]

0.114
2,186

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

0.114
2,186

-17.82*** (-3.942)
[-0.812]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-30.14*** (-5.326)
[-1.280]

0.154
2,005

-27.668*** (-3.451)
[-1.310]

3.193 (0.260)
[0.099]

0.112
2,191

-22.381*** (-5.479)
[-1.030]

Price of fast food
Elasticity

-26.633*** (-6.328)
[-1.150]

12.306 (1.083)
[0.380]
11.297 (1.165)
[0.365]

0.145
2,005

0.141
2,005

-11.04 (-1.263)
[-0.351]
-29.81*** (-3.940)
[-1.270]

29.21* (1.797)
[0.866]

-11.29 (-1.564)
[-0.503]

R-squared
Observations
BMI
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

0.151
2,005

-37.907*** (-4.881)
[-1.240]

0.113
2,191

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

9.622 (0.885)
[0.312]
12.151 (1.387)
[0.412]

-11.761* (-1.824)
[-0.585]

R-squared
Observations
PBF – DXA
Price of a calorie
Elasticity

Price of fruits and vegetables
Elasticity

Nonwhite Females

0.153
2,466

0.152
2,466

27.79*** (3.076)
[0.875]
0.166
1,605

0.167
1,605

-14.206** (-2.382)
[-0.628]
-25.542*** (-3.262)
[-1.100]
-11.754* (-1.790)
[-0.531]

-0.626 (-0.0853)
[-0.026]

3.997 (0.703)
[0.166]
9.968 (1.492)
[-0.433]

R-squared
0.109
0.107
0.122
0.122
Observations
2,453
2,453
2,258
2,258
Notes: All regressions are weighted using the NHANES sampling weights. t-statistics reported in parentheses are based on
standard errors that are clustered at the county level. All the prices are in real terms. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. Elasticities reported in brackets are computed at sample means.
39

