                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DROUGHT OF OPPORTUNITIES:
CONTEMPORANEOUS AND LONG TERM IMPACTS OF RAINFALL SHOCKS ON HUMAN CAPITAL

                                                Manisha Shah
                                            Bryce Millett Steinberg

                                             Working Paper 19140
                                     http://www.nber.org/papers/w19140


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 2013




    We would like to thank Marianne Bitler, Kitt Carpenter, Ed Glaeser, Rob Jensen, Larry Katz, Michael
    Kremer, and Emily Oster for helpful comments. Seminar participants at CMC, CSUF, Harvard, HKUST,
    NBER Summer Institute, UC Berkeley, UCI, UCSC, USC, and PacDev provided useful feedback.
    We thank Wilima Wadhwa for generously sharing the ASER data. The views expressed herein are
    those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
    reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
    NBER publications.

    © 2013 by Manisha Shah and Bryce Millett Steinberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
    to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
    © notice, is given to the source.
Drought of Opportunities: Contemporaneous and Long Term Impacts of Rainfall Shocks on
Human Capital
Manisha Shah and Bryce Millett Steinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 19140
June 2013
JEL No. I25,J1,O12

                                            ABSTRACT

Higher wages are generally thought to increase human capital production especially in the developing
world. We show that human capital investment is procyclical in early life (in utero to age 3), but then
becomes countercyclical. We argue this countercyclical effect is caused by families investing more
time in schooling when outside options are worse. We show that children and mothers report a lower
likelihood of work in drought years, and children are more likely to attend school. In addition, we
find long term impacts of these shocks: adults who experienced more rainfall during school years have
lower overall total years of schooling and lower wages. These results suggest that the opportunity
cost of schooling, even for fairly young children, is an important factor in determining overall human
capital investment.


Manisha Shah
Department of Public Policy
University of California, Los Angeles
Luskin School of Public Affairs
3250 Public Affairs Building
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1656
and NBER
manishashah@ucla.edu

Bryce Millett Steinberg
Harvard University
mmillett@fas.harvard.edu
1       Introduction

Human capital investment is an important determinant of economic growth (Mankiw et
al., 1992). However, there is still much debate over the determinants of human capital
investment. The majority of empirical evidence from poor countries suggests the relationship
is procyclical (see for example, Jacoby and Skoufias (1997); Jensen (2000); Thomas et al.
(2004); Maccini and Yang (2009)). However, there is some evidence from Latin America
suggesting countercyclical human capital investment (Duryea and Arends-Kuenning, 2003;
Schady, 2004; Kruger, 2007).1 Theoretically, the relationship is ambiguous; if time and
income are important inputs into human capital, then increased wages could either increase
or decrease human capital investment. As early as 1977, Rosenzweig and Evenson showed
that higher wages are associated with lower schooling rates, due to increased opportunity
costs of staying in school. If children react to higher wages by leaving school early to join the
workforce, it could raise overall inequality in poor countries or even stunt long term growth.
        We argue that at least part of the differences in these studies may be due to the differential
production function of human capital at different ages. Early in life, nutritional inputs and
medical care are particularly important, and thus the income effect of wage changes is likely
to be more important for human capital production. Later, as time inputs (of both parents
and children) become more important in human capital production, the substitution effect
may dominate, particularly in contexts with relatively low school fees. A relatively new
literature documents that these time intensive investments, particularly early in life, might
have long lasting effects (Cunha and Heckman, 2008; Almond and Currie, 2011; Gertler et
al., 2012).
        In this paper we use rainfall fluctuations in rural India to measure the effect of pro-
ductivity on human capital investment at all ages of a child’s life, exploiting fluctuations
in monsoon rainfall over time and across districts. Productivity shocks could affect human
    1
   All of these papers use school enrollment or years of schooling as their measure of human capital invest-
ment.



                                                     1
capital investment through wages in two important ways: by changing total income and
by changing the relative price of time. For example, in a drought year, agricultural pro-
ductivity decreases (especially when agriculture is rainfed), and the relative value of time
spent farming decreases. The income effect of this change is straightforward. Families have
fewer resources to spend on human capital production, whether this is school fees, books, or
proper nutrition. The effect of a drought on time inputs into human capital production is
ambiguous. The price of schooling (relative to outside options such as agricultural labor or
home production) for children has decreased. This could cause substitution toward human
capital production since it has become relatively less expensive. In addition, parents might
have more time during drought years to devote to their children’s human capital production
due to fewer outside opportunities. Since time and income are both important inputs into
human capital, the overall effect of drought (and positive rainfall shocks) on human capital
attainment is not obvious. The income effect will push human capital investment down-
ward unambiguously in drought years, but the substitution effect could cause households to
substitute time toward human capital production.2
       In our setting, rural India, we posit that the income effect is most likely to dominate
during the in utero period, because the time input of parents (and children) is limited during
this stage, and nutrition and other prenatal inputs are especially crucial for development.3
By contrast, the substitution effect will become relatively more important as children age.
Primary school is free and compulsory,4 and the Indian government has built many schools
to keep the costs of attendance low. For example, in 1971, 53 percent of villages had a
public primary school, in 1991, 73 percent did (Banerjee and Somanathan, 2007), and today
   2
     We note the caveat that a drought or positive rainfall shock may result in more than an income and/or
substitution effect. For example, drought may also influence the disease environment, relative prices of
goods, informal safety nets, access to credit, migration, etc. Later in the paper, we investigate some of these
channels as alternative explanations for our results.
   3
     Most studies that show long term impacts of the in utero environment attribute findings to Barker’s
(1994) famous fetal origins hypothesis. The fetal origins hypothesis helps explain why economic and environ-
mental conditions during pregnancy may have long term impacts on health and socioeconomic status (e.g.,
Almond and Currie (2011); Almond (2006); Almond and Mazumder (2011); Black et al. (2007); Dêschenes
et al. (2009); Royer (2009)).
   4
     While primary school is officially compulsory, in practice many children are in and out of school.


                                                      2
almost 100 percent of Indian villages have a primary school (Government of India, 2011).
In addition, child labor is still relatively common in rural India, particularly on household
farms. Agricultural labor is often traded in spot markets, allowing women and children
to work for wages without long term contracts or other extensive margin frictions (Kaur,
2011). While younger children are likely not working as day laborers, they could easily be
substituting time in school for labor in the home, either on household plots, or in domestic
work (cooking, cleaning, childcare) while older relatives leave the home to work if wages are
high.
       We test these hypotheses using ASER data from 2005-2009; we observe approximately
2 million rural children from almost every state in India. The data includes four distinct
measures of literacy and numeracy for each child whether or not he is currently enrolled in
school.5 In addition, our data allow us to look at more standard educational measures such
as school enrollment, drop out behavior, and being on track in school (age for grade). Since
the survey was conducted every year over five years, we can control for age, year of survey,
and district, identifying off within district variation in rain shock exposure.
       We find that during drought years, children report higher school attendance and score
higher on simple math tests. By contrast, during high rainfall years, children score worse
on both math and reading tests, and are more likely to report having dropped out. Using
a large, national household labor and employment survey, we corroborate this finding that
rural children are less likely to report being enrolled in school when rainfall is higher. For the
children in our sample, the substitution effect of higher wages dominates the income effect
for human capital investment, and higher rainfall is associated with lower test scores and
school attainment.
       We also estimate the impacts of early life rainfall on current test scores and schooling
outcomes. We find that, by contrast, more early life rainfall is associated with higher test
scores in both math and reading, and children who experience more rain before age 5 are
   5
    This is rare since tests are primarily conducted at school, and thus scores are usually only available for
currently enrolled kids who attended school on the day the test was given.


                                                      3
more likely to be enrolled in school and less likely to be off track in school. Thus, the income
effect dominates for these younger children, though the magnitude of the effects on test
scores are smaller than the contemporaneous effects.
   Lastly, we estimate the long term impacts of droughts and positive rainfall shocks at
every age on the oldest children in our sample. We find that for sixteen year olds, both the
positive early life effects and negative school age effects are still present. In addition, we
look at the effect of rainfall shocks at all ages on schooling and wages for adults aged 16-30
in the labor and employment survey and find similar results for total years of schooling and
wages.
   Our contribution to this literature is threefold. First, as far as we know, this is the first
paper to document the possibility that positive productivity shocks can lead to lower levels
of human capital attainment using test scores as the measure of human capital investment.
Test scores are a much better measure of human capital as they measure output/production
as opposed to the previous literature which has focused on school enrollment. Second,
unlike the previous literature which focuses on shocks at certain critical ages in a child’s
development, we focus on a child’s entire lifecycle from in utero to age 16. This allows us to
say something about the relative importance of time vs. income at all ages of a child’s human
capital development. We will show that human capital investment is procyclical from the in
utero phase to age two, but then becomes counter cyclical. Lastly, we provide new evidence
on the long term effects of cumulative shocks on human capital attainment and wages of
young adults. While previous research has suggested that that these shocks represent simple
intertemporal substitution of school time and that children make up these differences in
human capital (Jacoby and Skoufias (1997); Funkhouser (1999)), we find quite the opposite.
For example, children ages 11-13 complete approximately .2 more years for every drought
experienced (and .2 fewer years for every positive rainfall shock relative to normal years).
This constitutes a substantial shock to human capital attainment during a period when most
children will already be on the margin between dropping out and continuing.


                                               4
        The findings from this paper are important from a policy perspective since wage subsidy
programs such as NREGA in India (or EITC in the United States) have become a popu-
lar means of redistribution as they provide aid to the poor along with corresponding work
incentives.6 However, wage subsidies affect not only overall income, but also the prevailing
wage and time cost of family members. For example, NREGA, a massive program which
generated 2.57 billion person-days of employment (in 2010-2011) boosted the real daily agri-
cultural wage rate 5.3 per cent (Berg et al., 2012). It is possible such wage subsidy programs
could lead to decreased human capital production.


2       Background and Data

2.1       Rainfall Shocks in India

In rural India, 66.2 percent of males and 81.6 percent of females report agriculture (as
cultivators or laborers) as their principal economic activity (Mahajan and Gupta, 2011).
Almost 70 percent of the total net area sown in India is rainfed; thus, in this context we
would expect rainfall to be an important driver of productivity and wages. While there is
plenty of evidence showing droughts adversely affect agricultural output in India (see for
example Rao et al. (1988), Pathania (2007)), we also explore this question empirically using
the World Bank India Agriculture and Climate Data set. In Table A1 we show results from
regressions of rice, wheat, and jowar on rainfall shocks. In drought years, crop yields are
significantly lower regardless of the type of crop. In Section 5.1 we will test explicitly for
rainfall’s effect on wages and probability of working for both adults and children in rural
India.
    6
    Recent examples include programs in Malawi, Bangladesh, India, Philippines, Zambia, Ethiopia, Sri
Lanka, Chile, Uganda, and Tanzania. However, the practice of imposing work requirements for welfare
programs stretches back at least to the British Poor Law of 1834 (Imbert and Papp, 2012).




                                                 5
2.2      Cognitive Testing and Schooling Data

Every year since 2005, the NGO Pratham has implemented the Annual Status of Education
Report (ASER), a survey on educational achievement of primary school children in India
which reaches every rural district in the country.7 We have data on children for 2005-
2009, giving us a sample size of approximately 2 million rural children. The sample is a
representative repeated cross section at the district level. The ASER data is unique in that
its sample is extremely large and includes both in and out of school children. Since cognitive
tests are usually administered in schools, data on test scores is necessarily limited to the
sample of children who are enrolled in school (and present when the test is given). However,
ASER includes children ages 5-16, who are currently enrolled, dropped out, or have never
enrolled in school. In Table 1 we describe the characteristics of the children in our sample
as well as their test scores.
       The ASER surveyors ask each child four questions each in math and reading (in their
native language). The four math questions are whether the child can recognize numbers
1-9, recognize numbers 10-99, subtract, and divide. The scores are coded as 1 if the child
correctly answers the question, and 0 otherwise. The four literacy questions are whether the
child can recognize letters, recognize words, read a paragraph, and read a story. In addition,
we calculate a “math score” variable, which is the sum of the scores of the four numeracy
questions. For example, if a child correctly recognizes numbers between 1-9 and 10-99, and
correctly answers the subtraction question, but cannot correctly answer the division question,
then that child’s math score would be coded as 3. The “reading score” variable is calculated
in exactly the same way. Approximately 65 percent of the children tested can recognize
numbers between 1 and 9, and about 38 percent can correctly do a division problem. The
reading scores are slightly higher: nearly 90 percent of children tested can recognize letters
and 45 percent can read a story.
   7
    This includes over 570 districts, 15,000 villages, 300,000 households and 700,000 children in a given
year. For more information on ASER, see http://www.asercentre.org/ngo-education-india.php?p=
ASER+survey


                                                   6
2.3     Rainfall Data

To determine rainfall shock years and districts, we use monthly rainfall data which is collected
by the University of Delaware.8 The data covers all of India in the period between 1900-2008.
The data is gridded by longitude and latitude lines, so to match these to districts, we simply
use the closest point on the grid to the center of the district, and assign that level of rainfall
to the district for each year.
      We define a positive shock as yearly rainfall above the 80th percentile and negative shock
(drought) as rainfall below 20th percentile within the district. The “positive” and “negative”
shocks should not be taken in an absolute sense—we are not comparing districts that are
prone to higher rainfall to those that are prone to lower rainfall. These are simply high or
low rainfall years for each district within the given time frame (1975-2008). Later we define
“rain shock” as equal to 1 if rainfall is above the 80th percentile, -1 if rainfall is below the
20th percentile, and 0 otherwise.9 We also estimate our effects using rainfall quintiles and
employing the definition of drought from the Indian Meteorological Department, and none
of the results are sensitive to the definition of drought we employ.
      Figure 1 shows the prevalence of drought by district over time (for the years we have
cohort variation in in utero drought exposure) and indicates there is both a lot of variation
over time and across districts in terms of drought exposure. Between 6 and 48 percent of
districts experience a drought in any given year, and 80 percent of the districts experience
at least one drought in the 16 year period that we have child cohort variation. Table A3
shows the percent of districts each year that experience a drought or positive rainfall shock;
the variation in rainfall across time and space is quite extensive.
      It is important to note that in general positive rainfall shocks will be good for agricul-
tural output, especially in India where rice cultivation is very important. However, there
might also be some cases where positive rainfall shocks are capturing extreme rainfall which
  8
     The data is available at: http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/html_pages/download.html#
P2009
   9
     These are similar to the definitions employed in Kaur (2011) and Jayachandran (2006).


                                                7
could have negative consequences for agricultural output. Therefore while negative shocks
(i.e. droughts) are always bad for agricultural output, positive rainfall shocks are generally
positive but in some cases could have negative impacts on productivity.


2.4     NSS Data

To examine the impact of drought on work and wages, we use the NSS (National Sample
Survey) Round 60, 61, 62, and 64 of the NSS data which was collected between 2004 and
2008 by the Government of India’s Ministry of Statistics. This is a national labor and
employment survey collected at the household level all over India. This dataset gives us
measures of employment status as well as wages at the individual level. Given the potential
measurement error in the valuation of in-kind wages, we define wages paid in money terms.
We use data from all rural households in this survey and merge with our district level rainfall
data to explore the relationship between weather shocks, labor force participation and wages.


3     Empirical Strategy

3.1     Contemporaneous Rainfall Shock Regressions

For our primary specification, we take advantage of the quasi-random nature of rainfall
shocks within district (and across districts within a year) in order to measure the effect of
drought and positive rainfall shocks on test scores. Specifically, we estimate the regression:


                     Sijty = α + β1 δj,y + β2 δj,y−1 + θj,t + γj + φt + ψy + ijty                  (1)

      where Sijty is the test score of student i in district j born in year t and surveyed in year
y, δj,y is an indicator for whether there was a negative (or positive) rainfall shock in district
j in year y, δj,y−1 is a lagged indicator of the rainfall shock, θj,t is a vector of early life rainfall
exposure, from in utero to age 4, γj is a vector of district fixed effects, φt is a vector of age
fixed effects, and ψy is a vector of year of survey fixed effects. In this regression we compare


                                                   8
children who are surveyed in different years from the same district. Since our regressions
contain district level fixed effects, we should not be biased by systematic differences across
districts. β1 is the coefficient of interest and it is the impact of current year drought on the
various cognitive test scores. Standard errors are clustered at the district level.
      One possible issue with using droughts as quasi-random shocks, is that they may be
correlated over time. There are certainly districts in which droughts are more common in all
years, but this should not affect our empirical results, since the district fixed effects model
uses within district variation in timing of droughts to identify causal effects. However, if it
is the case that droughts this year are correlated with droughts next year, then it is difficult
to tell the extent to which we are picking up the effects of a single shock or multiple years of
rainfall. We test for serial correlation directly in Appendix Table A2. In column 1 we find
no significant evidence of serial correlation. In column 2 once we include year fixed effects,
the coefficient becomes negative and statistically significant, however, the magnitude of the
effect is very small. It is unlikely that such a small amount of negative rainfall correlation
will affect our results, particularly because is means that children exposed to a drought this
year are less likely to have been exposed to a drought last year. Still, we include an indicator
for drought (or positive rainfall shock) last year in all regressions.


3.2     Early Life Regressions

We would like to understand the effect of early life rainfall shock on human capital invest-
ment, especially since we think the mechanisms might be quite different. However, we only
observe test scores for children 5-16. Therefore we look at lagged effects of children who were
exposed to drought before age 5 on current test scores exploiting cohort variation for all the
children.10 We posit that the effects could last for many years, especially if the channel
affecting human capital is nutritional inputs and brain development, and thus we might be
   10
      In our data, we do not observe exact date of birth, only age at time of survey. We generate year of
birth=survey year-current age; but this measure of rainfall at each age will be somewhat noisy. As long as
it is not systematically biased, this will only attenuate results.



                                                    9
able to see differences in test scores and other schooling outcomes many years later. We ex-
ploit variation in cohorts within district, and use household fixed effects in this specification.
We estimate the following regression:


                                 Sijhty = α + βθj,t + λh + φt + ψy + ijhty                                       (2)

where Sijhty is the test score of student i in district j born in year t and surveyed in year y,
who is a member of household h. θj,t is a vector of early life rain shocks (as defined above)
from in utero to age 4, λh is a vector of household fixed effects, φt is a vector of age fixed
effects, and ψy is a vector of year of survey fixed effects. β is the vector of coefficients of
interest and it is the impact of early life rainfall at each age on test scores. Comparing
children from the same district who were born in different cohorts allows us to use household
fixed effects in this regression.11 In addition, household fixed effects allow us to rule out the
possibility that the results are driven by lower ability children showing up more frequently
in drought cohorts due to selective migration and/or fertility. Standard errors are clustered
at the district level. We discuss potential selection issues in Section 7 below.
       We also examine the effect of early life droughts (and positive shocks) on other outcome
variables of interest. In these regressions, we estimate Equation 2 above, but we replace
Sijhty with schooling outcomes: having never enrolled and being “on track”, which is an age
for grade variable.12 We also vary the measure of rainfall, θ in some alternate specifications.
We use the Indian Meteorological Department definition of drought and quintiles of rainfall.
In addition, we also use a more condensed measure of rainfall, “rain shock” which is equal
  11
      If drought exposure is indeed IID, and there are no intervening mechanisms which could affect outcomes,
this specification should yield exactly the same results as using district fixed effects, except that it is identified
off of households with more than one child. However, it is possible that parents could react to one child’s
drought exposure by reallocating resources within the household, either by shifting them toward or away from
the affected child. Thus, other children in the household (effectively our “control group” in this specification)
could be directly affected by their sibling’s drought exposure. Regressions estimated with district fixed effects
are qualitatively similar, and available upon request.
   12
      We define “on track” as a binary variable which indicates if a child is in the “correct” grade for his/her
age. The variable is coded 1 if age minus grade is at most six. That is, if an eight year old is in second or
third grade, he is coded as on track, but if he is in first grade, he is not.



                                                         10
to 1 if rainfall is in the top quintile, -1 if rainfall is in the bottom quintile, and 0 otherwise.


3.3       Testing for Longer Term Impacts

We examine the impact of rainfall shocks at all ages on the oldest cohorts (age 16) in our
sample. Specifically, we estimate:


Sijty = α+β1 νj,t−1 +β2 νj,t +β3 νj,t+1−t+4 +β4 νj,t+5−t+9 +β5 νj,t+10−t+12 +β6 νj,t+13−t+16 +γj +φt +ijty
                                                                                                     (3)
where Sijty is the test score of student i in district j born in year t and surveyed in year
y. νj,k is the sum of experienced “rain shocks” (as defined above) for the time period k.
That is, νj,t−1 is rain shocks in the year before birth, and νj,t+1−t+5 is the sum of the rain
shocks from age 2 to age 5.13 The time periods correspond roughly to schooling periods (in
utero, infancy, before primary, lower primary, upper primary and secondary). γj is a vector
of district fixed effects, φt is a vector of age effects. In this regression we compare children
who are surveyed in different years from the same district. Since our regressions contain
district level fixed effects, we should not be biased by systematic differences across districts.
β1 -β6 are the coefficients of interest and they are the impact of rainfall shocks on cognitive
test scores at each age. Standard errors are clustered at the district level. In addition, using
the NSS data, we estimate Equation 3 replacing Sijty with total years of schooling and log
wages for 16-30 year olds.


4        Results

4.1       Results: Contemporaneous Rainfall Shock Exposure

In Table 2 we report our results from Equation 1 estimating the impact of contemporaneous
rainfall shocks on test scores. Children who are tested during a drought year in their district
    13
    This can be thought of as the number of positive shocks minus the number of droughts during the time
period.



                                                   11
score 0.09 points higher on math tests. Since the test is out of 4 points, this can be thought
of as about 2.5 points on a test out of 100. In addition, children who experience a current
drought are 2 percentage points more likely to have attended school in the previous week
(from a mean of 86 percent).
      Children who experience a positive shock (higher than the 80th percentile of rainfall for
their district), either this year or last year, score .05 points lower on math tests. In addition,
these children are more likely to report having dropped out of school in the previous year
which is likely one reason their test scores remain lower the year following the positive shock.
Figures 2 and 3 show test score effects by age, and the results seem to be fairly consistent
across ages. However, Figure 4 shows the effects of positive shocks on dropout by age, which
does seem to increase with age, though the estimates are noisy.
      We use bottom and top quintiles of rainfall as negative and positive shocks, however,
any drought cutoff in rainfall is somewhat arbitrary. In Table A4 we consider alternative
measures of rainfall on test scores. The qualitative story here is very similar. Column 1 shows
the effect of droughts as defined by the Indian Meteorological Department: 75 percent of
the 10 year moving rainfall average. In Column 2, we show the effect of “rain shock”, which
is defined as 1 if rainfall is in the top quintile, -1 if rainfall is in the bottom quintile, and 0
otherwise. We will use this measure in later specifications in the interest of brevity. Column
3 shows the effect of rainfall in each quintile (relative to the lowest) on test scores; the result
here is surprisingly monotonic, even the second quintile is associated with significantly lower
test scores than the first. The results are very similar regardless of which measure we employ:
more rainfall is associated with lower test scores for children ages 5-16.


4.2     Results: Early Life Rainfall Exposure

Table 3 presents our main estimates of the effect of early life rainfall on test scores and
schooling outcomes. Panel A shows the effect of droughts, while Panel B shows the effects
of positive rainfall shocks. In the first column, we show the effect of rainfall on math test


                                                12
scores. In general, it looks as though drought exposure under the age of 4 causes a small but
statistically significant decrease in math test scores. The largest magnitude is for drought
exposure at age 1, which is -.02, or a bit less than one point if the test were out of 100. This
is about a third the size of the contemporaneous effect. Drought does not have a statistically
significant relationship with reading scores, though the coefficient is negative. The effect of a
positive rainfall shock below age 3 is also small (.03) but larger than the effect of the negative
shock. More rainfall from in utero to age 2 implies that children score .03 points higher on
math and reading tests today. These results suggest that rainfall early in life is positively
associated with childhood test scores. This is consistent with the idea that the income effect
of the rainfall shocks should dominate at early ages, since nutrition is particularly important,
and the children have little margin for substitution. It also indicates that the results of early
life shocks are somewhat persistent, at least in the medium term.
       In the second two columns, we examine the impact of early life rainfall shocks on schooling
outcomes. Early life drought exposure is associated with a higher likelihood of never enrolling
in school.14 For example, experiencing a drought in utero is associated with an 8 percent
increase in the likelihood of never enrolling. Magnitudes are similar, but negative, for positive
shocks. In the last column, we show the effect of rainfall shocks on being “on track”, or age
for grade. Children exposed to early life droughts are less likely to be on track, and those
exposed to positive rainfall shocks early in life are more likely to be on track. Children
exposed to drought in utero are 3 percentage points less likely to be on track, from a mean
of 81 percent. In general, the magnitudes for this effect are larger for earlier exposure, and
not statistically significant after age 3.
       Though others have examined the impact of early life shocks on health outcomes, wages,
and total years of schooling, there is little medium term evidence on human capital directly
(i.e. test scores). The results are similar to Akresh et al. (2010) who also find negative
effects of shocks in utero and infancy and Maccini and Yang (2009) who find positive effects
  14
       Since some of the children in our sample are quite young, this could also reflect delayed enrollment.



                                                       13
of early life rainfall on human capital. However, both of these papers find different effects for
different groups and ages. Akresh et al. (2010) find that the most important year is the in
utero year while Maccini and Yang (2009) find it is the year after birth (and only for girls).
We find largely similar effects for children under three and do not find differences by gender
(results by gender are available upon request).
       Much of this literature on early life shock exposure in economics focuses on health out-
comes (see Almond and Currie (2011) for a review of literature). However, ASER does not
collect information on health outcomes. We turn to another dataset, the National Family
Health Survey-2 (NFHS-2), to estimate the effect of in utero drought exposure on health
outcomes, which could also effect schooling. We use the 1998-99 NFHS-2 India survey be-
cause this is the latest year that district identifiers are publicly available. We merge the
rainfall data used above (which is at the district level) to the NFHS-2.15
       In Table A5, we show the effect of in utero drought on height and weight. In utero
drought exposure significantly decreases current height. For example, a child exposed to
in utero drought is approximately 6.9 centimeters shorter on average than a similar child
born during a non-drought year. This is about a 10 percent decrease and it is statistically
significant at .05 level. There are two likely channels through which drought might affect later
life achievement. First, maternal nutrition and the in utero environment could have a direct
effect on cognitive development, lowering IQ. Second, children exposed to drought could be
less healthy overall, and this could impact school attendance. Children who attend less school
will most likely have lower test scores. Though we will not be able to distinguish between
these channels in this paper, for children in rural India, it is likely that both mechanisms are
  15
     The NFHS-2 survey covers a nationally representative sample of more than 90,000 eligible women age 15-
49 from 26 states that comprise more than 99 percent of India’s population. The survey provides information
on fertility, mortality, family planning, and important aspects of nutrition, health, and health care. The
NFHS-2 measured children’s (ages 0-3) height and weight. Height and weight are a widely used proxy for
overall health status and correlate positively with economic outcomes. For example, Case and Paxson (2008)
show that height is positively correlated with earnings in the developed world. Similar patterns between
height and economics outcomes have been shown for individuals in Brazil (Strauss and Thomas, 1998) and
other developing countries (Behrman and Deolalikar, 1989; Deaton, 2008). Similarly, being underweight is
correlated with future health problems and worse schooling outcomes.



                                                    14
at play.


4.3     Results: Long Term Effects of Rainfall Shocks

Table 2 indicates that, in general, students in districts with higher rainfall have lower con-
temporaneous test scores. It is possible, however, that this represents simple intertemporal
substitution of school time, and that children make up these differences in human capital
over time. In fact, this is what the empirical literature to date suggests (see Jacoby and
Skoufias (1997); Funkhouser (1999)). Table 2 suggests that there are lagged effects for pos-
itive rainfall shocks, perhaps due to the increased propensity to drop out in these years as
well. While most of the children in our sample are simply too young to see long term effects,
we employ two strategies to test for possible long term impacts. First, we will look at the
effects of rainfall shocks on math scores at each age for the 16 year olds in our sample. While
many children are still in school at this age, it will give a sense of the relative importance
and lasting effects of rainfall shocks at the various ages (since this is the oldest age in our
sample). In addition, we use NSS data for 16-30 year olds to look at the impacts of rainfall
at each age on total years of schooling and wages (since most of these individuals will have
completed schooling by this age).
      In Table 4, we examine the impacts of rainfall at various ages on math scores (in the
ASER data) in column 1, and total years of schooling and wages (in the NSS data) in columns
2-3. Rainfall shocks have lasting impacts on math scores when experienced very early in life
(in utero) or later in life (early teenage years). A 16 year old who was in utero during a
positive rainfall year scores .1 points more than a 16 year old who experienced drought in
utero. However, later in life, an 11-13 year old who experiences a positive rainfall shock
scores .08 points lower than a similar aged child who experienced a drought. These effects
are consistent with our earlier findings that early in life, rainfall is good for cognitive test
scores, and later in life, it is primarily detrimental. This column indicates that these results
persist at least to age 16.


                                              15
   To test for longer term effects, we turn to another dataset, the NSS. While we cannot
measure human capital directly in the NSS, we can measure total years of schooling and
wages. Interestingly, rainfall shocks experienced at very early ages do not seem to have a long
term impact on total years of schooling. For the primary school years, the point estimates
are small but statistically significant. However, rainfall shocks experienced between the ages
11 and 16, have a negative and statistically significant impact on total years of schooling.
Children complete about .2 more years for every drought experienced during these years,
and .2 fewer years for every positive rainfall shock (relative to normal years). That is, a
child who experiences a drought in all three years (11-13) will complete a little more than
one extra year of schooling relative to a child who experiences positive shocks in all three of
those years. The stark difference between the effect in this age range and younger ages is
likely due to this age range being the relevant dropout margin. Indeed, in our ASER sample,
the median age of dropout is 14, and in Figure 4, it looks as though dropouts during positive
rainfall years are larger for this age range. This makes sense, since free primary schooling
ends at 8th grade and labor market and marriage opportunities are increasingly relevant for
older children. It is important to note that total years of schooling is a crude measure of
total human capital, and it is possible that rain shocks at earlier ages also affect long term
human capital, but not total years of schooling.
   The long term effects on wages are also quite interesting. While the coefficient on rainfall
shocks in utero is positive, it is not statistically significant. However, rainfall shocks during
primary school years (ages 11-13) have a negative and significant effect on later life wages.
One positive rainfall shock year is associated with a 1 percent decrease in wages. It seems
likely that this effect is operating through the schooling channel.
   Our conceptual framework predicts that the substitution effect will be more likely to
dominate in an environment in which school is free. In India, free primary schooling is a
relatively recent phenomenon; in 1994, the Government of India started a large push for
increased primary schooling, which continued with the Millennium Development Goals and


                                               16
the passage of free and compulsory schooling for all children under 14 in 2009. Thus, it is
possible that the effects of rainfall are different for different cohorts within our NSS sample.
Figure 5 shows the effect of rainfall shocks at each age on total years of schooling and log
wages in the NSS data16 broken down by three 5 year cohorts: those born 1976-1980, 1981-
1985, and 1986-1990. In addition, graphing the three cohorts separately will allow us to
be more certain that the observed patterns are being driven by the ages of the individuals
at the time of the rainfall shocks, and not, say, a particularly bad drought that hit in one
particular year.
       The first graph shows the effect of rain shock at each age on years of schooling for each of
the three cohorts. The pattern is clear: rainfall is generally good for schooling for the oldest
cohort (not surprising, since most of them likely had to pay tuition for primary school),
sometimes good and sometimes bad for schooling for the middle cohort, and generally bad
for schooling for the youngest cohort. In addition, the age patterns are reasonable– early
life rainfall is generally good for schooling and wages, and the substitution effect is strongest
for all three cohorts around puberty, when many children drop out of school. The spike
upward after age 14 for the youngest cohort is likely due to the fact that free schooling is
only guaranteed for all children in India up to age 14, and thus, we would expect the income
effect to be stronger for students of this age.
       The three graphs that follow show the effect of rainfall at each age on total years of
schooling as well as log wages for each cohort separately. The patterns are remarkably
similar for schooling and wages. Whether the effect of rainfall on later life wages is only
driven through its effect on schooling is beyond the scope of this paper, but it seems plausible
that the effect of temporary rain shocks at critical ages could have lasting effects on adult
wages.
  16
     These figures graph the coefficient on the variable “rain shock” at each age against the total years of
schooling or log wages in the NSS data. The equation being estimated is similar to Equation 3, except that
the shocks are not summed by age group, but estimated separately for each age. All regressions include fixed
effects for age and district.




                                                    17
5        Pathways

Weather shocks in rural India are likely to impact rural households primarily through their
effect on agricultural production and wages. It is clear from the attendance and dropout
results in Table 2 that children are indeed substituting toward schooling in drought years,
and away during positive rainfall shock years. The positive impacts of drought on test scores
are consistent with a context in which the importance of time inputs into human capital
production is relatively high.
         In the following sections we will show that children and mothers are more likely to work
when rainfall is higher. However, it is possible that rainfall shocks could have other indirect
effects on human capital. For example, if teachers also respond to positive agricultural wage
shocks, they might be less likely to show up for work. Alternatively, if school lunches are
more likely to be provided during drought years, this could provide additional incentives for
children to attend school. Lastly, if higher rainfall is associated with higher rates of malaria,
children might be healthier during drought years and thus more likely to attend school.
We will examine these various pathways below and find they are unlikely to be driving our
results.


5.1        Work and Wages

The most likely mechanism driving the contemporaneous test score result is lower wages
(due to decreased agricultural productivity) which accompany lower rainfall years. Since
wages affect not only income but the price of time, lower wages create a substitution effect,
in which the relative price of schooling to the outside option becomes cheaper in low rainfall
years. When wages are higher, older children might be more likely to work in the labor
market, and younger children could substitute into home production.17 In addition, higher
wages and agricultural productivity could lead parents to be more likely to work, and thus
    17
     This work could be agricultural, but need not be. For example, higher wages could drive older relatives
out of the home and into the workforce, and young children could be substituting for their labor in chores
like cleaning and caring for younger siblings.


                                                    18
less likely to be at home. This could imply less time spent with children, and particularly
less time investing in children’s human capital. To the extent that both parental and child
time are important inputs into children’s human capital, both of these channels could cause
lower cognitive test scores in years with higher rainfall. In fact, experimental evidence from
Jamaica and Colombia illustrates that remarkably simple socio-emotional stimulation to
toddlers (of only one hour per week) results in large positive impacts on child ability as well
as later life wages (Gertler et al. (2012); Attanasio et al. (2012)).
       While some evidence shows that higher rainfall leads to higher agricultural productivity,
higher wages, and increased work participation in India (e.g., Jayachandran (2006); Kaur
(2011)), there is some evidence to the contrary.18 Thus, we will test for the average effect of
rainfall on work and wages in rural areas for both children and parents in our setting.
       Tables 5 show the effect of rainfall shocks on work and wages. In general the results
are consistent with rainfall as a productivity shock. In this analysis we replace separate
positive and negative rainfall shocks with one variable, “rain shock,” which is equal to 1
if rainfall is above the 80th percentile, -1 if rainfall is below the 20th percentile, and 0
otherwise. We do this primarily for reasons of brevity, though it also increases our power.
Separate results for positive and negative shocks are qualitatively similar, and available
upon request. Panel A of Table 5 shows the effect of rain shocks on probability of working.
Consistent with our ASER results, children are less likely to report attending school in years
with more rainfall. In addition, children are 20 percent more likely to report working in
positive rainfall years relative to droughts. Women also report more work during higher
rainfall years, though standard errors become large. Interestingly, men do not report lower
likelihood of work during higher rainfall years, though the magnitude of this effect is small
  18
     Rose (2001) finds that low rainfall increases labor force participation in rural India. Kochar (1999) also
finds that male household member increase hours worked in response to negative crop income shocks. How-
ever, Rosenzweig and Wolpin (2000) show that when rainfall levels are higher, while adult family members do
work significantly fewer days per year since they hire labor, family time in supervisory activities is actually
higher in such areas. The labor supply response to rainfall shocks will most likely depend on whether the
household owns land, and if so, how much land. For example, Bar and Basu (2009) show that small increases
in land lead to increases in child labor but this relationship switches as the size of landholdings increase.



                                                      19
relative to the mean. Panel B shows the effect of rain shock on wages, which is consistent
with the productivity story for children, mothers and fathers, though effect sizes are largest
for children and mothers. These results are broadly consistent with the idea that children
are substituting school time for work when rainfall, and thus wages, are particularly high.
Results for mothers are similar, and since women tend to be primary caregivers, it is likely
they are spending less time investing in children’s human capital in good rainfall years. These
results are consistent with Miller and Urdinola (2010) who find that coffee price reductions
are associated with substantial declines in the probability that adults work in Columbia; this
leads to reductions in child deaths since parents have more time to invest in the health of
their children when world coffee prices are low. Similarly, Atkin (2012) finds that factory
openings across Mexican municipalities result in increased school dropout.


5.2     Alternative Explanations?

Teacher Attendance Table 5 illustrates that employment and wages are affected by rain-
fall shocks. Thus, as the outside option for students and parents increases in value, so does
the outside option for teachers. It is possible that the effects of rainfall shocks on test scores,
and even on student absence and dropout rates, could be the result of teacher absences.
We think this is unlikely in the context of India, because while absence rates for teachers
are high overall (Chaudhury et al., 2006), teachers are well educated and fairly well paid
workers, and the wages that are most affected by rainfall shocks are those for agricultural
laborers, who earn very little. The additional wage income available during good years for
day labor such as weeding and harvesting is small relative to teacher’s salaries.19
      In Table 6 we show the impact of rainfall shocks on teacher attendance rates recorded
by surveyors in the ASER School Survey. The results indicate that if anything, teachers
are slightly less likely to be absent from school in positive rainfall shock years. Therefore,
teacher absence cannot be the main driver of the contemporaneous test score results.
  19
     Indeed, wages in the educational sector can be as much as 10 times higher than wages in the agricultural
sector (NSS 2005).


                                                     20
School Lunches In November 2001, in a landmark reform, the Supreme Court of India
directed the Government of India to provide cooked midday meals in all government pri-
mary schools (Singh et al., forthcoming). Since that time, many schools have begun lunch
programs, but compliance is still under 100 percent. One concern is that schools might be
more likely to serve lunches during droughts and that students and parents respond to this
by sending their children to school for the meals. We test whether schools are more likely
to serve lunches during droughts using the ASER School Survey data, and do not find any
evidence of this. In fact, column 2 of Table 6 indicates that lunches are more likely to be
provided in positive rainfall shock years. This makes sense since these are the years everyone
is better off so districts and/or schools may have more resources to provide lunches.
   It is important to note the caveat that the school lunch and teacher absence results
presented in Table 6 are suggestive because the schools sampled in the ASER School Survey
(unlike the households) are not a representative, random sample of schools in the district.


Healthier Children During drought years, malaria rates could be lower so children could
be healthier and attend school more, explaining the test score results. However, this is
controversial; there is also evidence that droughts result in river margins retreating leaving
numerous pools suitable for vector breeding exacerbating the spread of malaria (Haque et
al., 2010). Nevertheless, we test for the possibility that differences in malaria infections
during drought years might explain the test score results. In Table A6 we re-estimate our
contemporaneous shock regressions including an interaction of rainfall shock with malaria
state (=1 if Orissa, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, or Karnataka as these are the
states which contributed the most malaria cases in India) (Kumar et al., 2007). The results
in Table A6 indicate that there is no additional statistically significant effect of rainfall shocks
in malaria states, and thus it is unlikely this channel is driving the contemporaneous test
score results.




                                                21
6   Heterogeneity Analysis

There are certain circumstances where we might expect the income or substitution effect to
dominate. For example, if schooling is costly then income effects could be relatively more
important. Indeed, this is already clear from the long term results shown in Figure 5. In
poorer areas, we also expect more children to be on the margin between school attendance
and work. Below we explore some of these hypotheses.


Income Unfortunately the ASER dataset does not have information on socio-economic
status of households. However, in almost every round of the survey we have a measure of
mother’s schooling. We use this as a proxy for household socioeconomic status. In Panel
A of Table 7, we re-estimate Equation 1 with an interaction term for whether the child’s
mother reported any schooling. The interaction term is positive, and almost completely
reverses the overall effect. That is, those children whose mother’s reported some schooling
are largely unaffected by the rainfall effects, which are concentrated in those children whose
mother’s had no schooling. This is consistent with poorer children being more affected by
rainfall shocks, which is not surprising, since we expect these children to be more likely to
be on the margin of missing school or dropping out in order to work in agriculture.


Educational Expenditure Free primary school is provided by the Government of India
and such schools are available in every village in India. However, in practice educational
expenditures vary widely by region. While educational expenditure is clearly an endogenous
choice, some of the variation stems from different policies at the state and district level.
We generate mean educational expenditure by district using NSS consumption data from
round 62 in Indian rupiah. In Panel B of Table 7 we regress test scores on the interaction
between rainfall shock and log school expenditure. Not surprisingly, we find that the overall
effect of expenditure increases test scores. The interaction term is positive and significant
indicating that in districts where more is spent on education, this mitigates the negative


                                             22
effect of positive rainfall shocks on test scores. At the mean of log expenditure (12.15) the
effect size is equal to about 0.5 which basically implies that the effects are being driven by
below mean expenditure districts which is exactly as we would expect. These results suggest
that families in districts who spend more on education are less likely to respond to rainfall
shocks on the schooling margin. This evidence is also consistent with various studies showing
schooling costs affect the child labor versus schooling decision (see Edmonds et al. (2007);
Edmonds (2008)).


7     Potential Selection Bias Issues

7.1     Selective Migration

The primary selection concern for our main results is that ASER is sampling a different set of
children in districts experiencing higher than average rainfall relative to districts experiencing
lower rainfall. Specifically, if higher ability children are systematically less likely to be
surveyed when rainfall is highest, this could bias our results upward. Fortunately, ASER
has a procedure designed to reduce sample selection as much as possible. Enumerators are
instructed to visit a random sample of households only when children are likely to be at
home; they must go on Sundays when children are not in school and no one works. If all
children are not home on the first visit, they are instructed to revisit once they are done
surveying the other households (ASER, 2010).
      This would not alleviate the issue if these students were leaving their districts perma-
nently when rainfall is particularly high (or low). However, migration rates in rural India are
extremely low. For example, Topalova (2005) using data from the National Sample Surveys
finds that only 3.6 percent of the rural population in 1999-2000 reported changing districts
in the previous 10 years. Munshi and Rosenzweig (2009) using the Rural Economic Devel-
opment Survey also conclude that rural emigration rates are low. Pathania (2007) using
Indian Census data also finds that only a small fraction of rural women reside in districts
different from their district of birth. Since it’s likely that out-migration happens more often

                                               23
in drought years, and migrants are positively selected, this would attenuate our results (since
we are finding children score higher in drought years).
      In the long term results, our main finding is that rainfall around the age of late childhood
and puberty matter for later life outcomes. In the NSS and the ASER data, we assume that
the district in which an individual is surveyed is the district in which he spent those years.
As stated above, cross district migration is not terribly common in India, and to the extent
that it is orthogonal to drought exposure in childhood, it will simply attenuate our results.
However, if children are systematically moving out of districts in which there is low rainfall
when they are leaving school, this could bias our results. However, again to the extent that
these migrants are positively selected this will bias our results downward, since rainfall at
puberty is negatively associated with later life outcomes.
      It is also important to remember that rainfall shocks are defined as the top and bottom
quintile of rainfall, respectively. The average child will experience 2 or 3 “droughts” by this
definition over the course of his childhood, and it is unlikely that he is leaving the district
in response to relatively small productivity fluctuations.
      Lastly, we are encouraged by the fact that the NSS results tell the same story as the
ASER test score results. For the NSS survey, children do not need to be at home to take
tests or answer questions; one family member answers basic questions (such as working status
and school enrollment) for the entire household. In addition, in the long term analysis using
the NSS data, people who experienced higher rainfall at particular ages have lower overall
schooling, which is consistent with the dropout rates we observe in the ASER sample.


7.2     Selective Fertility and Mortality

In the early life analysis, one potential concern with trying to understand the effect of drought
on cognitive development is that we only observe children who survive and make it into the
sample; if drought exposure increases infant and early childhood mortality, it could affect
the composition of our sample in “control” and “treatment” years. This selection would


                                                 24
most likely bias our results downward; since these are the children who survived, they are
positively selected and probably do better on health and educational outcomes relative to the
children who died off. Therefore, we are less concerned about bias from selective mortality.
   However, another potential concern with the early life results could be if women are
delaying and/or changing fertility patterns in response to droughts. For example, mothers
may choose to wait out a drought year before having a child. Rural fathers could migrate
during drought years in search of work and their absence would result in delayed fertility.
If droughts are in fact impacting fertility decisions, the empirical results could be biased
upward if the children being born in drought years are negatively selected.
   Since our dataset includes only children ages 5-16, both of these selection effects would
show up as smaller cohort sizes observed for treatment cohorts (assuming that most of the
selective mortality happens before age 3). Unfortunately, population by district is only
available every 10 years from census data. Therefore we investigate the issue of selective
fertility for children born in 1991 and 2001. We regress the ln number of children in each
cohort by district on measures of drought and ln total population by district. Given we
are not exactly sure when mothers and fathers make decisions about when to conceive, we
investigate the period 5 years prior to birth.
   Table A7 reports the results of these OLS regressions for 1991 and 2001. Most of the
coefficients are small, and only two are statistically significant. In column 1, drought in t-3
is significantly (and negatively) correlated with number of births. However, in column 2,
drought in t-4 is significantly (and positively) correlated with number of births. These data
do not suggest that there is a systematic difference in the size of “treated” cohorts, and thus
selective fertility and mortality are unlikely to be driving our results.
   Another piece of evidence which points against selective fertility (and selective migration)
are the household fixed effects results of Table 3. If either of these mechanisms is driving
the results, then within household variation in drought exposure should not affect cognitive
test scores. This story relies on between household variation–i.e. that “good” households are


                                                 25
acting differently with respect to droughts compared to “bad” households. That is, if “good
households” are leaving the area after droughts, or delaying their fertility when there are
droughts, then our sample of exposed children would be more heavily weighted toward “bad
households” which could bias our results upward. However, the results with and without
household fixed effects are extremely similar (results without household fixed effects that
include district fixed effects are available upon request), which leads us to conclude that this
type of selection is unlikely to be biasing the estimates.


8   Discussion and Conclusion

In this paper we show that under certain circumstances, positive productivity shocks can
cause lower investment in human capital. However, the effects differ significantly with the
timing of these shocks. Consistent with previous literature, we find that for young children,
human capital investment is procyclical. Children who are exposed to drought early in life
score significantly worse on literacy and numeracy tests than their peers. These children are
less likely to be on track in school and less likely to ever enrol. We argue that the results are
causal and not due to differences in the sample of children exposed to these shocks. This is
likely due to the fact that, particularly during the infancy and in utero periods, nutrition is
an extremely important input into later cognitive ability.
    By contrast, human capital investment is countercyclical for school aged children. Chil-
dren who are tested during a drought year score significantly better on math tests, and report
higher attendance rates. In positive rainfall years, the opposite holds true. We argue that
the likely explanation lies in the relative paucity of outside options during bad rainfall years,
both in the home and in the labor market, leading to increased school attendance. Children
on the margin of missing school or dropping out might stay in school if wages are low and
outside opportunities are scarce. While we do not have direct time use data for the children
in the ASER data set, we show that for similar aged samples in rural areas, the probability
of working decreases during droughts, which is consistent with this theory.


                                               26
   It is important to note that these results are likely to hold in a context in which there
is sufficient scope to substitute from labor market to human capital time allocation. In
particular, a child labor market (or significant home production capacity) is necessary. In
addition, low (or no) school fees are important factors for the substitution effect to dominate.
Indeed, our long term analysis in Figure 5 illustrates that the effect is primarily for the cohorts
young enough to have faced relatively cheap or free primary school. In Panel B of Table 7,
we show that the effects are stronger in districts that spend less on schooling, which lends
credence to this assertion. However, as with the heterogeneous treatment effects shown in
Panel A of Table 7, this is also consistent with poorer children being more likely to be on
the margin of school attendance.
   These results indicate that opportunity costs of human capital investment matter even for
young children, and that higher wages for low education jobs could have the counterintuitive
effect of lowering human capital investments in children. This research could inform policy
decisions about poverty alleviation programs. Many poverty alleviation programs in the
developing world take the form of work programs with inflated wages for agricultural laborers.
For example, NREGA in India generated 2.57 billion person days of employment (in 2010-
11). If these types of programs raise prevailing wages, they could cause students to substitute
toward work and away from for school attendance, even if the programs are only in place for
adults. Lump sum grants or even conditional cash transfers might be better options in this
context.
   Though these results focus on productivity fluctuations rather than steady growth, they
indicate that the reaction to wage growth in low income areas could be to decrease investment
in human capital, which could be detrimental to long term growth and poverty reduction. If
poor countries want to increase school enrollment and attendance, they should consider not
just fees and tuition, but the opportunity cost of attendance in terms of wages as well.




                                                27
References

Akresh, Richard, Emilie Bagby, Damien de Walque, and Harounan Kazianga, “Child
 Ability and Household Human Capital Investment Decisions in Burkina Faso,” 2010. IZA Dis-
 cussion Paper 5326.

Almond, Douglas, “Is the 1918 Influenza Pandemic Over? Long-Term Effects of In Utero In-
  fluenza Exposure in the Post-1940 U.S. Population,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114
  (4), 672712.

   and Bhashkar Mazumder, “Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment: The Effect of
  Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  October 2011, 45 (3), 56–85.

   and Janet Currie, “Killing Me Softly: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic
  Perspectives, Summer 2011, 25 (3), 153–172.

ASER, “Annual Status of Education Report (Rural) 2009,” Annual Report, Pratham 2010.

Atkin, David, “Endogenous Skill Acquisition and Export Manufacturing in Mexico,” July 2012.
  Working Paper.

Attanasio, Orazio, Emla Fitzsimons, Camila Fernandez, Sally Grantham-McGregor,
  Costas Meghir, and Marta Rubio-Codina, “Home Visiting in Colombia: Impacts of a
  Scalable Intervention,” 2012.

Banerjee, Abhijit and Rohini Somanathan, “The political economy of public goods: Some
 evidence from India,” Journal of Development Economics, 2007, 82, 287314.

Bar, Talia and Kaushik Basu, “Children, Education, Labor, and Land: In The Long Run and
 Short Run,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 04-05 2009, 7 (2-3), 487–497.

Behrman, Jere and Anil Deolalikar, Causes and implications of seasonal variability in house-
 hold food security, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989.

Berg, Erlend, Sambit Bhattacharyya, Rajasekhar Durgam, and Manjula Ramachan-
 dra, “Can Rural Public Works Affect Agricultural Wages? Evidence from lndia,” May 2012.
 CSAE Working Paper.

Black, Sandra E., Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes, “From the Cradle to the Labor
  Market? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2007, 122 (1), 40939.

Case, Anne and Christina Paxson, “Stature and Status: Height, Ability, and Labor Market
 Outcomes,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2008, 116 (3), 499–532.

Chaudhury, Nazmul, Jeffrey Hammer, Michael Kremer, Karthik Muralidharan, and
 F. Halsey Rogers, “Missing in Action: Teacher and Health Worker Absence in Developing
 Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2006, 20 (1), 91–116.




                                             28
Cunha, Flavio and James J. Heckman, “Formulating, Identifying and Estimating the Tech-
 nology of Cognitive and Noncognitive Skill Formation,” Journal of Human Resources, 2008, 43
 (4), 738–82.

Deaton, Angus, “Height, Health, and Inequality: The Distribution of Adult Heights in India,”
 American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 2008, 98 (2), 468474.

Dêschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Jonathan Guryan, “Climate Change and
  Birth Weight,” American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings, May 2009, 99 (2), 211–217.

Duryea, Suzanne and Mary Arends-Kuenning, “School Attendance, Child Labor and Local
 Labor Market Fluctuations in Urban Brazil,” World Development, 2003, 31 (7), 1165–1178.

Edmonds, E., N. Pavcnik, and P. Topalova, “Trade adjustment and human capital invest-
 ments: Evidence from Indian tariff reform,” 2007. NBER Working paper no. 12884.

Edmonds, Eric, “Child Labor,” in Hollis Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Handbook of Devel-
 opment Economics, Elsevier, 2008.

Funkhouser, Edward, “Cyclical Economic Conditions and School Attendance in Costa Rica,”
  Economics of Education Review, 1999, 18 (1), 31–50.

Gertler, Paul, Arianna Zanolini, Rodgrio Pinto, James Heckman, Susan Walker, Chris-
 tel Vermeersch, Susan Chang, and Sally Grantham-McGregor, “Labor Market Returns
 to Early Childhood Stimulation: A 20-Year Follow-up to the Jamaica Study,” 2012.

Government of India, “Census 2011,” 2011.

Haque, Ubydul, Masahiro Hashizume, Gregory E. Glass, Ashraf M. Dewan, Hans J.
 Overgaard, and Taro Yamamoto, “The Role of Climate Variability in the Spread of Malaria
 in Bangladeshi Highlands,” PLoS ONE, 12 2010, 5 (12).

Imbert, Clement and John Papp, “Equilibrium Distributional Impacts of Government Em-
  ployment Programs: Evidence from Indias Employment Guarantee,” March 2012. Paris School
  of Economics Working Paper.

Jacoby, Hanan G. and Emmanuel Skoufias, “Risk, Financial Markets, and Human Capital
  in a Developing Country,” The Review of Economic Studies, July 1997, 64 (3), 311–335.

Jayachandran, Seema, “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in Devel-
  oping Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 2006, 114 (3).

Jensen, Robert, “Agricultural Volatility and Investments in Children,” The American Economic
  Review, May 2000, 90 (2), 399–404.

Kaur, Supreet, “Nominal Wage Rigidity in Village Labor Markets,” 2011. Harvard University
 Working Paper.

Kochar, Anjini, “Smoothing Consumption by Smoothing Income: Hours-of-Work Responses to
 Idiosyncratic Agricultural Shocks in Rural India,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 1999,
 81 (1), 50–61.


                                               29
Kruger, Diana, “Coffee production effects on child labor and schooling in rural Brazil,” Journal
 of Development Economics, 2007, 82, 448463.

Kumar, Ashwani, Neena Valecha, Tanu Jain, and Aditya P. Dash, “Burden of Malaria
 in India: Retrospective and Prospective View,” American Journal of Tropical Medicine and
 Hygiene, 2007, 77, 6978.

Maccini, Sharon and Dean Yang, “Under the Weather: Health, Schooling, and Economic
 Consequences of Early-Life Rainfall,” American Economic Review, June 2009, 99 (3), 1006–26.

Mahajan, Vijay and Rajeev Kumar Gupta, “Non Farm Opportunities for Smallholder Agri-
 culture,” January 2011. Paper presented at the IFAD Conference on New Directions for Small-
 holder Agriculture.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics
 of Economic Growth,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), pp. 407–437.

Miller, Grant and B. Piedad Urdinola, “Cyclicality, Mortality, and the Value of Time: The
 Case of Coffee Price Fluctuations and Child Survival in Colombia,” Journal of Political Economy,
 2010, 118 (1).

Munshi, Kaivan and Mark Rosenzweig, “Why is Mobility in India so Low? Social Insurance,
 Inequality and Growth,” 2009. NBER Working Paper No. 14850.

Pathania, Vikram, “The Long Run Impact of Drought at Birth on Height of Women in Rural
  India,” November 2007. Working Paper.

Rao, C. H. Hanumantha, Susanta K. Ray, and K. Subbarao, Unstable Agriculture and
 Droughts : Implications for Policy, New Delhi: Vikas Publishing House, 1988.

Rose, Elaina, “Ex ante and ex post labor supply response to risk in a low-income area,” Journal
 of Development Economics, April 2001, 64 (2), 371–388.

Rosenzweig, Mark and Robert Evenson, “Fertility, Schooling, and the Economic Contribution
 of Children in Rural India: An Econometric Analysis,” Econometrica, July 1977, 45 (5), 1065–
 1079.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Natural &quot;Natural Experiments&quot;
 in Economics,” Journal of Economic Literature, December 2000, 38 (4), 827–874.

Royer, Heather, “Separated at Girth: US Twin Estimates of the Effects of Birth Weight,”
 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 49–85.

Schady, Norbert, “Do Macroeconomic Crises Always Slow Human Capital Accumulation?,”
  World Bank Economic Review, 2004, 18 (2), 131–154.

Singh, Abhijeet, Albert Park, and Stefan Dercon, “School Meals as a Safety Net: An
  Evaluation of the Midday Meal Scheme in India,” Economic Development and Cultural Change,
  forthcoming.

Strauss, John and Duncan Thomas, “Health, Nutrition and Economic Development,” Journal
  of Economic Literature, June 1998, 36 (2), 766–817.

                                               30
Thomas, Duncan, Kathleen Beegle, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Bondan Sikoki, John
 Strauss, and Graciela Teruel, “Education in a Crisis,” Journal of Development Economics,
 2004, 74 (1), 53–85.

Topalova, Petia, “Trade Liberalization, Poverty, and Inequality: Evidence from Indian Districts,”
  2005. NBER Working Paper No. 11614.




                                               31
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                       ASER Summary Statistics
                                                   Mean Std. Dev.       Observations
                  Male                               .54       .498      2,699,301
                  Age                               10.3       3.62      2,709,461
                  Grade                             4.64       2.85      2,509,008
                  Math Score                        2.19       1.35      2,489,307
                  Reading Score                     2.71       1.41      2,729,313
                  Dropped Out                       .032       .187      2,678,508
                  Never Enrolled                    .028       .165      2,678,508
                  On Track                           .82       .390      2,038,737
                  Mother Has Any Schooling          .458       .499      2,317,973
                                      Rainfall Summary Statistics
                  Contemporaneous Drought           .134       .367       2,131,761
                  Contemporaneous Positive Shock    .241       .426       2,131,761
                  Drought at Birth                  .171       .383       2,681,653
                  Positive Shock at Birth           .123       .328       2,681,653
                                            NSS Outcomes
                  Works                             .378        .49       1,080,276
                  Attends School                     .58        .49        453,160
                  ln Wages                          5.86       0.91        153,088
Notes: This table shows summary statistics from the ASER data, the NSS data, and the rainfall data.




                                                  32
            Table 2: Effect of Contemporaneous Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital

                                            Panel A: Droughts
                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                              Math      Read     Dropped               Attendance
                                              Score     Score      Out
                Drought This Year              .09       -.01      .001                   .02
                                               (.02)∗∗∗          (.02)       (.001)      (.01)∗∗
                Drought Last Year                .02              .01        -.002
                                                 (.02)           (.02)       (.001)
                Observations              1,892,741 2,115,547 2,193,040                 470,365
                                       Panel B: Positive Shocks
                                                       Dependent Variable:
                                             Math      Read     Dropped                Attendance
                                             Score     Score      Out
                Positive Shock This Year      -.05      -.01      .002                   -.004
                                               (.01)∗∗∗          (.01)       (.001)      (.008)
                Positive Shock Last Year         -.05            -.06        .003
                                               (.02)∗∗∗         (.02)∗∗∗    (.001)∗∗
                Observations                  1,892,741        2,115,547   2,193,040    470,365
                Mean Dependent Variable          2.07             2.69        .036        .863
Notes: This table shows our estimates of the effect of positive and negative rainfall shocks on current test
scores. Positive and negative shocks are defined as rainfall above the 80th percentile and below the 20th
percentile of district rainfall respectively. Columns 1, 2 and 3 contain fixed effects for district, year and
age. Since attendance is only observed in 2008, column 4 contains fixed effects for state, year, and age. All
columns contain controls for early life rainfall shock exposure (in utero-age 4). Standard errors, clustered at
the district level, are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10%
level.




                                                          33
                Table 3: Effect of Early Life Rainfall Shocks on Human Capital

                                            Panel A: Droughts
                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                                  Math     Read      Never                On
                                                  Score    Score    Enrolled             Track
              Drought In Utero                     -.01    -.006      .002                -.03
                                                   (.006)∗      (.007)     (.0006)∗∗∗   (.004)∗∗∗
              Drought in Year of Birth              -.01         .001        .002         -.02
                                                   (.006)∗∗     (.007)     (.0006)∗∗∗   (.003)∗∗∗
              Drought at Age 1                      -.02        -.008        .003         -.01
                                                   (.006)∗∗     (.007)     (.0006)∗∗∗   (.003)∗∗∗
              Drought at Age 2                      -.01        -.005        .003         -.006
                                                    (.006)      (.007)     (.0006)∗∗∗    (.003)∗∗
              Drought at Age 3                      -.001       .0001        .002         .006
                                                    (.007)      (.007)     (.0006)∗∗∗   (.003) ∗∗
              Drought at Age 4                      .006        -.005        .002         .006
                                                    (.006)      (.007)     (.0006)∗∗∗   (.003) ∗∗
              Observations                   2,223,078 2,368,101 2,405,642              1,788,427
                            Panel B: Positive Rainfall Shocks
                                                        Dependent Variable:
                                               Math      Read      Never                  On
                                               Score     Score    Enrolled               Track
              Positive Shock In Utero           .03       .03       -.002                 .03
                                                  (.007)∗∗∗    (.007)∗∗∗   (.0006)∗∗∗   (.003)∗∗∗
              Positive Shock in Year of Birth        .03         .03         -.003         .03
                                                  (.007)∗∗∗    (.007)∗∗∗   (.0007)∗∗∗   (.004)∗∗∗
              Positive Shock at Age 1                .03         .03         -.003         .02
                                                  (.007)∗∗∗    (.007)∗∗∗   (.0007)∗∗∗   (.004)∗∗∗
              Positive Shock at Age 2                .02         .03         -.004         .02
                                                  (.007)∗∗∗    (.007)∗∗∗   (.0007)∗∗∗   (.004)∗∗∗
              Positive Shock at Age 3               -.007        .02         -.002         .01
                                                    (.007)     (.007)∗∗∗   (.0007)∗∗∗   (.004)∗∗∗
              Positive Shock at Age 4               -.01         .03         -.004         .02
                                                   (.007)∗     (.007)∗∗∗   (.0007)∗∗∗   (.004)∗∗∗
              Observations                        2,223,078   2,368,101    2,405,642    1,788,427
              Mean Dependent Variable                2.19        2.70         .027         .821
Notes: This table shows our estimates of the effect of early life rainfall shocks on current test scores and
schooling outcomes. Positive and negative shocks are defined as rainfall above the 80th percentile and below
the 20th percentile of district rainfall respectively. “On Track” is equal to one if age minus grade is at least
six, and zero otherwise. All regressions contain fixed effects for household, year and age. Standard errors,
clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5%
level, * at 10% level.




                                                      34
    Table 4: Effect of Cumulative Rain Shocks on Total Schooling and Later-Life Wages

           Dependent Variable:                     Math Score     Years of Education       ln Wages
                                                  (ASER data)        (NSS data)           (NSS data)
           In Utero Rain Shock                        .05                 .02                 .004
                                                     (.02)∗∗∗             (.02)              (.005)
           Total Rain Shocks (Birth–Age 1)            -.003                -.03              .001
                                                      (.02)               (.02)              (.005)
           Total Rain Shocks (Ages 2–5)               -.001                -.07              -.003
                                                      (.02)              (.02)∗∗∗            (.004)
           Total Rain Shocks (Ages 6–10)              .005                 -.06              -.009
                                                      (.02)              (.02)∗∗            (.004)∗∗
           Total Rain Shocks (Ages 11-13)              -.04                -.2                -.01
                                                     (.02)∗∗             (.02)∗∗∗          (.004)∗∗∗
           Total Rain Shocks (Ages 14–16)              -.02                -.13              -.005
                                                      (.02)              (.02)∗∗∗            (.004)
           Mean Dependent Variable                    2.99                4.58               5.86
           Observations                              96,404              306,925            62,115
Notes: This table shows our estimates of the effect of childhood rain shocks on math scores for 16 year olds
using ASER data (column 1) and total years of schooling (column 2) and ln wages (column 3) using rounds
60, 61, 62, and 64 of the NSS data for individuals 16-30. Rain shock is defined as 1 if rainfall is in the highest
quintile, -1 if rainfall is in the lowest quintile, and 0 otherwise. The independent variables are the sum of
total rain shocks in each age bin. NSS regressions contain age and district fixed effects. Standard errors,
clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5%
level, * at 10% level.




                                                       35
            Table 5: Effect of Rain Shocks on Labor Force Participation and Wages

                      Panel A: Effect of Rain Shocks on Working
             Dependent Variable:      Attends School   Works      Works                           Works
                                        (Age ≤ 18)   (Age ≤ 18) (Females)                        (Males)
             Rain shock                    -.01         .007       .008                            -.02
                                                (.002)∗∗∗           (.001)∗∗∗        (.005)∗     (.003)∗∗∗
             Rain shock lagged                   -.003                .003           -.005         -.01
                                                 (.002)             (.001)∗∗         (.005)      (.002)∗∗∗
             Observations                  453,160      473,327  371,280                         378,862
             Mean Dependent Variable         .58          .07      .34                             .79
                        Panel B: Effect of Rain Shocks on Wages
             Dependent Variable:         ln Wages      ln Wages ln Wages
                                         (Age≤18)     (Females)  (Males)
             Rain shock                      .09          .07      .02
                                                (.02)∗∗∗            (.01)∗∗∗        (.009)∗∗
             Rain shock lagged                     .1                 .13             .03
                                                (.02)∗∗∗            (.01)∗∗∗        (.009)∗∗∗
             Observations                        15,038             40,913          108,646
             Mean Dependent Variable              5.47               5.42            6.04
Notes: This table shows our estimates of the effect of rain shocks on school attendance (panel A), working
(panel A), and ln wages (panel b) using rounds 60, 61, 62, and 64 of NSS data. Rain shock is defined
as 1 if rainfall is in the highest quintile, -1 if rainfall is in the lowest quintile, and 0 otherwise. In Panel
A, columns 1-2 restrict the sample to both males and females less than 18 years old, column 3 to adult
females with children in the household, and column 4 to adult males with children in the household. All
regressions contain district and age fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported
in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.




            Table 6: Are Teacher Absences or School Lunches Driving the Results?

                Dependent Variable:           Teacher Absence Rate             Midday Meal Provision
                Rain shock                            -.03                             .04
                                                          (.01)∗∗                      (.02)∗∗
                Rain shock lagged                          .002                         .06
                                                           (.01)                      (.02)∗∗∗
                Observations                             20,297                       24,203
                Mean Dependent Variable                   0.18                         0.81
Notes: This table shows the effect of rainfall shocks on teacher absence rates and midday meal provision
using the 2005 and 2007 ASER School Survey. Rain Shock is defined as -1 if rainfall was below the 20th
percentile for the district, 1 if rainfall was above the 80th percentile for the district, and 0 otherwise. All
regressions contain village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported
in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                                                          36
                                    Table 7: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

         Panel A: Effect of Rain Shocks on Test Scores, Mother’s Schooling Interaction
                                                     Dependent Variable:
                                    Math Score Reading Score Dropped Out     Attendance
        Rain shock                      -.07         .01           .002         -.007
                                                      (.01)∗∗∗             (.01)              (.001)∗∗             (.006)
        Rain shock*Mother’s Schooling                   .05               -.007                -.002                .006
                                                     (.009)∗∗∗            (.009)             (.0009)∗∗            (.003)∗
        Mother’s Schooling                              .27                 .33                 -.03                .03
                                                     (.007)∗∗∗           (.008)∗∗∗           (.0008)∗∗∗          (.002)∗∗∗
        Rain Shock Last Year                           -.04                -.04                 .001
                                                      (.01)∗∗∗           (.01)∗∗∗              (.0009)
        Observations                  1,605,242    1,741,883       1,772,954   446,165
        Mean Dependent Variable          2.07         2.69            .036       .863
        Panel B: Effect of Rain Shocks on Test Scores, Schooling Expenditure Interaction
                                                       Dependent Variable:
                                     Math Score Reading Score Dropped Out     Attendance
        Rain shock                       -.68         -.59             .02       -.21
                                                      (.17)∗∗∗           (.21)∗∗∗               (.02)              (.1)∗∗
        Log Expenditure*Rain shock                      .05                 .05                -.001                .02
                                                      (.01)∗∗∗           (.02)∗∗∗              (.001)             (.008)∗
        Log Expenditure(Rs)                             .05                 .06                -.006                .02
                                                      (.02)∗∗∗           (.02)∗∗∗            (.001)∗∗∗           (.005)∗∗∗
        Rain shock lagged                               .03                 .02                 .002
                                                      (.01)∗∗              (.01)              (.0009)∗
        Observations                                1,845,482           2,063,200           2,137,769            454,245
        Mean Dependent Variable                        2.07                2.69                .036               .863
Notes: This table shows the effect of rainfall on current year schooling, interacted with measures of household income and
schooling expenditure. Panel A shows the main results interacted with mother’s schooling. This variable is equal to 1 if the
child’s mother reported having any schooling, and 0 otherwise. The mean of mother’s schooling is .453 and the standard
deviation is .498. Panel B shows the main results interacted with the log of household expenditure on education, at the district
level, from the NSS in 2005. The mean of log expenditure (in rupees) is 12.2 and the standard deviation is .794. Rain Shock is
defined as -1 if rainfall was below the 20th percentile for the district, 1 if rainfall was above the 80th percentile for the district,
and 0 otherwise. Columns 1, 2 and 3 contain fixed effects for district, year and age. Since attendance is only observed in 2008,
column 4 contains fixed effects for state, year, and age. All columns contain controls for early life rainfall (in utero to age 4).
Standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level,
* at 10% level. All specifications are clustered at the district level. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***indicates
significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                                                                 37
Figure 1: Variation in Drought Across District and Time




                          38
                                                                                                                      Eﬀect	  of	  Drought	  This	  Year	  on	  Math	  Scores,	  by	  Age	  
                                                             0.16	  


                                                             0.14	  


                                                             0.12	  


   Coeﬃcient	  of	  Drought	  on	  Math	  Scores	                   0.1	  


                                                             0.08	  


                                                             0.06	  


                                                             0.04	  


                                                             0.02	  


                                                                                 0	  
                                                                                         4	                       6	                8	               10	                             12	       14	      16	     18	  

                                                            -­‐0.02	  


                                                            -­‐0.04	  


                                                            -­‐0.06	  
                                                                                                                                                                    Child	  Age	  




Figure 2: Effect of Negative Shocks on Current Test Scores




                                                                                                         Eﬀect	  of	  Posi-ve	  Rainfall	  Shock	  This	  Year	  on	  Math	  Scores,	  by	  Age	  
                                                                                 0.06	  



                                                                                 0.04	  



                                                                                 0.02	  
   Coeﬃcient	  of	  Posi-ve	  Rainfall	  Shock	  on	  Math	  Score	  




                                                                                         0	  
                                                                                                 4	                       6	                8	          10	                            12	      14	     16	     18	  


                                                                                -­‐0.02	  
                                    	  




                                                                                -­‐0.04	  



                                                                                -­‐0.06	  



                                                                                -­‐0.08	  



                                                                                  -­‐0.1	  



                                                                                -­‐0.12	  
                                                                                                                                                                      Child	  Age	  




Figure 3: Effect of Positive Shocks on Current Test Scores



                                                                                                                                                                 39
               Coefficient of Positive Rainfall Shock on Dropouts, by age
    0.02




   0.015




    0.01




   0.005




      0
           5     7             9             11            13               15   17




  ‐0.005




Figure 4: Effect of Positive Shocks on Current Test Scores




                                          40
                                                                   Eﬀect&of&Rain&Shocks&at&Each&Age&on&Year&of&Schooling,&by&Cohort&                                                                                                                                                                                    Cohort&born&1976A1980&
                                                       0.6%                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5%                                                                           0.06%



                                                       0.4%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4%                                                                           0.05%


                                                       0.2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.3%                                                                           0.04%


                                                         0%
                                      !2%                     0%           2%         4%            6%             8%             10%     12%    14%    16%                                                  18%                                                                      0.2%                                                                           0.03%

                                                      !0.2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1976!1980%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0.1%                                                                           0.02%                                           Years%of%School%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1981!1985%
                                                      !0.4%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log%Wages%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1986!1990%




     Years&of&Schooling&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0%                                                                          0.01%
                                                      !0.6%                                                                                                                                                                                                            !2%                    0%   2%   4%   6%            8%          10%   12%   14%   16%   18%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coeﬃcient&of&Rainshock&on&Schooling&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Coeﬃcient&of&Rainshock&on&Log&Wages&




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !0.1%                                                                          0%
                                                      !0.8%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      !0.2%                                                                          !0.01%
                                                        !1%



                                                      !1.2%                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !0.3%                                                                          !0.02%
                                                                                                         Age&at&Rainfall&Shock&                                                                                                                                                                                   Age&at&Rainfall&Shock&




41
                                                                                                         Cohort&Born&1981A1985&                                                                                                                                                                                         Cohort&Born&1986A1990&
                                                     0.4%                                                                                                    0.08%                                                                                                                    0.2%                                                                           0.06%



                                                     0.3%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.04%
                                                                                                                                                             0.06%                                                                                                                       0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       !2%                    0%   2%   4%   6%            8%          10%   12%   14%   16%   18%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0.02%
                                                     0.2%

                                                                                                                                                             0.04%                                                                                                                    !0.2%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0%
                                                     0.1%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !0.02%
                                                                                                                                                             0.02%                                                                                                                    !0.4%
                                                        0%
                                      !2%                    0%       2%         4%        6%              8%           10%         12%    14%   16%   18%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Years%of%School%                                                                                                                                  !0.04%                                          Years%of%School%

                                                     !0.1%                                                                                                                                                         Log%Wages%                                                                                                                                                                                        Log%Wages%
                                                                                                                                                             0%                                                                                                                       !0.6%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !0.06%

                                                     !0.2%




                                                                                                                                                                      Coeﬃcient&of&Rainshock&on&Log&Wages&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Coeﬃcient&of&Rainshock&on&Log&Wages&




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !0.08%
                                                                                                                                                             !0.02%                                                                                                                   !0.8%




     Coeﬃcient&of&Rainshock&on&Years&of&Schooling&
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Coeﬃcient&of&Rainshock&on&Years&of&Schooling&




                                                     !0.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !0.1%

                                                                                                                                                             !0.04%                                                                                                                     !1%
                                                     !0.4%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !0.12%


                                                     !0.5%                                                                                                   !0.06%                                                                                                                   !1.2%                                                                          !0.14%
                                                                                                Age&at&Rainfall&Shock&                                                                                                                                                                                            Age&at&Rainfall&Shock&




                                                                                Figure 5: Effect of Rainfall at Each Age on Years of Schooling and Wages, by Cohort
A   Appendix Tables




                      42
                           Table A1: Drought and Crop Yields: 1957-1987
                                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                    Rice               Wheat                 Jowar
            Drought                          -.41          -.32    -.14     -.16         -.09     -.16
                                           (.04)∗∗∗    (.04)∗∗∗   (.02)∗∗∗   (.02)∗∗∗   (.02)∗∗∗   (.03)∗∗∗


            Year fixed effects               Y              Y       Y          Y          Y          Y
            District fixed effects           Y              Y       Y          Y          Y          Y
            Controls                         Y              N       Y          N          Y          N
            Observations                    7161           8401    6680       8401       6265       7409
            Mean Dependent Variable         1.51           1.51    .856       .856       .589       .589
Notes: This table tests if crop yields react to drought using the World Bank India Agriculture and Climate
Data set which has agricultural yield (revenues per acre) data from 1957-1987. Controls include inputs such
as fertilizer, machinery, etc. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1%
level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                         Table A2: Testing for Serial Correlation in Rainfall
                         Dependent Variable: Deviation from district mean this year
                                                                  (1)        (2)
                         Deviation from district mean last year  .005     -.031∗∗∗
                                                                (.011)     (.010)
                         Year Fixed Effects                        N          Y
                         Observations                           9,248       9,248
Notes: This table tests if there is serial correlation in rainfall in our data. An observation is a district year.
The dependent variable in both regressions is the deviation from mean rainfall in the current year (in inches),
where deviation is simply defined as current year rainfall minus the mean rainfall in sample period. The
independent variable is deviation from mean rainfall last year (in inches), constructed in the same way. The
mean of the deviation is 0 (2.2e-06)and the standard deviation is 223 inches. Standard errors are reported
in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                                                           43
             Table A3: Percent of Droughts and Positive Rainfall Shocks by Year
                               Year    % Top Quartile     % Bottom Quartile
                                          Rainfall            Rainfall
                               1975         .35                  .03
                               1976         .16                  .17
                               1977         .29                  .09
                               1978         .29                  .14
                               1979         .03                  .46
                               1980         .13                  .22
                               1981         .11                  .15
                               1982         .06                  .30
                               1983         .26                  .08
                               1984         .26                  .17
                               1985         .26                  .16
                               1986         .12                  .26
                               1987         .24                  .35
                               1988         .44                  .05
                               1989         .13                  .15
                               1990         .43                  .02
                               1991         .11                  .19
                               1992         .01                  .45
                               1993         .14                  .15
                               1994         .29                  .05
                               1995         .11                  .13
                               1996         .11                  .19
                               1997         .12                  .15
                               1998         .20                  .03
                               1999         .07                  .22
                               2000         .03                  .22
                               2001         .04                  .14
                               2002         .02                  .42
                               2003         .08                  .14
                               2004         .06                  .24
                               2005         .19                  .17
                               2006         .20                  .30
                               2007         .25                  .04
                               2008         .29                  .05
Notes: This table shows estimates of the percent of districts each year that experience a drought and positive
rainfall shock.




                                                     44
                              Table A4: Alternative Measures of Rainfall
                                                      Dependent Variable: Math Score
                                                          (1)       (2)        (3)
                        IMD Drought                      .115
                                                      (.020)∗∗∗
                        Rain Shock                                 -.054
                                                                 (.01)∗∗∗
                        Bottom Quintile Rainfall                                -

                        Second Quintile Rainfall                                       -.069
                                                                                     (.02)∗∗∗
                        Third Quintile Rainfall                                        -.077
                                                                                     (.02)∗∗∗
                        Fourth Quintile Rainfall                                        -.12
                                                                                     (.02)∗∗∗
                        Highest Quintile Rainfall                                       -.12
                                                                                    (.002)∗∗∗
                        Observations                  1,892,741       1,900,357     1,892,741
Notes: This table shows our estimates of the effect of three different measures of rainfall on math test scores.
Rainfall is measured in millimeters: the mean is 1,286 mm and the standard deviation is 788.5 mm. Quintiles
of rainfall are measured relative to the entire period of our data rainfall data (1976-2008). IMD Drought
is drought as defined by the Indian Meterological Department: less than 75% of a 10 year moving average
of district level rainfall. Rain shock is defined as 1 if rainfall is in the highest quintile, -1 if rainfall is in
the lowest quintile, and 0 otherwise. In column3, the independent variables are quintiles of rainfall, run as
separate dummy variables, in one regression with the bottom quintile omitted. All specifications include
district, age, and year of survey fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in
parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                Table A5: Effect of In Utero Drought on Child Health Outcomes

                                                             Dependent Variable
                                                         Height (cm) Weight (kilos)
                          In Utero Drought                  -6.89          -.80
                                                             (3.39)∗∗              (.62)
                          Observations                       18,283               18,283
                          Mean Dependent Variable             71.7                 8.17
Notes: This table shows our estimates of the effect of drought in utero on health outcomes. The sample
is children 3 and under in the NFHS data set. All regressions contain year of birth and state fixed effects.
Children are marked as having a drought occur while in utero if rainfall was below 75% of a 10 year moving
average by district in the year prior to their birth (calculated as survey year minus reported age). Standard
errors, clustered at the district level, are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, **
at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                                                        45
            Table A6: Effect of Rain Shocks on Test Scores in High Malaria States
                                                            Dependent Variable:
                                                             Math      Reading
                                                             Score      Score
                              Rain shock                      -.08       -.03
                                                             (.03)∗∗      (.03)
                              Malaria state                   -.14         -.1
                                                              (.12)       (.12)
                              Rain shock*Malaria state        .07          .03
                                                              (.07)       (.06)
                              Rain shock lagged               .04          .02
                                                              (.03)       (.03)
                              Observations                 1,892,741    2,115,547
Notes: This table shows the results of our contemporaneous rainfall specification focusing on the five high
malaria states. All specifications include state region fixed effects and are clustered at the state level. All
columns contain controls for early life rainfall shock exposure (in utero-age 4). Standard errors, clustered at
the district level, are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, ** at 5% level, * at 10%
level.




                       Table A7: Does Drought Impact Fertility Decisions?
                                                       ln cohort size   ln cohort size
                                                        (born 1991)      (born 2001)
                                                            (1)               (2)
                         Drought (t)                        .02              -.007
                                                            (.03)            (.02)
                         Drought In utero (t-1)             -.06             .01
                                                            (.04)            (.03)
                         Drought (t-2)                      -.03             -.02
                                                            (.03)            (.02)
                         Drought (t-3)                      -.12             -.03
                                                           (.06)∗∗           (.04)
                         Drought (t-4)                      -.04             .11
                                                            (.02)          (.02)∗∗∗
                         Drought (t-5)                      -.04             -.03
                                                            (.03)            (.03)
                         ln Population 1991                  .04
                                                           (.02)∗∗
                         ln Population 2001                                  .02
                                                                             (.02)
                         Observations                      104,630         207,905
                         Mean Dependent Variable            5.33            5.98
   Notes: These are OLS regressions where the dependent variable is ln number of births in each district
   in 1991 and 2001. All regressions contain state and year of survey fixed effects. Standard errors are
   clustered at the district level and are reported in parentheses. ***indicates significance at 1% level, **
   at 5% level, * at 10% level.




                                                      46
