                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          REPAIRING THE DAMAGE:
      THE EFFECT OF PRICE EXPECTATIONS ON AUTO-REPAIR PRICE QUOTES

                                          Meghan R. Busse
                                            Ayelet Israeli
                                         Florian Zettelmeyer

                                        Working Paper 19154
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w19154


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2013




We wish to thank Brian Hafer, Georgette Ong, Tracey Virtue, and Melanie Webber for enabling us
to run the experiments in this paper. This research was conducted in collaboration with AutoMD, whose
call center employees conducted the primary data collection. The authors received no compensation
from AutoMD for conducting this research. We are also grateful for the generous advice and help
from Angela Lee and Eric Anderson. We thank Steve Tadelis and seminar participants at Northwestern,
Stanford, Yale, and the NBER IO Winter Meetings for many helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2013 by Meghan R. Busse, Ayelet Israeli, and Florian Zettelmeyer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Repairing the Damage: The Effect of Price Expectations on Auto-Repair Price Quotes
Meghan R. Busse, Ayelet Israeli, and Florian Zettelmeyer
NBER Working Paper No. 19154
June 2013
JEL No. D12,D83

                                             ABSTRACT

In this paper we investigate whether sellers treat consumers differently on the basis of how well-informed
consumers appear to be. We implement a large-scale field experiment in which callers request price
quotes from automotive repair shops. We show that sellers alter their initial price quotes depending
on whether consumers appear to be well-informed, uninformed, or poorly informed about market prices.
We find that repair shops quote higher prices to callers who cite a higher expected price. We find that
women are quoted higher prices than men when callers signal that they are uninformed about market
prices. However, gender differences disappear when callers mention an expected price for the repair.
Finally, we find that repair shops are more likely to offer a price concession if asked to do so by a
woman than a man.


Meghan R. Busse                                     Florian Zettelmeyer
Northwestern University                             Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management                        Kellogg School of Management
Management & Strategy, Sixth Floor                  Marketing Department, Fourth Floor
2001 Sheridan Road                                  2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208                                  Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER                                            and NBER
m-busse@kellogg.northwestern.edu                    f-zettelmeyer@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Ayelet Israeli
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Marketing Dept., Fourth Floor
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
a-israeli@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

When we buy something, most of us would prefer to feel that we are well-informed shoppers. For
small-ticket goods that we buy regularly, this is easy to accomplish, and most of us don’t worry
very much about whether we have purchased the right product or gotten a good price. However,
when purchasing a big-ticket item that we buy rarely, many of us have more anxiety. One concern
is whether we have chosen the lowest-price outlet at which to buy something. Many of us address
this concern by shopping around. A second concern is how sellers will treat us if we appear to be
uninformed or poorly-informed about the product itself or about its price. Information provided by
the Federal Trade Commission, an agency whose mandate is partly consumer protection, reflects
this anxiety. The FTC publishes guides for consumers shopping for mortgages, cars and car repair,
jewelry, products with extended warranties, antiques, funerals, mattresses, and a variety of other
complicated, expensive, and/or infrequently purchased products.1 These are the sorts of products
and services that inspire in consumers a nagging suspicion that sellers will take advantage of them
if they are not well-informed.
        There is an extensive empirical literature that has investigated price dispersion and the value of
shopping around.2 In this paper, we investigate the second cause of information-related consumer
anxiety; namely, whether sellers treat consumers differently on the basis of how well-informed
consumers appear to be. We do so by using a field experiment in a setting in which sellers have
some discretion about what price to offer an individual customer. Our experiment employs mystery
shoppers who ask automobile repair shops for price quotes using scripts that reveal different degrees
of price knowledge. The purpose of our experimental design is to illuminate a single aspect of
the effect of customer information on prices; namely, how much sellers differentiate their initial
price offers to customers on the basis of how informed customers appear to be. By using scripts
to keep buyer behavior fixed, our experiment isolates sellers’ responses to differences in buyer
information. This approach explicitly will not capture the effect of consumer information on
equilibrium transaction prices. Instead, it will estimate one component of the overall effect: the
seller response.
        We perform two experiments. In our first and main experiment we test the effect of mentioning
an expected price on firm behavior by comparing price quotes obtained by callers who don’t refer
to any particular price (the “no expected price” condition) to those given to callers who mention
that they have learned that the requested repair should cost $365 (the “market-based expected
price” condition since $365 is the approximate market average for the requested repair) or $510

    1
        See http://www.consumer.ftc.gov/topics/shopping-saving.
    2
        See Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2006) for a review. See also Brown and Goolsbee (2002) and Sorensen (2000).



                                                          1
(the “upward-biased expected price” condition since $510 clearly exceeds the market average price
for the requested repair). Since demographic differences have been known to affect outcomes in
price negotiations, we vary the gender of callers. We anticipate that firms may assign different
priors to the price knowledge of male and female callers.
      We find that price expectations affect firms’ price quotes. When callers don’t communicate an
expected price, the price quote is, on average, no different from when they communicate market-
based expected prices. However, repair shops quote significantly higher prices to callers who men-
tion upward-biased expected prices than to those who communicate market-based or no expected
prices.
      Female callers are quoted higher prices on average. Moreover, this effect is driven by differences
in the “no expected price” condition. Women who do not mention any expected price are quoted
significantly higher prices than men in the same condition or women who mention market-based
price expectations. However, once callers refer to a price, gender differences disappear. We find
some evidence that men do better in the no expected price condition than they do in the market-
based expected price condition; we find the opposite effect for women.
      To test the effect of an expected price as a readily available reference in negotiations, we in-
structed callers to ask the repair shop for a price concession if the shop’s initial price quote exceeded
the expected price used in the relevant experimental condition. In the condition where callers did
not mention any expected price, callers requested that the market-based price expectation ($365)
be matched. We find that asking for a price concession leads to a 13% average reduction relative to
the quoted price, regardless of whether callers had previously mentioned an expected price. This
average price reduction notwithstanding, only 26% of requests led to a price concession of any
amount. We find that women are more likely by 10 percentage points than men to obtain a price
concession at all. However, conditional on obtaining a price concession, the magnitude of the price
concession does not vary by gender.
      When we combine our findings on initial price quotes and price concessions, our results suggest
that women are best off mentioning market-based price expectations upfront. This lowers the
initial quote while not negatively affecting any subsequent match concession. In contrast, our
results suggest that men are better off inserting their price expectation into the negotiation late:
mentioning a market-based expected price upfront may increase the initial price quote,3 but does
not increase the benefit of using it later to ask for a price concession.
      After we finished collecting most of the data for the first experiment, we conducted a second ex-
periment to see whether a “downward-biased” expected price condition (an expected price of $310)

  3
      We find this result in our main estimates, but the result does not hold up throughout all of our robustness checks.




                                                            2
would lead to a lower price than the no expected price condition for both men and women. We did
not find that downward-biased price expectations changed prices relative to no price expectations
(after pooling the data across both experiments), relative to market-based price expectations.
   As described above, the key contribution of our paper is its focus on the role that consumer
(buyer) price expectations have on altering firm (seller) behavior. We can summarize what we
believe our results indicate about the behavior of repair shops with regards to price expectations
as follows. First, shops appear to respond to the available information about how well price-
informed the caller is. When the caller does not provide any information about his or her price
expectation, the shop must rely on its priors. If we group all callers together, it appears that shops
assume that callers know the market average price. However, if we split our analysis by the caller’s
gender, it appears that the shops have different priors about different genders, and that they infer
that women will accept a price that is higher than the market average and that men will only accept
a price below it. However, once a caller provides information about his or her price expectation,
the shops treat men and women the same, whether the information is that the caller’s expectation
is too high, too low, or correct. In other words, information about price expectations supersedes
for the shops any information they might infer from the caller’s gender. In this sense, our results
imply that our estimated gender effects are statistical discrimination rather than animus: shops
don’t quote women higher prices no matter what—they just believe that women expect higher
prices than men and respond accordingly. Finally, we find that women are more likely than men
to be offered a price concession if they ask for one. We discuss possible reasons for this later in the
paper in conjunction with the results themselves.
   A key implication of our study is that consumers can use price expectations strategically to
affect price negotiations. Having an expected price in mind enables consumers to use bargaining
strategies that they might otherwise not use, such as mentioning the expected price or negotiating
for a price concession, which in turn may lead firms to offer different prices from what they would
have offered otherwise. As we have shown, the extent to which expected prices help consumers
depends on whether the expected prices accurately reflect market prices, how they are used, and
what consumer type uses them.
   Our paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we describe the connections between this paper
and related research. In Section 3 we describe the experiment design and summarize the data. In
Section 4 we describe economic models of consumer price search, and the predictions suggested by
such models for the outcomes of our experiments. In Section 5 we present the findings from our
experiments. Section 6 explores the robustness of our findings. We conclude in Section 7.




                                                  3
2    Related literature

Our paper connects to three literatures: negotiation and bargaining, reference prices, and gender
and race discrimination. We discuss the connection between our paper and each of these literatures
in turn.
    There is a vast literature on negotiation. Tsay and Bazerman (2009) provide a review that
emphasizes factors that lead to negotiated outcomes deviating from rational negotiation outcomes.
There are a variety of such factors, including negotiators’ social relationships, a negotiator behaving
in an egocentric manner, negotiators’ illusions about their own negotiation skills, negotiators’
emotions, and their reliance on intuition. The section of this literature that most closely relates
to our paper is that which examines the effect of information on negotiation outcomes. Stigler
(1961) asserted the importance, in general, of price information. The effect of information on
bargaining outcomes specifically is studied by Valley, Blount White, Neal, and Bazerman (1992),
who find that, in a setting in which agents serve as information brokers between buyers and sellers,
settlement prices are higher when the agent knows the buyer’s maximum reservation price, and
lower when the agent knows the seller’s minimum reservation price.
    Our study is unusual in this literature in that the experimental manipulation is not to vary the
information setting, and then evaluate the equilibrium bargaining outcome that results from the
two parties interacting. Instead, our experiment focuses on only a part of the negotiation process:
namely, how the seller’s offer differs depending on how informed about prices the buyer appears to
be. We do this by having buyers operate from a script that keeps the buyers’ side of the negotiation
fixed across information conditions, leaving sellers’ responses to the buyers’ price inquiry as the
only factor that varies across the information conditions.
    The second literature to which our paper relates is reference prices. (See Biswas, Wilson, and
Licata (1993), Kalyanaram and Winer (1995), and Mazumdar, Raj, and Sinha (2005) for reviews.)
A large part of this literature is devoted to understanding how customers form reservation prices.
In our experiment, the experimental design specifies reservation prices for our callers to present as
their own, which means that this is not the part of the reference price literature that is relevant for
our paper. Our paper is more closely related to a literature that studies the effect of reservation
prices on negotiations, such as Galinsky and Mussweiler (2001), Van Poucke and Buelens (2002),
and Moosmayer, Schuppar, and Siems (2012). This literature has focused on identifying which of
three possible references prices—the reservation price (the price at which the negotiator would be
indifferent between accepting the offer and walking away), the aspiration price (the best expected
result given the other negotiator), and the first offer price—has the greatest effect on the negotiated
outcome. Again, since we are using a script in which we fixed the reference prices that our callers



                                                  4
present, and specify what the callers should say at every juncture in the script, our experiment
really focuses on the effect that a buyer’s reservation price has on sellers’ responses. This effect
is certainly part of the overall price determination studied in other papers in this literature. Our
paper is unusual in that we have designed an experiment to isolate just this effect.
   The last literature to which our paper is related is gender and race discrimination. The aim of
many of the papers in this literature is to understand whether one set of customers (distinguished by
gender or race) is able to obtain lower prices than another. Castillo, Petrie, Torero, and Vesterlund
(2012) and Gneezy, List, and Price (2012) are two examples; they investigate this effect in the
market for taxi rides in Lima, Peru, and for new cars in the United States, respectively. While our
paper does investigate the effect of gender on price, our emphasis differs in that we are interested
primarily in whether the effects of different information conditions vary by gender; put simply, we
are interested more in the interaction than in the main effect of gender.
   The paper that most closely relates to ours is Ayres and Siegelman (1995). In this paper the
authors conduct a field experiment in which they send buyers into car dealerships to negotiate for
a new car using a prepared script. They find that white men receive lower initial price quotes
and are also able to negotiate lower final prices than black or female buyers. Using observations
made by testers during the negotiation, the authors argue that the price quote differences mainly
arise from dealerships assuming that different groups have different reservation prices. Our paper
is similar in that it scripts the behavior of buyers in order to try to hold buyer behavior constant
across observations, and therefore focuses primarily on the seller response to experimentally ma-
nipulated differences across observations. We differ from Ayres and Siegelman (1995) in that we
experimentally manipulate whether consumers present themselves to firms as being uninformed,
well informed, or poorly informed. Ayres and Siegelman (1995) focus on gender and race effects,
while our paper focuses on the effect of price expectations. We expand on the gender results in
Ayres and Siegelman (1995) by showing that gender discrimination depends on firms’ perception
about how well informed consumers are.
   Schneider (2012) also conducts a field experiment in the context of auto repair, although his
paper is interested in the issue of over- vs. under-treatment in the diagnoses offered by repair
shops, not price quotes.
   Our paper is also related to a literature on consumer price search. We will describe the con-
nections between our paper and the price search literature in Section 4, after we describe our
experiment in detail in the next section. In Section 4, we will discuss specifically what such models
suggest about the results of our experiment.




                                                 5
3        Experiment

We conducted the experiment in cooperation with the company AutoMD.com, an online firm that
specializes in auto repairs by helping consumers diagnose car problems and providing consumers
with information on repair costs.4 In order to provide repair cost estimates to consumers, AutoMD
operates a call center in which agents call local repair shops and ask for price quotes for specific
types of repairs. For that purpose, agents may or may not introduce themselves as employees of
AutoMD, and may at times mention AutoMD’s estimated prices to shops. AutoMD allowed us to
prepare a set of scripts for calls that varied the information that their call center agents provided
in order to create a set of experimental treatment and control conditions. AutoMD instructed its
agents to make calls following the scripts and to randomize which scripts they used for which calls,
according to a randomization protocol we designed. Conducting our scripted calls was very similar
to what agents regularly did in their jobs. They incorporated our experimental calls into their
normal workflow, and were paid their regular salary by AutoMD. The call center consisted of nine
agents, of which four were males and five were females, who conducted our assigned calls over a
period of 16 weeks in Summer and Fall 2012.
        We instructed the agents to request a price quote for a radiator replacement for a 6-cylinder
2003 Toyota Camry LE. We chose this model because it was one of the vehicles in the AutoMD
database for which consumers most frequently requested information on repair costs.5 We chose
a radiator replacement because radiator leaks are relatively common among 10-year-old vehicles,
and because radiator leaks are easily diagnosed by consumers. We held the car model, model year,
and repair constant across all conditions and weeks of the experiment. The estimated average price
in the AutoMD database for a radiator repair for this specific model and model year was $365,
with some regional variation. The repair shops in this study were independent shops and shops
affiliated with national/regional chains. To reduce the variance of quoted prices we did not call car
dealerships, which generally quote much higher prices than other repair shops.


3.1       Main experiment

In our main experiment we randomly assigned repair shops and call center agents to one of three
experimental conditions. These conditions were codified in the form of call center scripts that
the agents were instructed to follow as closely as possible. In the first script, after introducing
themselves with, “Hello, my name is John/Jennifer,” agents said, “So I have a 6-cylinder 2003

    4
     Any results and conclusions contained in this paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of AutoMD.com nor are they endorsed by AutoMD.com.
   5
     In addition, in unrelated vehicle purchase data to which we have access, this model does not stand out relative
to other cars in how many buyers are male or female.


                                                         6
Toyota Camry LE. I just visited the website AutoMD.com, and for this area they say the cost
should be $365 to replace the radiator on my car. Could you tell me how much you charge?” We
refer to this script as the “market-based expected price” condition (or “market-based EP” condition
for short).
   In the second script, after introducing themselves, agents said, “So I have a 6-cylinder 2003
Toyota Camry LE. I have no idea how much it is to replace a radiator. Could you tell me how
much you charge?” This is the “no expected price” condition.
   In the third script, again after introducing themselves, agents said, “So I have a 6-cylinder
2003 Toyota Camry LE. I just visited the website AutoMD.com, and for this area they say the cost
should be $510 to replace the radiator on my car.” We refer to this condition as the “upward-biased
expected price” condition. (See page Appendix-1 for an outline of the scripts used by the agents.)
   We chose the price in the market-based EP condition to signal that the consumer was aware
of the prevailing market price. In the upward-biased EP condition we wanted to signal that the
caller had inaccurate information. In consultation with AutoMD.com we chose $510 because it was
substantially higher than $365 (by 40%) but not so high that it would be impossible for a repair
shop to have given such a quote. We chose the wording in the no expected price condition to signal
that the consumer was not informed about prices in the market and had no expected price in mind.
   After agents received a price quote, they asked shops to make sure that the price included parts,
labor, and antifreeze and was the total price before tax. The agents then recorded the price quote
that incorporated any adjustments for these elements. We refer to this price as the “initial price
quote.”
   Next, agents were instructed to compare the initial price quote to the expected price they had
mentioned at the beginning of the call in the market-based or upward-biased price condition ($365
or $510). If the initial price quote exceeded the respective expected price, agents said, “So, I have
a question. Would you match the price of $365 (or $510) that the website AutoMD said it should
cost in this area?” Agents would then record “no,” “yes,” or a revised price offer if the shop offered
a price concession that differed from a match of the expected price. We also had agents ask for
price concession in the no EP condition by saying, “So, I have a question. I just visited the website
AutoMD.com, and for this area they say the cost should be $365. Would you match this price?”
Doing so allowed us to later determine whether callers were better off mentioning the expected
price at the outset of the call (market-based EP condition) or after the initial price quote (no EP
condition). The agents concluded the call after obtaining a response to the request for a price
concession or—if the initial price quote was below $365 or $510, depending on the condition—after
obtaining the initial price quote.
   Agents were provided with weekly spreadsheets containing a list of shops to call for each day


                                                  7
of the week, and a script assignment for that shop. In order to minimize agent error in following
the script, we assigned agents to use the same script for all the calls they made in a given day
(although agents used different scripts on different days). Calls were made during weekdays. Shops
were randomly assigned across agents. In order to study within-shop variation, we tried to obtain
two price quotes from each shop, with a randomly assigned pair of scripts in random order, keeping
at least four weeks between the two calls.6 We chose to have both calls to any given shop made my
agents of a single gender; the purpose was to be able to measure differences between information
conditions with less variance. We decided on the number of shops to call before the start of
the experiment and ended the experiment once we had exhausted our list of shops. The list of
repair shops consisted of all non-dealership repair shops recorded by AutoMD as providing radiator
replacements for Toyota vehicles in Designated Market Areas (DMAs) with 150 or more repair
shops. These DMAs correspond to the most heavily populated DMAs in the country.
       We collected quotes from a total of 2,778 shops over a period of 16 weeks. Of these, 1,825
provided price quotes under two different experimental conditions. We obtained only one quote
from the remaining shops because the shop could not be reached a second time, the shop closed, or
the shop refused to provide a quote over the phone despite having done so in a previous call under
a different information condition. Overall, we obtained 4,603 price quote observations in our main
experiment.7


3.2      Experiment 2

After collecting data for 10 weeks we were told that there was enough call center capacity to add
a downward-biased expected price condition. We chose $310 for the downward-biased expected
price, which corresponded to the 20th percentile of the initial price quotes we had collected so far
in the no EP condition.
       Since our original list of shops from DMAs with 150 or more shops would be exhausted in the
process of completing our ongoing main experiment, we used a new list of shops for our calls in
experiment 2, this time from DMAs with 70 to 149 repair shops. These calls began in week 12.
As a result, experiment 2 was based on shops in different, smaller, markets and in different, later,
weeks than our original experiment (henceforth experiment 1). Because we knew that we could not
consider the conditions in which we collected observations in experiment 1 to be experimentally
valid counterfactuals for the downward-biased EP condition in experiment 2, in experiment 2 we

   6
     We asked agents to record if a shop indicated that they noticed that we had called before. We recorded only 94
such occasions among the 4,603 total quotes.
   7
     We obtained an additional 85 quotes but removed them from the analysis because agents had erroneously used
a pre-test version of the call script. See Section 6.1.1 for a discussion.




                                                        8
replicated the no EP condition along with the downward-biased EP condition. This way we had
one experimentally valid counterfactual for the downward-biased EP condition.
   Overall, both experiments ran concurrently for three weeks. During that time the agents
made second calls to shops in experiment 1 and also called repair shops from experiment 2 using
the no expected and downward-biased EP conditions. In experiment 2, we collected 1,941 price
quotes across the two conditions. Table 1 summarizes the differences across conditions in the two
experiments.
                                     Table 1: Experimental Conditions

  Variable                                     No EP       Market-Based   Upward-     Downward-
                                                           EP             Biased EP   Biased EP
  Expected price mentioned at outset of call   None        $365           $510        $310
  Price used in request for price concession   $365        $365           $510        $310
  Observations in experiment 1                 1,613       1,509          1,481       0
  Observations in experiment 2                 1,012       0              0           929




3.3    Experimental paradigm

The experiments used in this paper follow an experimental paradigm commonly used to study race
and gender discrimination (Ayres and Siegelman 1995, Bertrand and Mullainathan 2004, Gneezy,
List, and Price 2012). In this paradigm researchers pose as consumers/job seekers to measure the
reaction of firms to different experimental stimuli. By design, firms cannot give informed consent
without invalidating the purpose of the experiment. Because researchers typically do not end up
engaging in a purchase or taking a job, this experimental paradigm imposes costs on firms. As a
result, researchers have to be mindful to balance the benefits from the insights of the experiments
with the costs imposed on firms.
   While this is fundamentally a subjective judgment, we believe that the cost imposed by this
experiment on a repair shop was small, for three reasons: First, these shops receive calls from
“mystery shoppers” on a regular basis (a term used in the industry to refer to the practice of
agents of firms pretending to be a consumer in order to obtain price and/or product information).
In fact, the business model of AutoMD and its competitors is based on sampling prices for various
repairs and vehicles from repair shops. While our script prescribed specific wording, calls made
during the experiment did not differ in nature from calls made by AutoMD call center agents on a
daily basis. Second, we picked a “standard” repair to ensure that shops would not have to engage
in time-intensive research for a quote. In fact, the duration of our calls was short—typically three
minutes or so. Third, our calls were unlikely to have further consequences for these firms. (Our
calls were not made in high enough volume to trigger updated estimates of anticipated demand,

                                                       9
nor were they likely to trigger an emergency response by firms such as might be caused by reports
of food poisoning in restaurants, for example.)


4        Consumer price search

In this section we discuss how economic theory illuminates our understanding of the results of our
experiments. In models of consumer price search, a literature initiated by Stigler (1961), price
dispersion can arise in equilibrium if consumers vary in how costly it is for them to search (Stahl
1989, Anderson and de Palma 2005). Optimizing consumers will employ a search rule in which
they continue searching as long as the expected gain to an additional search is worth the cost of
conducting an incremental search. In practice, this translates to a “reservation price” rule in which
consumers search until they find a price that is below their “reservation price.” It is important to
note that in this context “reservation price” is not the consumer’s gross utility of consuming the
good or the consumer’s maximum willingness-to-pay for the good.8 Instead, the reservation price
is the price at which the cost of an additional search just equals the amount by which the next
price quote would be expected to beat the reservation price.
        On the other side of the market in these models, firms who are choosing prices make a trade-off
that closely resembles the monopoly pricing trade-off: a higher price increases the profits made on
each individual sale, but also increases the possibility that the price is above a potential buyer’s
reservation price, and hence reduces the probability of making a sale.
        Salop (1977) shows that consumers with higher search costs will have higher reservation prices.
While search cost can be understood as the disutility or opportunity cost of time spent searching,
or of the financial cost of accessing information sources, Salop argues that search cost could also
be understood more broadly. He says, “Consumers may differ in effective search costs due to
differences in their abilities to analyze and process data gathered. A consumer with an incorrect
prior on [the distribution of prices offered in the market] may also be treated as having a higher
[search cost]. One can think of high cost consumers simply as being less adept in economic decision
making.” If a firm can identify which consumers are likely to have high vs. low search costs, it
should charge higher prices to high search cost consumers.
        In the remainder of this section, we discuss the effect of different information conditions and
of the caller’s gender on shops’ beliefs about consumers’ search costs and reservation prices, and
thereby on their price quotes.9

    8
    These could be labelled as the “reservation value” in order to clarify the distinction.
    9
    One might be concerned that differences in quoted prices will not reflect differences in transaction prices since
repair shops can deviate from the price they have quoted once a consumer actually brings the car in for repair.
Notice, however, that shops have incentives not to deviate too much from their quoted prices for two reasons. First,


                                                         10
4.1    No EP condition

In the “no expected price” (“No EP”) condition, agents do not convey price information to firms.
We expect therefore that repair shops will maintain their population estimates of car repair cus-
tomers’ search costs and reservation prices. However, since repair shops can easily observe a caller’s
gender, if shops believe that search costs differ by gender, this may lead them to quote different
prices to different genders.
    In particular, one could imagine that women have a higher search cost for obtaining information
about car repair costs. For example, there is a prevalent stereotype that women are, on average,
less interested in cars than men. If this is so, then gathering information about car repair costs
may be inherently less interesting to the average woman than to the average man, or it may be
more difficult to evaluate price quotes, since understanding what needs to be repaired and why and
whether a fair price is being quoted are all aided by knowing more about cars themselves. Even if
women understand price quotes just as easily as men do, women may dislike being treated by repair
shops as if they know less about cars, or may dislike interacting in an environment in which they
suspect repair shops will try to rip them off because they are perceived (correctly or incorrectly)
to be poorly informed. There is a sense in which this is self-fulfilling: if women dislike interacting
with repair shops, they may do it less, leading them to be less well-informed about prices, and
thus justifying the repair shops’ beliefs that they are poorly informed which leads women to dislike
interacting with repair shops. Notice also that it need not be the case that women actually are
less well-informed about cars. As long as repair shops believe that women are less well-informed,
and this leads them to interact with women in a way women dislike, the cycle begins.10
    If it is indeed the case that, on average, women have higher search costs for obtaining informa-
tion about car repair shops (or if shops believe this to be true), then a shop fielding a request from
a woman should assume, in the absence of any other information, that she has a higher reservation
price than a man and quote her a higher price.

a shop quotes a price that is higher than they actually plan to charge—perhaps to “delight” the customer once they
come in—risks losing business to other shops if consumers make their choice of shop based on the quoted price.
Second, a shop that quotes a price that is lower than they actually plan to charge—a “bait and switch” strategy—
risks making consumers fell “ripped off” and losing repeat business. This means that, while quoted price need not
exactly correspond to eventual transaction prices, there are strong economic incentives for repair shops for the two
not to deviate too much. Even if there are systematic differences between quoted and actual prices, this would only
invalidate our results if the differences themselves differ systematically across conditions.
   10
      Salop suggests that one way some consumers can have higher search costs is if they are “less adept in economic
decision-making.” While it is definitely neither our intention, nor Salop’s, to suggest that women are less adept
decision-makers, repair shops may believe they are. If this leads them to treat women in a way that women dislike,
and shy away from, then this could lead to women having higher search costs, and thus higher reservation prices,
even if the repair shops’ belief has no basis in reality. In some aspects, the repair shops’ belief may become self-
perpetuating.




                                                        11
4.2   Stated EP conditions

In our experimental script for the market-based EP condition, the call center agent says “I just
visited the website AutoMD.com, and for this area they say the cost should be $365 to replace the
radiator on my car.” We assert that this price (which we call the “expected price” in this paper),
should communicate to the repair shops something very similar to Salop’s reservation price; we
believe that the implicit message to the shop is “If you don’t match or beat this price I will keep
searching,” which is exactly the idea of a reservation price. As a result, if either a man or a woman
announces this reservation price, then the gender of the caller yields no additional information that
is relevant for the shop’s pricing, if indeed gender was being used as a way to infer the reservation
price. If this is the case, then average prices in the market-based EP condition would not be
expected to vary between men and women.
   Further, we predict that men and women who announce a higher price expectation ($510) will
be offered higher price quotes than those who announced $365. These consumers have revealed
that they have an upward-biased view of market prices. If shops interpret $510 as these consumers’
reservation price, then they should quote these consumers higher prices. Even if the shops don’t
interpret $510 directly as the reservation price, there are several reasons to infer that customers
who cite $510 as their price expectation probably have higher search costs and reservation prices
than customers who cite $365. Specifically, a consumer whose current price expectation is $510
would typically have sampled fewer prices, since each price draw should improve the estimate of
the mean and also lower the expected value of the first order statistic. Alternatively, a consumer
with a price expectation of $510 is likely to have conducted less effective or less informative search.
All of these would be correlated with higher search costs and higher reservation prices.
   Finally, a consumer who announces $310 also reveals an incorrect view of market prices, how-
ever, this should not lead to higher price quotes than for a $365 announcement. If $310 reflects the
consumer’s reservation price, a shop who quotes the same price as for an announcement of $365 is
more likely to lose the repair job. Therefore, at least some shops will have an incentive to quote
a lower price. Alternatively, if a shop concludes that the low price announcement is a “bluff,” as
long as some competing shops lower their quotes in response to this bluff, the shop should have an
incentive to quote a lower price than for a $365 announcement.


4.3   Discussion

We wrote the script for the “no EP condition” so that it would emphasize that agents had no
expected price in mind when requesting a price quote. Specifically, in the script for this condition
we did not ask agents to say: “So I have a 6-cylinder 2003 Toyota Camry LE. Could you tell me



                                                  12
how much you charge?” since this would have left open to the shop’s interpretation what price
expectation the caller had. Instead, we asked agents to say: “So I have a 6-cylinder 2003 Toyota
Camry LE. I have no idea how much it is to replace a radiator. Could you tell me how much you
charge?”
   One might be concerned that the phrase “I have no idea” does not communicate the “non-
information” to shops that would cause them to rely on their beliefs about search costs and reser-
vation prices among men and women in the overall population, but that it instead communicates
some kind of more specific information. For example, shops might interpret “I have no idea” to
mean “I am just starting my price search process.” In this case, shops still have little to go on
except their beliefs about the population.
   If “I have no idea” is interpreted to mean “I have unusually high search costs” then consumers
who say this should be quoted higher prices than, for example, consumers with market-based price
expectations. Furthermore, men and women should be quoted similar prices since gender now
conveys little incremental information about search costs. Neither of these are true about the
empirical results for the no expect price condition, so this appears not to be how this statement is
interpreted.
   If “I have no idea” is interpreted as “I probably have some idea, but I am withholding it
strategically,” it is unclear what shops should think about these customers relative to customers
who cite an expected price of $365. Perhaps they are extra-savvy and extra-cagey, or perhaps
they haven’t yet gotten price information they think can be used as a useful reference price. If the
caller’s gender interacts with the statement in shops’ interpretation—for example, men who say “I
have no idea” are believed to be very strategic while women who say this are believed to be very
naive—that would lead to higher price quotes for women than men in this condition.


4.4   Summary of predictions

If the repair shops respond to the price expectations announced by our call center agents as if
they are (or are correlated with) the reservation prices of price-searching consumers who differ
by gender in their search costs, that would lead to the following basic prediction: Women who
announce no price expectation (reservation price) should be quoted higher prices than men who
announce no price expectation, but both men and women should be offered the same price quotes
on average if they announce a price expectation. Finally, men and women who announce higher
price expectations should be offered higher price quotes than those who announce lower price
expectations.




                                                13
5         Results

In this section we report on the results of our main experiment. We begin with an analysis of
how communicating different expected prices affects the initial price quote given to a consumer, a
variable we label PriceQuote. Next, we analyze how the effect of communicating an expected price
differs by gender. We then show how firms react when consumers request that the firm match their
expected price. Finally, we report the results the downward-biased price condition, added in our
second experiment.


5.1         Comparing different expected price conditions

The distribution of initial price quotes in our main experiment are graphed in Figure 1 on page 15.
Consumers who communicated no expected price were quoted, on average, a price of $394.5; the
median initial quote was $375. If consumers communicated a market-based expected price, the av-
erage price quote was $392.5 (median $370).11 Communicating an upwards-biased expected price
led to an average quote of $427 (median $425). An comparison of the variance of the distributions
shows weak evidence that communicating a price expectation shrinks the variance relative to pro-
viding no price expectation. A test of equality of variances between the no EP condition and the
market-based EP condition yields a p-value of 0.13; a test of the equality of variances between the
no EP condition and the upward-biased EP condition yields a p-value of 0.01.
         To analyze whether the quotes are statistically different from each other in the three conditions,
we estimate the following specification:


                           P riceQuoteijt = α0 + α1 Conditioni + α2 Controlsijt + ijt                              (1)

         PriceQuote is the initial price quote obtained from shop j called under condition i in week t.
Condition contains indicator variables for the different EP conditions. The omitted category is
the market-based EP condition. While the randomization of repair shops to conditions and call
center agents should make control variables unnecessary, we use control variables in Controls as
a randomization check and to convince ourselves of the robustness of our findings. In different
specifications we will control for week fixed effects, DMA fixed effects, call order fixed effects, and
repair shop fixed effects.
         The results of estimating Equation 1 with varying controls are reported in Table 2 on page 16.
Column 1 shows the results of a specification without control variables, which corresponds to a
test of whether the means in the histogram are different from each other. We find no difference

    11
         Note that the median price in these conditions is very close to our market-based expected price of $365.



                                                             14
                Figure 1: Main experiment: Distribution of price quotes by condition


                                    No Price Expectation
                              .02


                  Density
                            .015
                              .01                                                Mean: 394.5
                            .005
                                0
                                    0        100           200    300           400        500   600   700   800
                                                                            Quoted Price


                                    Market-Based Price Expectation ($365)
                              .02
                  Density




                            .015
                              .01                                                Mean: 392.5
                            .005
                                0
                                    0        100           200    300           400        500   600   700   800
                                                                            Quoted Price


                                    Upward-Biased Price Expectation ($510)
                              .02
                  Density




                            .015
                              .01                                                    Mean: 427
                            .005
                                0
                                    0        100           200    300           400        500   600   700   800
                                                                            Quoted Price




in the prices quoted to callers between the no EP and the market-based EP conditions. However,
consumers who communicated upward-biased expected prices paid, on average, $34 more than
consumers in the market-based EP condition (p < 0.01). In columns 2 and 3 we report the results
of estimating Equation 1 with week fixed effects only, or week and DMA fixed effects. The results in
column 2 and 3 indicate that our randomization of shops to conditions worked well—the estimates
of the experimental effects are essentially unchanged by the addition of these controls. Column 4
also includes a dummy if the price quote was obtained from a shop that had already been called
once before under a different condition. While the coefficient on SecondCall in column 4 suggests
that shops quoted somewhat higher prices when they had been called before, the coefficients on the
condition indicator variables suggest that this does not change the estimated difference between
conditions.
    As we described in Section 3, we tried to call each shop twice. In practice, some shops could
not be reached a second time or simply refused to give a quote when we called them the second
time. As a result, 953 of the 4,603 quotes in our main experiment are from shops that only quoted
one price. For the remaining 3,650 price quotes we can add another control, namely, repair shop
fixed effects.12 Column 5 reports the results of this regression. As before, we find no difference in
the prices quoted to callers between the no EP and the market-based EP conditions. In addition,

   12
      We take out DMA fixed effects in specifications that use shop fixed effects, since they are collinear with shop
fixed effects.


                                                                            15
                           Table 2: Effects of information condition
                                    (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)
Dependent Variable             Price Quote   Price Quote   Price Quote   Price Quote   Price Quote
No EP                               1.9            2.1           2.7           2.5        -.068
                                   (3.8)         (4.1)           (4)           (4)         (3.3)
Upward-Biased EP                   34**          35**          35**          35**          24**
                                   (3.8)         (4.1)         (4.1)         (4.1)         (3.8)
Week 2                                            -1.1          -3.7          -3.8         -45*
                                                 (18)          (17)          (17)          (20)
Week 3                                              -3          -2.6          -2.5          -14
                                                 (20)          (20)          (20)          (23)
Week 4                                            -3.8          -7.7          -7.8          -36
                                                 (17)          (16)          (16)          (23)
Week 5                                            -8.6          -12           -13         -39+
                                                 (17)          (16)          (16)          (22)
Week 6                                            -1.5          -4.8          -7.2        -46+
                                                 (17)          (16)          (16)          (24)
Week 7                                            -9.4          -13           -17         -44+
                                                 (17)          (16)          (17)          (25)
Week 8                                            -7.2          -12           -23           -51
                                                 (17)          (16)          (17)          (34)
Week 9                                             21            14            4.5          -46
                                                 (19)          (18)          (18)          (32)
Week 10                                            12            9.1          -4.4        -66+
                                                 (19)          (19)          (19)          (37)
Week 11                                            2.3          -1.9          -15         -60+
                                                 (17)          (17)          (18)          (34)
Week 14                                           -9.9          -14           -28         -67+
                                                 (18)          (17)          (18)          (36)
Week 15                                           -24           -25          -38*          -73*
                                                 (18)          (17)          (18)          (36)
Week 16                                           -1.3          -8.3          -22           -53
                                                 (19)          (18)          (19)          (36)
Boston (Manchester)                                            15+           16+
                                                               (8.7)         (8.7)
Charlotte                                                        2.8          2.8
                                                               (11)          (11)
Chicago                                                        29**          29**
                                                               (8.7)         (8.6)
Cleveland-Akron (Canton)                                        32*           33*
                                                               (14)          (14)
Dallas-Ft. Worth                                                -7.8          -7.3
                                                               (10)          (10)
Denver                                                         24**          24**
                                                               (9.4)         (9.3)
Detroit                                                          1.9          1.8
                                                                 (9)           (9)
Indianapolis                                                     18            18
                                                               (11)          (11)
Los Angeles                                                   -14+           -14*
                                                               (7.1)         (7.1)
Miami-Ft. Lauderdale                                             2.8          3.2
                                                               (11)          (11)
New York                                                        -5.7          -5.4
                                                               (7.8)         (7.8)
Orlando-Daytona Bch-Melbrn                                       7.4           8.1
                                                               (9.7)         (9.6)
Philadelphia                                                   55**          56**
                                                               (9.3)         (9.3)
Phoenix (Prescott)                                               5.6           5.4
                                                               (9.2)         (9.2)
Portland, Or                                                     5.8           5.9
                                                               (12)          (12)
Sacramnto-Stkton-Modesto                                         17            17
                                                               (11)          (11)
Salt Lake City                                                  -8.5          -8.4
                                                               (10)          (9.9)
San Francisco-Oak-San Jose                                     30**          30**
                                                                 (9)           (9)
Seattle-Tacoma                                                 29**          29**
                                                                 (9)           (9)
Tampa-St. Pete (Sarasota)                                        4.4           4.4
                                                               (9.4)         (9.3)
Washington, DC (Hagrstwn)                                      65**          65**
                                                               (9.7)         (9.7)
Second Call                                                                   13*          19
                                                                             (5.4)        (15)
Shop Fixed Effects                                                                         X
Constant                          393**        396**         388**         388**         438**
                                  (2.7)         (17)          (17)          (17)          (22)
Observations                      4,603        4,603         4,603         4,603         3,650
R-squared                         0.022        0.026         0.067         0.068         0.811

                                               16
we still find that callers who communicated an upward-biased expected price paid, on average,
more than consumers whose expected price was market-based, although we estimate an effect of
$25 when we include shop fixed effects, an estimate that is smaller in magnitude than the $35 effect
estimated in columns 1-4.13
       In summary, we find that communicating an expected price that exceeds the market price
induced repair shops to provide price quotes that were higher by $25 to $35 than when a market-
based expected price or no expected price was communicated. The main inference we draw from
this result is that shops change the prices they quote in response to information communicated to
them by potential customers. In particular, if a customer indicates that he or she has a substantially
inflated price expectation, the shop will try to capitalize on that by quoting a higher price. This
inference is particularly strong because it holds in a within-shop comparison (column 5, which
includes repair shop fixed effects). However, we find no difference in price quotes when callers
communicate market-based expected prices or no expected prices. An interpretation of this result
might be that repair shops, without any information about consumers’ price expectations, infer
that everyone has an expected price that corresponds to the market price. We will argue next, in
our presentation of gender effects, that this interpretation is too simple.


5.2      Expected prices and gender

In addition to randomly assigning conditions to repair shops, we also randomized whether calls
made to a given shop were made by male or female call center agents. In this section we report on
the results of analyzing the effect of different conditions by the gender of the caller.
       Figure 2 on page 19 shows the distribution of prices by condition and gender. Visual inspection
of the means displayed in the figure suggests that men and women are quoted similar prices
in both the market-based and upward-biased EP conditions, but that women are quoted higher
prices than men in the no EP condition. In order to assess the size and statistical significance of
these comparisons, we add interaction effects between condition and gender to the specification in
Equation 1, thereby obtaining Equation 2.


                P riceQuoteijt = β0 + β1 Conditioni × Genderj + β2 Controlsijt + νijt                                (2)

  13
     The fact that our qualitative results don’t change when we include shop fixed effects suggests that, on average,
shops don’t directly quote from a price list (if they did we would not observe price quote differences between
conditions). In fact, it seems that quoting individualized prices is the norm among shops: Only 178 of the 1825 shops
that provided us price quotes under two different experimental conditions quoted the same price in both conditions.
This result is not restricted to independent repair shops. For the three largest chains in our sample we found that
only 8 of 132, 1 of 62, and 0 of 56 shops within each chain quoted the same price in both conditions. These figures
are larger but still small (less than a quarter of the sample) if we define the prices across the two calls as being “the
same” if they are within $1 or within $10.



                                                           17
                              Table 3: Effects of information condition by gender
                                                    (1)               (2)          (3)             (4)
               Dependent Variable              Price Quote      Price Quote   Price Quote     Price Quote
               Market-Based EP, Women               -.45             -2.7          -2.8            -2.7
                                                   (5.4)            (5.5)         (5.4)           (5.4)
               No EP, Women                         13*              11*           12*             11*
                                                   (5.4)            (5.6)         (5.5)           (5.5)
               No EP, Men                         -9.9+             -11*         -11+            -10+
                                                   (5.3)            (5.7)         (5.6)           (5.6)
               Upward-Biased EP, Women             35**             34**          34**            34**
                                                   (5.3)            (5.6)         (5.5)           (5.5)
               Upward-Biased EP, Men               33**             33**          32**            33**
                                                   (5.4)            (5.6)         (5.5)           (5.6)
               Second Call                                                                         11*
                                                                                                  (5.4)
               Week Fixed Effects                                   X               X               X
               DMA Fixed Effects                                                    X               X
               Constant                           393**           395**           387**          388**
                                                  (3.8)            (17)            (17)           (17)
               Observations                       4,603           4,603           4,603          4,603
               R-squared                          0.026           0.030           0.070          0.071


Genderj is an indicator variable for the gender of agents making calls to shop j.14
       In Table 3 we report the results from estimating Equation 2. In the table, the omitted category
is the market-based EP condition for male callers. Hence, all coefficients measure the effect of
different conditions for male or female callers relative to the market-based EP condition for male
callers. As in Table 2, the first four columns of Table 3 differ in the controls they use: column 1
reports on the results of Equation 2 without controls and column 4 reports on the estimation with
full controls.15 Results vary little as controls are added. Therefore we focus on column 1.
       We find that repair shops quote men and women the same price on average after they communi-
cate market-based expected prices, as indicated by the statistically insignificant coefficient estimate
of -0.45 for “Market-Based EP, Women.” Similarly, after communicating upward-biased expected
prices, men and women are quoted the same price, as indicated by the statistically indistinguish-
able coefficient estimates of 35 for “Upward-Biased EP, Women” and 33 for “Upward-Biased EP,
Men.”16
       However, our prior finding that callers who communicated no expected price were quoted the
same prices as callers who communicated a market-based expected price no longer holds when

  14
     An individual shop received calls from a single gender of agents. In some cases, the calls were made by different
agents of the same gender; in others both calls were made by the same agent.
  15
     Note that one consequence of our decision to use a single gender for all calls made to an individual shop is that
we cannot identify gender effects on price quotes in a specification that also uses shop fixed effects. This is because
results estimated using shop fixed effects are identified by within-shop variation, and there is no within-shop variation
in caller gender, only in condition. We can still estimate the differences between conditions using shop fixed effects,
but the estimated effects should be interpreted as the average within-shop differences between conditions for male
callers (for shops that received calls from male agents) and for female callers (for shops that received calls from female
agents). We report such results separately for the subsample of shops that received calls from male agents and for
the subsample of shops that received calls from female agents in Table A-1.
  16
     An F-test of the hypothesis that these are equal yields a p-value of 0.95.


                                                           18
 Figure 2: Distribution of price quotes by condition and gender


                  Men: No Price Expectation
            .01                                     Mean: 382.8
Density



          .008
          .006
          .004
          .002
              0
                  0      100     200     300       400      500      600   700   800
                                               Quoted Price


                  Women: No Price Expectation
            .01                                      Mean: 405.6
Density




          .008
          .006
          .004
          .002
              0
                  0      100     200     300       400      500      600   700   800
                                               Quoted Price


                  Men: Market-Based Price Expectation ($365)
            .01                                     Mean: 392.8
Density




          .008
          .006
          .004
          .002
              0
                  0      100     200     300       400      500      600   700   800
                                               Quoted Price


                  Women: Market-Based Price Expectation ($365)
            .01                                     Mean: 392.3
Density




          .008
          .006
          .004
          .002
              0
                  0      100     200     300       400      500      600   700   800
                                               Quoted Price


                  Men: Upward-Biased Price Expectation ($510)
            .01                                        Mean: 425.9
Density




          .008
          .006
          .004
          .002
              0
                  0      100     200     300       400      500      600   700   800
                                               Quoted Price


                  Women: Upward-Biased Price Expectation ($510)
            .01                                        Mean: 428
Density




          .008
          .006
          .004
          .002
              0
                  0      100     200     300       400      500      600   700   800
                                               Quoted Price




                                               19
we analyze the effect by gender. Specifically, female callers are quoted prices that are $13 higher
(p = 0.01) when they do not mention an expected price than when they communicate a market-
based expected price.17 In contrast, we estimate that male callers are quoted prices that are
$9.9 lower (p = 0.07) when they do not mention an expected price than when they communicate a
market-based expected price. (Note, however, that the estimate of the differences for males between
the No EP condition and the market-based EP condition is of borderline statistical significance
across the four columns.) Taken together, these results imply that female callers pay on average
almost $23 more than male callers when they don’t communicate an expected price to the repair
shop.
       The gender results presented in this section show an interesting pattern. When callers reveal
an expected price to shops, they are treated the same whether male or female. This is true whether
the expected price reveals the caller to be well-informed (market-based expected price of $365) or
poorly informed (upward-biased expected price of $510). However, when shops are given no direct
indication of a caller’s price information, they appear to draw inferences from the caller’s gender
that lead them to offer male and female callers different initial price quotes. Female callers who
reveal no expected price are offered prices that are higher than male callers in the same condition,
and higher than is offered to female callers with market-based expected prices. Male callers who
reveal no expected price are offered lower prices than female callers in the same condition and
lower than the prices offered to male callers with market-based expected prices. In short, shops
appear to respond to whatever information they have about consumers’ price knowledge, drawing
inferences from gender if that is all they have to go on, but disregarding gender if provided more
direct information about consumers’ price expectations.


5.3      Expected prices as a bargaining reference

So far we have investigated how mentioning an expected price changes the initial price quote
provided by repair shops. We have interpreted the estimated results as evidence that repair shops
adjust their initial price quotes according to how well-informed a shop thinks a caller is, conveyed in
part by the expected price a caller communicates. While signaling price knowledge is one role that
an expected price can play in such an interaction, it can also play a second role—as a reference in
bargaining with the repair shop. To investigate the role of expected prices as a bargaining reference
we instructed callers to determine immediately after obtaining the initial price quote whether the
initial price quote exceeds the expected price. If so, callers asked shops whether they would match

  17
    An estimate of $13 for this effect is obtained from the regression coefficients by subtracting the coefficient of
-0.45 for “Market-Based EP, Women” from the coefficient of 13 for “No EP, Women.” The p-value is derived from
an F-test.



                                                         20
the reference price. In the market-based and upwards-biased EP condition we instructed them to
say, “So, I have a question. Would you match the price of $365 ($510) that the website AutoMD
said it should cost in this area?” In the no EP condition we had callers request a match if the
initial price quote exceeded $365: “So, I have a question, I just visited the website AutoMD.com,
and for this area they say the cost should be $365. Would you match this price?” We then had the
agents record whether the repair shop revised their price quote. We refer to the difference between
the initial price quote and the revised price quote as the PriceConcession.
       Overall, we find that shops agree to some form of price concession 26% of the time, i.e., 74% of
caller requests to modify the price were not successful. How frequently shops agree to make a price
concession varies between the EP conditions. As shown in Table 4, shops are much more likely to
modify the price when asked to match $510 than when asked to match $365 (p-value < 0.01 in a
χ2 test).18

                          Table 4: Likelihood of price concession by condition


                                                    Price Concession
                            Condition                  =0       >0            Total
                            Market-Based EP           73.8%       26.2%     100.0%
                            No EP                     76.6%       23.4%     100.0%
                            Upward-Biased EP          58.1%       41.9%     100.0%
                            Total                     73.6%       26.4%     100.0%


       One might think that this is because lowering the price to $510 requires less of a concession
than lowering the price to $365. Consistent with this, the average amount by which the initial price
quote exceeds the expected price is lower by $19 in the upward-biased EP condition than in the
other conditions. To see whether shops are more likely to modify the price when the request is to
match $510 rather than $365, even when controlling for the magnitude of the requested concession,
we estimate the following specification:


            I(PriceConcession > 0)ijt = δ0 + δ1 Conditioni + δ2 RequestedConcessionijt + µi                   (3)


Condition contains indicator variables for the different EP conditions. RequestedConcession
controls for the difference between the initial price quote and requested price ($365 or $510). In
column 1 of Table 5 we control for this difference linearly. In column 2 we control for this difference
non-parametrically by including indicator variables for deciles of the difference between the initial

  18
   This tests the probability of matching in the upward-biased condition versus the probability of matching in the
market-based and no EP conditions pooled.


                                                       21
                                    Table 5: Price concession results
                                        (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)            (5)
    Dependent Variable               I(Price      I(Price      I(Price      I(Price     PriceConcession
                                    Concession   Concession   Concession   Concession    if Concession
                                       > 0)         > 0)        > 0)          > 0)            >0
    No EP                              -.027        -.022                     .013            4.1
                                      (.022)       (.021)                     (.03)          (6.5)
    Upward-Biased EP                  .14**        .16**                      .076            5.2
                                      (.041)       (.041)                    (.061)          (7.2)
    Women                                                       .11**
                                                                (.021)
    No EP, Women                                                             .057*            3.4
                                                                             (.029)          (4.8)
    Market-Based EP, Women                                                   .12**            5.3
                                                                             (.031)          (6.1)
    Upward-Biased EP, Women                                                  .24**            5.4
                                                                             (.074)          (4.7)
    RequestedConcession             -.00076**
                                     (.00011)
    RequestedConcession Decile 2                    -.041        -.055        -.052          19**
                                                   (.048)       (.046)       (.047)         (1.1)
    RequestedConcession Decile 3                   -.24**       -.21**       -.26**          27**
                                                   (.066)       (.071)       (.064)         (2.6)
    RequestedConcession Decile 4                   -.13**       -.13**       -.14**          36**
                                                   (.051)        (.05)        (.05)         (2.1)
    RequestedConcession Decile 5                   -.24**       -.25**       -.24**          57**
                                                   (.046)       (.045)       (.045)         (2.9)
    RequestedConcession Decile 6                   -.25**       -.27**       -.27**          73**
                                                   (.054)       (.053)       (.053)         (5.2)
    RequestedConcession Decile 7                    -.2**       -.22**       -.22**          94**
                                                    (.05)       (.049)       (.049)         (4.8)
    RequestedConcession Decile 8                   -.26**       -.27**       -.26**         121**
                                                   (.048)       (.047)       (.048)           (7)
    RequestedConcession Decile 9                   -.27**       -.29**       -.28**         171**
                                                   (.047)       (.046)       (.047)         (6.7)
    RequestedConcession Decile 10                  -.26**       -.27**       -.27**         256**
                                                   (.048)       (.047)       (.048)          (19)
    Constant                          .34**        .43**         .39**        .37**           4.1
                                      (.021)       (.039)       (.038)       (.041)         (5.8)
    Observations                      1,738        1,738         1,738        1,738           458
    R-squared                         0.038        0.064         0.065        0.081         0.814


price quote and requested price. The results show that shops remain significantly more likely to
agree to a price concession (by 16 percentage points) in the upward-biased EP condition than
in other conditions, even when holding constant the magnitude of the requested concession. An
alternative explanation, which we cannot separately identify with our data, is that the shops’
willingness to agree to a price concession depends on the absolute magnitude of the price; perhaps
shops are more likely to make a price concession when they know that their price quote is high in
absolute terms, irrespective of condition.
   Next, we explore whether men and women are equally likely to obtain price concessions when
they bargain. We estimate this in column 3 of Table 5 by replacing the condition indicators in
Equation 3 with a gender indicator. The results show that women remain significantly more likely
than men (by 11 percentage points) to obtain price concessions from repair shops. Note that



                                                    22
because we control directly for the size of the requested concession, this result is not an artifact of
women receiving higher initial price quotes in the no EP condition.
       Finally, we would like to know whether the likelihood of obtaining a price concession depends
on the interaction of gender and condition. In column 4 of Table 5 we add condition and gender
interaction effects to the specification in column 4. We find that repair shops are more likely to
give a price concession to a female caller than to a male caller, irrespective of condition (although
the gender difference for the no EP condition is only marginally significant at p = 0.052). However,
the gender difference seems most pronounced in the upward-biased EP condition (even though we
control for the size of the requested concession).
       If we look in column 4 at the results across condition for a single gender rather than across
gender for a single condition, we see that men are statistically equally likely to obtain a price
concession in the three conditions, controlling for the size of the requested concession. For women,
however, the probability of obtaining a concession is highest in the upward-biased EP condition,
even controlling for the size of the requested concession. Most interesting, however, is the result
that women are more likely to obtain a concession in the market-based EP condition than in the
no EP condition (p-value = 0.09), even though in both cases the caller is asking the shop to match
a price of $365. This result suggests that for women, there is a double benefit to revealing a
market-based price expectation: doing so not only leads on average to a lower initial price quote
(Table 3), it also leads to a higher probability of obtaining a match, should the initial quote exceed
the market-based expect price. Together these suggest that a woman in this context has a distinct
advantage in revealing good price knowledge early on.
       One might worry that the results for the No EP condition could be affected by selection for
the following reason.19 Agents only ask for a price concession if the original price quote exceeds
$365 (in the No EP and market-based EP condition) or $510 (in the upward-biased EP condition).
In the market-based and upward-biased conditions, men and women are quoted the same prices
on average. This means that, since agents are assigned randomly to shops, there should not be
systematic differences in the shops where women are asking for price concessions and where men
are asking for price concessions.20 However, in the No EP condition, women receive higher initial
price quotes than men do, which means that women are asking for price concessions at a greater
number of shops than men are. One could think of there being a set of shops where a woman would
be quoted a price above $365 and therefore ask for a concession, but where a man would be quoted
a price below $365 and therefore would not ask for a concession. The selection question is whether

  19
    We thank Stephan Seiler and seminar participants at Stanford GSB for pointing this possibility out to us.
  20
    Women and men are also offered the same prices on average if we restrict the sample to calls in which the original
price quote was at least $365 in the market-based condition or $510 in the upward-biased condition.



                                                         23
this set of shops are more likely or less likely to offer price concessions irrespective of the gender
of the agent than the shops which would quote both men and women prices above $365. If this
were true, it would bias our estimate of the difference between men and women in the probability
of receiving a price concession.
    It turns out that our empirical results are inconsistent with this type of selection for the following
reasons. Suppose that the set of shops at which only a woman would be quoted an initial price
above $365 offer concessions more frequently, irrespective of the gender of the caller, than the shops
at which both men and women would be offered prices above $365. If this were the case, then in
column 4, the estimated coefficient for “No EP, Women” should be higher than the coefficient
on “Market-based EP, Women” and “Upward-biased EP, Women” since the No EP condition
would contain a positive selection bias that the other two coefficients would not. (Women would
receive concessions more frequently relative to men in the No EP condition than in the other two
conditions, because of the sample of shops in the No EP condition at which only women are asking
for concessions.) Instead, the reverse is true. The female indicator variable is lower in the No EP
condition than in the other two conditions. Suppose, on the other hand, that the set of shops at
which only women would be quoted a price above $365 offers concessions less frequently, irrespective
of the caller’s gender, than shops that would quote prices above $365 to both men and women.
If this is the case, then the coefficient on “No EP, Women” should be negative. (Women in the
No EP condition should receive concessions less often on average than men because some of the
shops at which women are asking for concessions grant them less frequently.) This is the opposite
of what we estimate. Our estimates are consistent with neither direction of the possible selection
bias.21
    Having established that women are significantly more likely than men to obtain price conces-
sions from repair shops, we analyze next whether the magnitude of the price concession differs by
condition and gender. We estimate the following specification using data only from calls for which
PriceConcession > 0:


    PriceConcessionijt = γ0 + γ1 Conditioni × Genderj + γ2 RequestedConcessionijt + νijt                       (4)


where Condition × Gender contains interaction variables for gender and condition. The results
are reported in column 5. According to the estimates, the magnitude of price concessions vary
neither by condition nor by gender. Furthermore, there are no interaction effects between condition
and gender.22

  21
     The negative selection bias could make the “No EP, Women” coefficient smaller than it otherwise would be, but
this can’t be the dominant determinant of this coefficient, since the coefficient is positive rather than negative.
  22
     Note that we have estimated these results only in the subset of the sample where the initial price offer was


                                                        24
    In summary, we have shown that likelihood of obtaining a price concession depends on both
how high the initial price quote is and how large a concession is requested. We have also shown
that women are significantly more likely than men to obtain price concessions from repair shops.
However, conditional on obtaining a price concession, the size of the concession varies neither by
gender nor by expected price condition.23 The design of our experiment does not enable us to do
more than speculate about why women are more likely to obtain a price match than men are. We
have evidence that most of the repair shop employees to whom callers spoke were male.24 It may be
that men are more likely because of social or cultural conditioning to respond positively to requests
made by women. Research by Babcock, Laschever, Gelfand, and Small (2003) indicates that women
are less likely to ask for things such as raises (or perhaps price concessions) in negotiations. Further,
Leibbrandt and List (2012) demonstrate that women are likely to negotiate in environments where
negotiability is explicit, but shy away from negotiations when they do not perceive a situation as
a negotiation opportunity. Women may not consider asking for a quote or shopping for prices as
a negotiation opportunity, thereby further reducing the likelihood that a woman would ask for a
price reduction. If these findings are true on average for women in the repair shop context, repair
shops may interpret a woman asking for a concession as being a signal that she is more dissatisfied
with the price offer she has received (because it has actually prompted her to take the relatively
uncommon step of asking for a price match) than a man is when he asks for a concession.


5.4    Downward-biased expected prices

After we concluded most of the data collection for the first experiment, we decided to investigate
the effect of a “downward-biased” EP condition, for which we chose an expected price of $310. We
wanted to compare the price quotes that callers obtained in the downward-biased EP condition
to price quotes obtained in other conditions. However, the data gathered on various conditions
in experiment 1 could not be used to construct an experimentally valid counterfactual for the
downward-biased EP condition in experiment 2 for two reasons. First, we started the second

greater than either the expected price of either $365 or $510. (Asking the repair shop to match the expected price
when the initial price quote was actually below the expected price would have been nonsensical.) Thus, our results
should be interpreted as the effect of gender on the size of a concession when the request is to match an announced
expected price. In other words, it is the average treatment effect on a particular treatment group, defined by the
kind of concession we had agents ask for. If we had had another rule for the concession the agents were to ask
for—for example, “Ask for a price $30 lower, whatever the initial price quote”—then we could estimate the effect of
concession requests in the entire sample.
  23
     All these results are robust to inclusion of week, DMA, and call order controls (see Table A-2 on page Appendix-4).
  24
     We did not ask our callers to record the gender of the repair shop employee to whom they spoke. Nonetheless,
in 915 cases agents recorded the name of the employee they spoke to of their own accord. In this sample, 814 of
the names were male, 75 were female, and the rest could be either. Due to the small sample, we cannot test the
hypothesis that male repair shop employees are more likely than female employees to make concessions to female
callers.



                                                          25
experiment in the 12th week of the first experiment. The two experiments ran concurrently for
only three weeks. In addition, during these three weeks we were conducting only second calls to
repair shops in experiment 1, whereas we were calling repair shops in experiment 2 for the first
time. (Because experiment 2 was initiated near the end of our experimental period, we did not
have enough time to call the shops in experiment 2 for the first time, wait a few weeks, and then
follow-up with a second call under another condition. As a result, shops in experiment 2 were called
only once, with a single experimental condition.) Second, for experiment 1 we called all shops that
were located in DMAs with 150 or more repair shops. These DMAs largely correspond to the most
populous DMAs in the nation. As a result, for experiment 2 we had to call repair shops in smaller
DMAs, specifically shops in DMAs with 70 to 149 repair shops.
       Because we knew that we would step outside the experimental paradigm if we pooled the
data from both experiments, in experiment 2 we replicated the no EP condition along with the
downward-biased EP condition. This way we had one experimentally valid counterfactual for the
downward-biased EP condition.25
       The initial price quote results of experiment 2 are reported in Table 6. In column 1 we analyze
whether mentioning a downward-biased expected price yields a lower initial price quote than not
mentioning an expected price. Column 2 repeats the analysis while controlling for week and DMA
fixed effects. In these two columns our point estimates indicate that average price quotes are lower
in the downward-biased EP condition, by $7.4 and $8.4, respectively, but these differences are not
statistically different from zero (p = 0.12 in column 1 and p = 0.11 in column 2). Moreover, when
we investigate interactions between gender and the two expected price conditions in column 3 of
Table 6, we find no statistically significant effects. (We will revisit the lack of gender effects in this
experiment in the robustness section.)
       We can also investigate the likelihood of obtaining a price concession in experiment 2. Table 7
shows that callers are less likely to obtain a price concession when they ask the shop to match
a price of $310 than when they ask the shop to match a price of $365 (p-value < 0.01 in a χ2
test).26 Similar to what we found in subsection 5.3, this difference seems to be driven not by the
condition directly, but instead by the size of the requested concession. In column 1 of Table 8, we
reestimate Equation 3 using data from experiment 2. We find no statistically significant difference
between conditions in the probability of obtaining a price concession, once we control for the size
of the requested concession. We also find that women are (statistically weakly) more likely to
obtain a price concession than men in the no EP condition, but no difference across genders in the

  25
     In the robustness section we will show results obtained by pooling the data from both experiments, with appro-
priate caveats.
  26
     For consistency with experiment 1 we instructed callers to request $365 in the no EP condition.



                                                        26
           Table 6: Experiment 2, initial price quote results
                                  (1)             (2)              (3)
Dependent Variable            PriceQuote      PriceQuote      PriceQuote
                             Experiment 2:   Experiment 2:   Experiment 2:
Downward-Biased EP                -7.4            -8.4            -8.9
                                 (4.6)           (5.2)             (8)
No EP, Women                                                      -5.7
                                                                 (6.9)
Downward-Biased EP, Women                                         -5.2
                                                                 (6.9)
Week 13                                          -3.8             -3.6
                                                (6.4)            (6.4)
Week 14                                          -1.7             -1.5
                                                  (7)            (7.1)
Week 15                                          -6.7             -6.5
                                                (8.6)            (8.6)
Week 16                                         -24+               -22
                                                 (14)            (14)
Week Fixed Effects                                 X                X
DMA Fixed Effects                                  X                X
Constant                         399**          384**           388**
                                 (3.3)           (13)             (14)
Observations                     1,941          1,941            1,941
R-squared                        0.001          0.055            0.056




          Table 7: Likelihood of price concession by condition


                                  PriceConcession
          Condition                  =0      >0          Total
          No EP                    78.7%      21.3%     100.0%
          Downward-Biased EP       83.3%      16.7%     100.0%
          Total                    81.2%      18.8%     100.0%




                                  27
                           Table 8: Experiment 2, price concession results
                                                    (1)          (2)             (3)
                Dependent Variable               I(Price      I(Price     PriceConcession
                                                Concession   Concession    if Concession
                                                   > 0)         > 0)            >0
                Downward-Biased EP                 -.021         .03             2.5
                                                  (.022)       (.036)          (8.4)
                No EP, Women                                   .062+            -.26
                                                               (.035)          (7.5)
                Downward-Based EP, Women                        -.018            4.9
                                                               (.029)          (6.2)
                RequestedConcession Decile 2      -.16**       -.16**           18**
                                                  (.058)       (.057)          (1.9)
                RequestedConcession Decile 3      -.24**       -.24**           25**
                                                  (.058)       (.057)          (3.1)
                RequestedConcession Decile 4       -.2**       -.19**           38**
                                                  (.057)       (.057)          (3.2)
                RequestedConcession Decile 5      -.31**       -.31**           61**
                                                  (.052)       (.052)          (4.3)
                RequestedConcession Decile 6      -.29**       -.29**           66**
                                                  (.052)       (.052)          (7.1)
                RequestedConcession Decile 7      -.36**       -.37**           94**
                                                  (.048)       (.048)          (8.3)
                RequestedConcession Decile 8      -.32**       -.32**          131**
                                                  (.054)       (.053)          (7.7)
                RequestedConcession Decile 9       -.3**        -.3**          178**
                                                  (.053)       (.052)           (12)
                RequestedConcession Decile 10      -.3**        -.3**          210**
                                                  (.053)       (.052)           (24)
                Constant                          .45**        .41**             10
                                                  (.044)       (.048)          (6.6)
                Observations                      1,259        1,259            236
                R-squared                         0.073         0.076          0.822


downward-biased EP condition exists, as shown in column 2 of Table 8. This is consistent with
our prior finding that the female effect seemed to be smaller for lower requested prices (column 4
of Table 5). Also, as in experiment 1, the magnitude of price concessions vary neither by condition
nor gender.


6     Robustness

In this section we explore the robustness of our findings. We begin by investigating agents’ ad-
herence to our experimental protocol. Next, we pool the data from our two experiments to see
whether our conclusions would be the same if we considered the data to have been generated by a
single experiment.


6.1   Execution of the experiment

To make sure that calls were conducted in the way we intended, we put several safeguards in
place. First, we regularly communicated with the call center supervisor to discuss the progress
of the experiment and react to unexpected issues. Second, the call center supervisor held weekly

                                                   28
meetings with agents where she assigned them spreadsheets that we created, which contained each
agent’s randomly assigned shops and randomly assigned conditions for the week. During those
meetings she communicated any instructions we wanted implemented. Third, to make sure that
agents were following the correct script for each experimental condition, we printed on each script
a 3-digit “script code” (e.g., “181”). We changed the script code whenever we changed the wording
of the script, or updated instructions on how to fill out the spreadsheet.27 Agents were required to
manually enter these codes in a spreadsheet column at the end of each call. Fourth, we monitored
comments made by agents in the spreadsheet in which they noted anything that struck them as
noteworthy during the call. Analyzing these comments serves the purpose of both recording shop
behavior that we had not anticipated as well as monitoring agent behavior by observing what
agents felt was necessary to point out.
       In the following subsections we investigate how our estimated results change if we make data
corrections to account for inconsistent and/or problematic behavior by agents. We begin with
script codes and then move to three types of comments made by agents in the comment field.


6.1.1      Script codes

Out of the 6,544 price quotes obtained during the course of the two experiments, we found that in
249 instances (3.8%) the agent had recorded the incorrect script code. Out of these, 85 quotes were
obtained at the beginning of the experiment using script wording that we changed after making
some calls in a pre-test. These 85 calls recorded the pre-test script codes, indicating that the calls
were probably made using the pre-test script wording. In the analysis presented in this paper we
have already eliminated these 85 quotes. However, the remaining 164 quotes with incorrect script
codes are still in the data. This is because the scripts to which the codes referred had identical
wording to those that the agents should have used.28 Since all of these cases occurred during the
first six weeks of data collection, they can only potentially affect the results from experiment 1.
       To explore the robustness of our result to incorrect script code entries, we rerun the main
regressions from experiment 1 (column 4 of Table 3, and columns 4 and 5 of Table 5) after dropping
all 249 quotes with incorrect script codes. The results are reported in column 2 of Table A-3 and
columns 2 and 6 of Table A-4. While the point estimates change slightly, none of our conclusions
are affected by dropping quotes with incorrect script codes.29

  27
     This occurred when we updated the wording of scripts between the pre-test and the beginning of the experiment,
when we updated instructions on how to fill out the spreadsheet before week 3 and again week 5, and when we
introduced experiment 2.
  28
     We changed the script code because we updated instructions on how to fill out the spreadsheet, not because the
wording of the scripts themselves changed.
  29
     The most significant differences in the results are in two p-values in Table A-3. The p-value for the “No expected
price, Women” coefficient goes from just over .05 to just under, while the p-value for the “No expected price, Men”


                                                          29
6.1.2    Agents’ comments: call-backs

We reviewed the comments entered by agents when they considered something out of the ordinary.
We noticed that for 13% of price quotes, shops asked agents to call back before they gave a price
quote. This reflects situations in which the shop could not pull together a price quote while staying
on the phone, perhaps because of other demands of the shop employee’s attention. For an additional
1% of the quotes in our data, agents were asked to call back after they had obtained the initial price
quote but before they were given a revised price quote in response to their request to match one
of the expected prices. Both of these requests for a call-back are potentially problematic because
we don’t know whether our experimental manipulation had the same effect on quotes that were
assembled once the agent was off the phone. As a result, we reestimate our main specifications
after eliminating all quotes for which an agent noted that the shop requested a call-back before the
quote was obtained. The conclusions from experiment 1 do not change (see column 3 of Table A-3,
columns 3 and 7 of Table A-4).30 Similarly, we did not find any significant changes in experiment
2 (see column 2 of Table A-5, columns 2 and 5 of Table A-6).


6.1.3    Agents’ comments: rough estimates

For 3.4% of price quotes, agents noted that the shop had referred to the price quote it gave as a
“rough estimate.” To ensure that our findings are not driven by these observations, we reestimate
our main specifications after eliminating all quotes that were classified as “rough estimates.” The
conclusions from experiment 1 do not change; see column 4 of Table A-3, columns 4 and 8 of
Table A-4.31 In experiment 2, the results in column 3 of Table A-5 and column 6 of Table A-6 are
unchanged. However, the result that women are more likely to obtain a price concession in the no
EP condition falls in magnitude and is no longer statistically significant even at the 10% confidence
level (see column 3 of Table A-6).


6.1.4    Agents’ comments: inconsistent call behavior

The final issue we detected in agents’ comments was an inconsistency over time in how they applied
scripts and specifically in whether they insisted on including particular aspects of the radiator repair
in the recorded price quotes. To understand the context of this problem, recall that the script calls
for a radiator replacement. In pre-testing we identified that a radiator replacement always requires

coefficient does the reverse.
  30
     Again, the p-values of the “No expected price, Women” and “No expected price, Men” coefficients in Table A-3
vacillate between just over and just under .05, but with little change in the coefficients themselves.
  31
     In Table A-3, the p-values on the “No expected price, Women” and “No expected price, Men” coefficients are
now both just under .05.



                                                       30
new antifreeze and often (but not always) requires a cooling system flush. To reduce the variance
in repair quotes we tried to standardize quotes by asking shops whether the quote included new
antifreeze and a cooling system flush, and if not, to requote the price to include these items. To be
precise, after the shop quoted the initial price the agent would say, “OK, thanks. Would that also
include antifreeze liquid? [If the answer is “no”]: Can you give me the price including antifreeze?
[If necessary, adjust price.] OK, thanks. Would that also include a cooling system flush? [If the
answer is “no”]: Can you give me the price including a cooling system flush? [If necessary, adjust
price.]”
    Regrettably, in copying the script into a flowchart format, as requested by the call center,
we instructed agents to say (differences are underlined), “OK, thanks. Would that also include
antifreeze liquid? [If the answer is “no”]: Can you give me the price including antifreeze? [If
necessary, adjust price.] OK, thanks. Would that also include a cooling system flush? [If the
answer is “no”]: Can you give me the price including antifreeze? [If necessary, adjust price.]” In
other words, while agents asked whether the price included a cooling system flush, they were not
instructed to request a price that included the flush.
    This mistake would be of serious concern if it had only been present in some scripts (conditions)
but not others. However, the error was uniformly present across all conditions. The likely effect of
the mistake is to increase the variance of price quotes, because some of the quotes would include a
cooling system flush while others do not. This is likely to have decreased the power of our estimates.
    Another consequence is that the mistake creates some room for interpretation by the agents.
Specifically, while agents are instructed to follow the script exactly, some agents might perceive an
inconsistency and therefore request an updated price including the cooling system flush, even if
they were not instructed to do so. To investigate whether this occurred, we analyzed how frequently
agents made reference in the comment field of the spreadsheet to accounting for a cooling system
flush when requesting price quotes. The results from this analysis are in Table 9.
    As we can see from these results, most agents never refer to a cooling system flush. Agents 5
and 8 are much more likely to mention accounting for a cooling system flush when requesting price
quotes, but not equally across all weeks of the experiment. Agent 5 seems to have accounted for
a cooling system flush during the first half of the experiment but followed the script more closely
during the second half. Agent 8 exhibits the opposite pattern: the agent seems to have accounted
for a cooling system flush during the second half of the experiment but not during the first half.32
Agents 5 and 8 are both male, a detail whose relevance will become apparent shortly.
    We account for the variation in agent behavior by using three different approaches. First, we

  32
     The reader may note a low percentage for agent 5 during weeks 1 and 3 and a high percentage for agent 8 during
week 2. During these weeks these two agents made very few calls, resulting in high sampling variation.


                                                        31
 Table 9: Percentage of calls in which agent notes that price quote includes cooling system flush
                                                      Agent ID
                              Week    1   2   3   4      5   6   7   8    9
                                1     0   0   0   0      0   0   0    0   0
                                2     0   0   0   0     17 0     0   14   0
                                3     0   0   0   0      0   0   0    0   0
                                4     1   0   0   0     19 1     0    0   1
                                5     0   0   0   0     27 2     0    2   0
                                6     2   0   0   0     24 0     0    0   0
                                7     0   0   0   0      9   0   0    5   0
                                8     0   0   0   0      5   1   0    0   0
                                9     0   0   0   0      0   0   0    0   0
                               10     0   0   0   0      0   0   0    0   0
                               11     0   0   0   0      6   0   0    6   0
                               12     0   0   0   0      2   1   0   15   0
                               13     0   0   0   0      6   0   0   28   3
                               14     0   0   0   0      8   1   0   12   8
                               15     0   0   0   0      3   1   0   15   0
                               16     0   0   0   0      0   0   0   11   0


add the information in Table 9 as a control variable in all estimations. This means that for each
agent in each week we control for the percentage of calls in which the agent refers to accounting
for a cooling system flush when requesting price quotes. We also add the percentage squared in
this specification. Second, we eliminate all observations for an agent in a week in which that agent
refers to accounting for a cooling system flush more than 7.5% of the time, the 90th percentile
in Table 9. Third, we eliminate all observations associated with agents 5 and 8 from the sample.
That is, we remove observations where these agents’ behavior was inconsistent compared to other
agents, but also instances where they behaved in accordance with other agents. Removing these
two agents from the dataset altogether eliminates 25% of the observations from our sample.
   Table A-7 reports the results of comparing the quoted prices across the different conditions of
experiment 1, using the three different methods to account for agents’ inconsistent behavior with
respect to cooling system flush. Column 1 presents the original results from column 4 of Table 2,
and columns 2-4 reestimate this specification in three variations of accounting for flush references:
controlling for flush reference, eliminating agent-weeks with a high frequency of flush references,
and eliminating the two inconsistent agents altogether. The results remain unchanged. Specifically,
there is no statistical difference between the average price quotes in the market-based EP and the
no EP conditions. In addition, there is no change in the effect of the upward-biased EP condition,
which remains about $35 higher than the market-based EP condition.
   Table A-8 reports on the results of reestimating Equation 2 by incorporating the three ap-
proaches for accounting for a flush reference. Column 1 presents the original results from column 4
of Table 3, and columns 2-4 reestimate this specification in three variations of accounting for flush
references. Upon first inspection, it appears that many of the condition–gender interaction terms
that capture our main results have changed. Closer inspection reveals that the results have not


                                                  32
changed by as much as initially appears.
   We turn our attention to column 2 of Table A-8. The “% Flush Reference” and “% Flush
Reference Squared” coefficients imply that the initial price quotes for an agent-week in which the
agent refers to a cooling system flush in 5% of his calls will be higher by $21.38 on average. For a
10% flush reference rate, the implied average effect on the initial price quote is a $33.61 increase;
$30.64 for a flush reference rate of 20%.
   The second point to note is that agents 5 and 8, the agents who had the highest flush reference
rates, were male. Given the effects described in the previous paragraph, these agents may well
have recorded higher average initial quotes than the remaining three male agents, since agents 5
and 8 appear to have more often recorded a price quote that included a cooling system flush, an
add-on that would increase a price quote.
   This means that in column 4 of Table A-8, the specification in which we eliminate agents 5
and 8 from the sample, we redefine our benchmark group (male agents) to be a subgroup of male
agents who would be expected to obtain lower price quotes on average (because they did not include
cooling system flushes) than did agents 5 and 8. This can be seen in the estimated constant term
of $370 (which captures the average for male callers in the market-based EP condition) in column
4 compared to an estimated constant term of $388 in column 1.
   In column 4, many of the condition–gender interaction terms have higher estimated coefficients
than in column 1. But this is in large part because they estimate the incremental effect relative
to the “left out” group (male callers in the market-based EP condition), which is a lower average
price quote group in column 4 than in column 1 because the (male) high flush reference agents
are not included in the sample in column 4. These effects can be seen visually in Figure 3, which
plots the average initial price quotes for each of our six condition–gender interactions as predicted
by the estimates in Table A-8. For each condition-gender combination, the bar on the left shows
the predicted initial price quotes based on the estimates in column 1, while the bar on the right
is based on column 4. It is noteworthy that the predicted average initial price quotes for women
are very similar in the two specification, which we might have expected since the sample of women
callers did not change between columns 1 and 4.
   What this tells us is that the differences between outcomes obtained by men and women, and the
differences in outcomes between the upward-biased and market-based conations may be somewhat
bigger than what we have reported in the main section of the paper. However, this is for the very
simple reason that some of the male agents in the sample had artificially high initial price quotes
because they were more likely to include a cooling system flush in the price quote they recorded.
   Table A-9 reports on the results of price concession incidence and levels, accounting for the
flush references. Columns 1 and 5 present the original results from columns 4 and 5 of Table 5,


                                                 33
Figure 3: Predicted average initial price quotes by condition and gender, full sample (“Col 1”) and
subsample (“Col 4”) estimates

            450

            430                                                                   421              422
                                                                                          415             416
            410                                                    399
                                                                          395
                   388             385
            390                            382
                                                  378
                           370                            367
            370

            350

            330

            310

            290

            270

            250
                  MB EP   MB EP   MB EP   MB EP   No EP   No EP   No EP   No EP   UB EP   UB EP   UB EP   UB EP
                  Men     Men     Women Women     Men     Men     Women Women     Men     Men     Women Women
                  Col 1   Col 4   Col 1   Col 4   Col 1   Col 4   Col 1   Col 4   Col 1   Col 4   Col 1   Col 4



and columns 2-4 and 6-8 reestimate these specifications in three variations of accounting for flush
references. The results after adding the flush reference variables as controls and eliminating agents
in weeks where their relative frequency of flush reference was high are consistent with the original
results that overall, women are more likely to obtain price concessions. In these specifications, the
result for women in the no EP condition becomes stronger (p < 0.05). In the specification where
we eliminate agents 5 and 8, the directional result that women are more likely to obtain price
concessions remains, but the results are statistically weaker for all of the experimental conditions,
and insignificant for the no EP condition.
   Table A-10 and Table A-11 report the analysis of experiment 2 while accounting for the flush
reference. Column 1 in Table A-10 presents the original results from column 3 of Table 6, and
columns 2-4 reestimate this specification in three variations of accounting for flush references. As
in Table 6, the price quotes in the downward-biased EP condition are not statistically different
than in the no EP condition. When adding the condition and gender interactions, we again do not
find significant differences between women and men.
   Table A-11 reports the results of price concession incidence and levels in experiment 2, ac-
counting for the flush references. Columns 1 and 5 present the original results from columns 2
and 3 of Table 8, and columns 2-4 and 6-8 reestimate these specifications in three variations while
accounting for flush references. The (statistically weak) result that women in the no EP condition

                                                            34
in experiment 2 are more likely to obtain price concessions no longer holds in experiment 2 when
accounting for flush reference, although the result does hold for experiment 1 when accounting for
flush reference, as described previously.


6.2   Pooling data from experiments 1 and 2

In this section, we pool data from experiments 1 and 2, with the caveat that these experiments do
not provide clearly valid counterfactuals for each other. Recall that a) the two experiments were
conducted using different DMAs (experiment 1 was conducted in higher-population DMAs than
experiment 2); and b) experiment 2 started after most of the data for experiment 1 was collected.
The two experiments ran concurrently only for a period of three weeks, a period during which we
collected the first (and only) call to each shop in experiment 2, but during which we were making
second calls to shops in experiment 1.
   In order to understand how much these differences matter, we begin by comparing the results
in experiment 1 and experiment 2 for the no EP condition, which is the one condition present in
both experiments. In Table 10 we report that the average initial price quote obtained in the no
EP condition of experiment 1 was $394.5, compared to $398.8 obtained in the same condition in
experiment 2. A t-test of means cannot reject that the two experiments had equal average initial
price quotes in this condition (p-value = 0.31). Table 10 also reports the standard deviation of
initial price quotes in the two experiments in the no EP condition; a variance ratio test fails to reject
equal variances (p-value = 0.16). From this we conclude that it will not be obviously misleading
to pool the data from experiments 1 and 2. We repeat our main analysis using the pooled dataset.
The results are reported in Tables A-12, A-13, and A-14.
             Table 10: Initial price quotes in no EP condition in experiments 1 and 2

                                                   Mean     Std. Dev.
                                  Experiment 1     394.5      108.4
                                  Experiment 2     398.8      104.1


   Table A-12 reports on the differences between experimental conditions in the pooled sample
that includes all four conditions: market-based EP, no EP, upward-biased EP, and downward-
biased EP for both experiments. In column 3 we reestimate the specification of column 4 in
Table 2 using the pooled sample, and in columns 4-6 we repeat the specification, using the three
different strategies to account for flush references. Across all of these specifications, the results of
the pooled regression do not change our prior conclusions. In particular, we estimate that initial
price quotes in the upward-biased condition are $35 higher on average than initial price quotes in
the market-based condition (similar to our estimate of $34 in experiment 1, reported for comparison


                                                   35
in column 1 of Table A-12). In addition, we do not find statistically significant differences between
initial price in the market-based EP condition and initial prices in either the no EP condition or
the downward-biased EP conditions (similar to our findings in experiments 1 and 2).
   Table A-13 reports the results of reestimating Equation 2, which included condition–gender
interactions, for the pooled sample. Column 3 presents the main results using the pooled sample.
(For ease of comparison, column 1 re-reports the results of this specification from experiment
1—originally reported in column 4 of Table 3; column 2 re-reports the results from experiment 2—
originally reported in column 3 of Table 6.) Columns 4-6 reestimate condition–gender interaction
specification using the three variations to account for flush references. Without accounting for flush
references, the result that women in the no EP condition are quoted higher prices than men in the
same condition and higher prices than men in the market-based condition is no longer statistically
significant. Additionally, the result that men in the no EP condition are quoted lower prices than
men in the market-based EP condition is also no longer statistically significant. However, once we
account for flush references, the result that women in the no EP condition are quoted higher prices
than both men in the no EP and men in the market-based EP conditions returns to statistical
significance.
   Table A-14 reports the results of price concession incidence and levels, both with and without
accounting for the flush references. Columns 1 and 5 present the results using the full sample with
the specification of columns 4 and 5 of Table 5, and columns 2-4 and 6-8 reestimate these specifica-
tions with three variations of accounting for flush references. Overall, women in the market-based
EP and women in the upward-biased EP conditions are more likely to obtain price concessions.
However, the result from experiments 1 and 2 showing women in the no EP condition are also more
likely to obtain price concessions holds only in columns 1 and 2 of Table A-14.


6.3   Summary

In summary, the majority of our results are robust to different considerations about the execution
of the experiment. Regarding the initial price quote results, we find, across all our specifications,
that the price quotes in the upward-biased EP condition are higher than in the other conditions
by about $35. In addition, we consistently find that women in the no EP condition are quoted
higher prices than men in that condition, and than men and women in the market-based EP
condition. The only specification where we did not find this result was when pooling experiment
1 and experiment 2 without applying any corrections for the agent inconsistency issue. While we
did find some evidence in experiment 1 that men in the no EP condition were quoted lower prices
than men in the market-based EP condition, that result was not robust to different specifications,
although the direction of the results remained throughout most of the specifications.


                                                 36
    Regarding the price concession results, we find, across all specifications, that women in the
market-based EP and the upward-based EP conditions are more likely to obtain positive price
concessions compared to men in those conditions. We also find in experiment 1 and in its subsequent
robustness tests, that women in the no EP condition are also more likely to obtain price concession.
However, once we pool the data, that result is maintained only in some of the specifications. Recall
that the result that women in the no EP condition are more likely to obtain price concession
for experiment 2 are not robust to accounting for inconsistency in agents’ behavior, which could
explain why the result does not hold when pooling the sample.


7    Concluding remarks

In this paper we have presented the results of an experiment designed to measure the differences
in the price quotes sellers offer to customers who present themselves as being uninformed, well-
informed, or poorly informed about price. Our experiment also varies the gender of buyers, in order
to understand whether the effects of information differ across genders. By scripting the buyer’s side
of the negotiation, this experimental design focuses specifically on the seller’s response to buyers
who are differentially informed.
    In our results we find that callers who ask for repair shop quotes after announcing that they have
no idea what the repair should cost are quoted the same prices on average as callers who announce
first that they have learned that the repair should cost an amount that is approximately the market
average. The overall averages, however, mask differences between genders: female callers who say
they are uniformed about prices are quoted prices about $20 higher than male callers who present
themselves the same way. However, there is no difference between genders for callers who present
themselves as accurately informed about prices. There is also no difference between genders for
callers who announce that they have learned that the repair should cost an amount that is much
higher than the actual market average price.
    We note that one way we could observe such an outcome would be if repair shops believe that
women are on average less well informed about prices than men, and price accordingly when callers
present no direct information about how informed they are. In order to explain the rest of our
observed results, however, we must conclude that when presented with direct information that a
caller is either well or poorly informed, the repair shops price according to that information, and
no longer find gender a useful basis on which to price discriminate.
    In our experiment, we also directed the callers to ask for price concessions if their initial quote
exceeded the expected price in the relevant information condition. Our results show that shops are
more willing to agree to a price concession the higher their initial price quote, and also more likely,


                                                  37
in all information conditions, to agree to a price concession for a female than for a male caller.
In addition, shops were more likely to agree to a price concession for a female caller if she first
presented herself as well informed than if she first presented herself as uninformed, even though
the price the shops were being asked to match was the same in those two conditions. These results
together suggest that there is a double benefit to women to presenting themselves as well informed
in these negotiations: first, they obtain lower initial price quotes on average, and second, if they
obtain a high initial price quote, they are more likely to be able to negotiate a price concession.




                                                 38
References
Anderson, S. P., and A. de Palma (2005): “Price Dispersion and Consumer Reservation
 Prices,” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 14(1), 61–91.

Ayres, I., and P. Siegelman (1995): “Race and Gender Discrimination in Bargaining for a New
  Car,” American Economic Review, 85(3), 304–321.

Babcock, L., S. Laschever, M. Gelfand, and D. Small (2003): “Nice Girls Don’t Ask,”
 Harvard Business Review, 81(10), 14–16.

Baye, M. R., J. Morgan, and P. Scholten (2006): “Information, Search, and Price Disper-
  sion,” Discussion paper, IDEAS.

Bertrand, M., and S. Mullainathan (2004): “Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than
  Lakisha and Jamal? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination,” American Economic
  Review, 94(4), 991.

Biswas, A., E. J. Wilson, and J. W. Licata (1993): “Reference Pricing Studies in Marketing,”
  Journal of Business Research, 27(3), 239–256.

Brown, J. R., and A. Goolsbee (2002): “Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive?
 Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, 110(5), 481–507.

Castillo, M., R. Petrie, M. Torero, and L. Vesterlund (2012): “Gender Differendes
 in Bargaining Outcomes: A Field Experiment on Discrimination,” Discussion Paper 18093,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Galinsky, A., and T. Mussweiler (2001): “First Offers and Anchors: The Role of Perspective-
 Taking and Negotiator Effects,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(4), 657–669.

Gneezy, U., J. List, and M. K. Price (2012): “Toward an Understanding of Why People
 Discriminate: Evidence from a Series of Natural Field Experiments,” Working paper 17855,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kalyanaram, G., and R. Winer (1995): “Empirical Generalizations from Reference Price Re-
 search,” Marketing Science, 14(3), G161–G169.

Leibbrandt, A., and J. List (2012): “Do Women Avoid Salary Negotiations? Evidence from
  a Large Scale Natural Field Experiment,” Working paper 18511, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Mazumdar, T., S. Raj, and I. Sinha (2005): “Reference Price Research: Review and Proposi-
 tions,” Journal of Marketing, 69(10), 84–102.

Moosmayer, D. C., B. Schuppar, and F. U. Siems (2012): “Reference Prices as Determinants
 of Business-to-Business Negotiation Outcomes: An Empirical Perspective from the Chemical
 Industry,” Journal of Supply Chain Management, 48(1), 92–106.



                                             39
Salop, S. (1977): “The Noisy Monopolist: Imperfect Information, Price Dispersion, and Price
  Discrimination,” Review of Economic Studies, 44(3), 393–406.

Schneider, H. (2012): “Agency Problems and Reputation in Expert Services: Evidence from
  Auto Repair,” Journal of Industrial Economics, 60(3), 406–433.

Sorensen, A. (2000): “Equilibrium Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription Drugs,”
  Journal of Political Economy, 108(4), 833–850.

Stahl, D. O. (1989): “Oligopolistic Pricing with Sequential Consumer Search,” American Eco-
  nomic Review, 79(4), 700–712.

Stigler, G. J. (1961): “The Economics of Information,” Journal of Political Economy, 69(3),
  213–225.

Tsay, C.-J., and M. Bazerman (2009): “A Decision-Making Perspective to Negotiation: A
  Review of the Past and a Look to the Future,” Negotiation Journal, 25(4), 467–480.

Valley, K., S. Blount White, M. Neal, and M. Bazerman (1992): “Agents as Informa-
  tion Brokers: The Effects of Information Disclosure on Negotiated Outcomes,” Organizational
  Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 51, 220–236.

Van Poucke, D., and M. Buelens (2002): “Predicting the Outcome of a Two-Party Price
  Negotiation: Contribution of Reservation Price,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 23(1), 67–76.




                                              40
                                      Appendix

                           Outline of call center scripts

• Dial number

    – “Hello, my name is John/Jennifer. I have a leak in the radiator on my 2003 Camry and
      I need to replace it. Is that something you work on?”

• If the answer is no

    – “Thank you” (and hang up)

• If the answer is yes

    – “So I have a 6 Cylinder 2003 Toyota Camry LE.”
    – No Expected Price Condition: “I have no idea how much it is to replace a radiator.”
    – Market-Based Price Condition: “I just visited the website AutoMD.com, and for this
      area they say the cost should be $365 to replace the radiator on my car.”
    – Upward-Biased Price Condition: “I just visited the website AutoMD.com, and for this
      area they say the cost should be $510 to replace the radiator on my car.”
    – Downward-Biased Price Condition: “I just visited the website AutoMD.com, and for
      this area they say the cost should be $310 to replace the radiator on my car.”
    – “Could you tell me how much you charge?”

• If shop refuses to give quote over the phone type “Refused” in column I (do not leave column
  empty).

    – “Thank you” (and hang up)

• Otherwise, insert amount into column I.

    – “OK, thanks. Would that also include antifreeze liquid?”

• If the answer is “no”:

    – “Can you give me the price including antifreeze?” (If necessary, update amount in column
      I.)
    – “OK, thanks. Would that also include a cooling system flush?”

• If the answer is “no”:

    – “Can you give me the price including a cooling system flush?” (If necessary, update
      amount in column I.)

    – “OK, thanks. That is the total price without tax, right?”

• If the answer is “no”:

                                       Appendix-1
     – “Can you give me the total price before tax?” (If necessary, update amount in column
       I.)
     – “Just to make sure: does the price include parts and labor?”

• If the answer is ‘yes”:

     – “OK, thank you”

• If the answer is “no”:

     – “Can you give me the total price before tax?” (If necessary, update amount in column
       I.)

• If the price in column I is LESS than or EQUAL to column J: ($365 for Market-Based
  Price and No Expected Price Condition, $510 for Upward-Biased Price Condition, $310 for
  Downward-Biased Price Condition)

     – “All right, let me think about this” (and hang up)

• If the price in column I is MORE than column J:

     – “So, I have a question:”
     – No Expected Price Condition: “I just visited the website AutoMD.com, and for this area
       they say the cost should be $365. Would you match this price?”
     – Market-Based Price Condition: “Would you match the price of $365 that the website
       AutoMD said it should cost in this area?”
     – Upward-Biased Price Condition: “Would you match the price of $510 that the website
       AutoMD said it should cost in this area?”
     – Downward-Biased Price Condition: “Would you match the price of $310 that the website
       AutoMD said it should cost in this area?”

• If the answer is “yes,” type “yes” in column K

• If the answer is “no” with a REVISED offer, type amount of revised offer in column K. If
  they mention certain terms (proof/local shops) write them.

• If the answer is “no” WITHOUT a revised offer, type “no” in column K. If they mention
  certain terms (proof/local shops) write them.

• “All right, let me think about this” (and hang up)




                                       Appendix-2
           Additional Tables

Table A-1: Analysis of shops with two quotes
                           (1)          (2)
                          Men        Women
  Dependent Variable   Pricequote   Pricequote
  No EP                   -2.8          7.5
                         (5.1)        (4.7)
  Upward-Biased EP        25**        27**
                         (5.1)        (5.8)
  Second Call              22           12
                          (21)         (21)
  Week Fixed Effects       X            X
  Shop Fixed Effects       X            X
  Constant               395**        460**
                          (23)         (32)
  Observations           1,626        2,024
  R-squared              0.842        0.795




                 Appendix-3
         Table A-2: Price concession results with controls
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)
Dependent Variable                 Price        Price          Price
                                 Concession   Concession    Concession if
                                                 >0        Concession > 0
No EP                                           .0036            12
                                                (.034)         (7.8)
Upward-Biased EP                                 .064           5.7
                                                (.062)          (8)
Women                              .096**
                                   (.021)
No EP, Women                                       .05          -2.9
                                                (.031)         (5.4)
Market-Based EP, Women                           .11**           9.2
                                                (.033)         (6.7)
Upward-Biased EP, Women                          .22**           5.2
                                                (.074)         (5.9)
RequestedConcession Decile 2        -.048        -.045          20**
                                   (.046)       (.047)         (2.2)
RequestedConcession Decile 3       -.21**       -.25**          31**
                                   (.073)       (.067)         (4.6)
RequestedConcession Decile 4        -.12*        -.12*          37**
                                    (.05)        (.05)         (3.2)
RequestedConcession Decile 5       -.24**       -.23**          59**
                                   (.045)       (.046)         (3.6)
RequestedConcession Decile 6       -.25**       -.24**          71**
                                   (.052)       (.053)         (6.4)
RequestedConcession Decile 7       -.22**       -.21**          99**
                                   (.049)       (.049)         (5.2)
RequestedConcession Decile 8       -.27**       -.27**         124**
                                   (.047)       (.047)         (7.3)
RequestedConcession Decile 9       -.29**       -.27**         169**
                                   (.046)       (.047)         (6.6)
RequestedConcession Decile 10      -.26**       -.26**         255**
                                   (.047)       (.048)          (18)
Second Call                         .046          .049           9.2
                                    (.04)        (.04)         (6.6)
Week Fixed Effects                    X             X            X
DMA Fixed Effects                     X             X            X
Constant                           .63**         .63**           6.3
                                    (.12)        (.12)         (9.4)
Observations                       1,738        1,738           458
R-squared                          0.104         0.117         0.833




                                Appendix-4
               Table A-3: Initial price quote results, robustness checks
                                   (1)               (2)           (3)           (4)
Robustness Check            Original Results   Script Code    Call-Back    Rough Estimate
Dependent Variable           Price Quote       Price Quote   Price Quote    Price Quote
Market-Based EP, Women            -2.7              -3.7          -3.3           -2.8
                                 (5.4)             (5.5)           (6)          (5.6)
No EP, Women                      11*              9.7+           13*           11+
                                 (5.5)             (5.6)         (6.2)          (5.6)
No EP, Men                       -10+              -12*         -11+           -11+
                                 (5.6)             (5.8)         (6.2)          (5.8)
Upward-Biased EP, Women           34**             33**          34**           33**
                                 (5.5)             (5.6)         (5.9)          (5.6)
Upward-Biased EP, Men             33**             31**          33**           32**
                                 (5.6)             (5.6)         (6.1)          (5.8)
Second Call                       11*               11*           13*            11*
                                 (5.4)             (5.5)         (6.1)          (5.5)
Week Fixed Effects                  X                 X             X             X
DMA Fixed Effects                   X                 X             X             X
Constant                         388**            389**         389**          390**
                                  (17)             (17)          (19)           (17)
Observations                     4,603            4,439         4,022          4,455
R-squared                        0.071            0.071         0.073          0.073




                                      Appendix-5
                                                          Table A-4: Price concession results, robustness checks
                                                  (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)             (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)
             Robustness Check                 Original    Script Code   Call-Back    Rough Estimate       Original        Script Code        Call-Back      Rough Estimate
                                              I(Price       I(Price      I(Price         I(Price      PriceConcession   PriceConcession   PriceConcession   PriceConcession
             Dependent Variable              Concession   Concession    Concession     Concession      if Concession     if Concession     if Concession     if Concession
                                                > 0)           > 0)         > 0)           > 0)             >0                 >0               >0                >0
             No EP                               .013         .0052       -.0048           .0012             4.1               3.8               6.1               3.8
                                                (.03)        (.031)       (.033)          (.032)           (6.5)              (6.5)            (7.7)             (6.7)
             Upward-Biased EP                    .076          .079         .081            .061             5.2               5.5               11                5.3
                                               (.061)        (.062)       (.066)          (.062)           (7.2)              (7.2)            (7.5)             (7.4)
             No EP, Women                       .057*         .065*        .071*          .053+              3.4               3.8               5.3               3.8
                                               (.029)        (.029)        (.03)           (.03)           (4.8)               (5)             (5.2)               (5)
             Market-Based EP, Women             .12**         .12**        .11**            .1**             5.3               5.2               6.9               5.3
                                               (.031)        (.032)       (.034)          (.032)           (6.1)              (6.2)            (7.4)             (6.3)
             Upward-Biased EP, Women            .24**         .24**        .23**          .24**              5.4               5.5                -2               5.5
                                               (.074)        (.076)       (.079)          (.075)           (4.7)              (4.7)            (2.7)             (4.7)
             RequestedConcession Decile 2       -.052         -.063        -.052           -.058           19**               19**              20**              19**
                                               (.047)        (.048)        (.05)          (.049)           (1.1)              (1.2)            (1.2)             (1.2)
             RequestedConcession Decile 3      -.26**        -.27**       -.25**          -.27**           27**               27**              30**              27**
                                               (.064)        (.065)       (.071)          (.065)           (2.6)              (2.7)            (2.1)             (2.6)
             RequestedConcession Decile 4      -.14**        -.15**       -.15**          -.15**           36**               36**              40**              36**




Appendix-6
                                                (.05)        (.051)       (.054)          (.052)           (2.1)              (2.2)            (2.1)             (2.2)
             RequestedConcession Decile 5      -.24**        -.26**       -.25**          -.25**           57**               58**              56**              57**
                                               (.045)        (.046)       (.048)          (.047)           (2.9)              (2.8)            (3.4)             (2.9)
             RequestedConcession Decile 6      -.27**        -.28**       -.25**          -.27**           73**               73**              76**              73**
                                               (.053)        (.054)       (.058)          (.055)           (5.2)              (5.2)            (5.5)             (5.1)
             RequestedConcession Decile 7      -.22**        -.24**       -.19**          -.23**           94**               93**              95**              94**
                                               (.049)         (.05)       (.054)          (.051)           (4.8)              (5.2)            (4.7)             (4.8)
             RequestedConcession Decile 8      -.26**        -.28**       -.24**          -.27**           121**             121**             126**             121**
                                               (.048)        (.049)       (.052)           (.05)             (7)              (7.2)            (5.8)             (7.1)
             RequestedConcession Decile 9      -.28**        -.29**       -.26**          -.28**           171**             170**             171**             171**
                                               (.047)        (.048)       (.051)          (.049)           (6.7)              (6.9)            (7.1)             (6.7)
             RequestedConcession Decile 10     -.27**        -.28**       -.26**          -.28**           256**             256**             255**             256**
                                               (.048)        (.049)       (.051)          (.049)            (19)              (20)              (21)              (19)
             Constant                           .37**         .39**        .37**            .4**             4.1               4.2               1.7                4
                                               (.041)        (.043)       (.045)          (.044)           (5.8)              (5.8)              (7)               (6)
             Observations                       1,738         1,669        1,513          1,682             458                443               397               450
             R-squared                          0.081         0.086        0.077          0.081            0.814             0.807             0.810             0.813
Table A-5: Experiment 2, initial price quote results, robustness checks
                                   (1)               (2)            (3)
Robustness Check            Original Results    Call-Back    Rough Estimate
Dependent Variable           Price Quote       Price Quote    Price Quote
Downward-Biased EP                -8.9              -14            -8.9
                                   (8)             (9.3)          (8.1)
No EP, Women                      -5.7              -11            -5.2
                                 (6.9)             (7.9)            (7)
Downward-Biased EP, Women         -5.2                -3             -4
                                 (6.9)             (7.7)          (7.1)
Week 13                           -3.6              -3.2           -4.4
                                 (6.4)               (7)          (6.5)
Week 14                           -1.5              -3.8           -1.9
                                 (7.1)             (7.9)          (7.2)
Week 15                           -6.5              -11            -5.4
                                 (8.6)             (9.5)          (8.9)
Week 16                            -22            -38**            -23
                                  (14)             (15)           (14)
DMA Fixed Effects                   X                 X              X
Constant                         388**            395**          389**
                                  (14)             (16)           (14)
Observations                     1,941            1,629          1,864
R-squared                        0.056            0.061          0.055




                             Appendix-7
                                      Table A-6: Experiment 2, price concession results, robustness checks
                                                 (1)           (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)
             Robustness Check                 Original    Call-Back    Rough Estimate       Original         Call-Back      Rough Estimate
                                              I(Price      I(Price         I(Price      PriceConcession   PriceConcession   PriceConcession
             Dependent Variable              Concession   Concession     Concession      if Concession     if Concession     if Concession
                                                > 0)          > 0)           > 0)             >0                >0                >0
             Downward-Biased EP                  .03          .037           .016              2.5               3.5              -1.1
                                               (.036)       (.043)           (.04)           (8.4)              (10)             (8.4)
             No EP, Women                      .062+        .068+             .044            -.26              -2.5              -.83
                                               (.035)       (.039)          (.037)           (7.5)             (9.3)             (7.5)
             Downward-Based EP, Women           -.018        -.014           -.022             4.9               3.1               7.9
                                               (.029)       (.033)           (.03)           (6.2)             (7.1)             (6.3)
             RequestedConcession Decile 2      -.16**       -.22**          -.18**           18**               17**              17**
                                               (.057)       (.063)           (.06)           (1.9)               (2)             (1.9)
             RequestedConcession Decile 3      -.24**       -.25**          -.26**           25**               23**              25**
                                               (.057)       (.067)           (.06)           (3.1)             (3.5)             (3.1)
             RequestedConcession Decile 4      -.19**       -.21**          -.23**           38**               37**              38**
                                               (.057)       (.064)          (.059)           (3.2)             (3.7)             (3.3)
             RequestedConcession Decile 5      -.31**       -.32**          -.34**           61**               60**              61**
                                               (.052)        (.06)          (.054)           (4.3)             (4.7)             (4.7)
             RequestedConcession Decile 6      -.29**       -.31**          -.32**           66**               63**              66**
                                               (.052)       (.059)          (.054)           (7.1)             (7.9)             (7.4)
             RequestedConcession Decile 7      -.37**        -.4**          -.39**           94**               96**              94**
                                               (.048)       (.054)           (.05)           (8.3)             (8.5)               (8)




Appendix-8
             RequestedConcession Decile 8      -.32**       -.34**          -.35**           131**             138**             131**
                                               (.053)       (.061)          (.056)           (7.7)             (2.4)             (7.5)
             RequestedConcession Decile 9       -.3**       -.32**          -.33**           178**             175**             179**
                                               (.052)        (.06)          (.055)            (12)              (12)              (12)
             RequestedConcession Decile 10      -.3**       -.34**          -.33**           210**             212**             203**
                                               (.052)       (.059)          (.054)            (24)              (27)              (24)
             Constant                           .41**        .43**          .45**              10                 12              11+
                                               (.048)       (.056)          (.052)           (6.6)             (8.3)             (6.6)
             Observations                       1,259        1,054          1,205             236                207               231
             R-squared                          0.076        0.077          0.084            0.822             0.818             0.823
        Table A-7: Effects of information condition, robustness to inconsistent behavior
                             (1)                 (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Robustness Check       Original Results   % Flush Reference    Eliminate High Flush   Eliminate High Flush
                                                              Reference Agent-Weeks     Reference Agents
Dependent Variable       Price Quote         Price Quote           Price Quote            Price Quote
No EP                        2.5                   3                     3                     5.4
                             (4)                  (4)                  (4.2)                  (4.5)
Upward-Biased EP            35**                 35**                  33**                   37**
                            (4.1)                (4.1)                 (4.3)                  (4.9)
% Flush Reference                               354**
                                                (102)
% Flush Reference Sq                           -1299**
                                                (445)
Second Call                  13*                 14**                 12*                      9.2
                            (5.4)                (5.4)               (5.3)                   (6.1)
Week Fixed Effects            X                    X                   X                       X
DMA Fixed Effects             X                    X                   X                       X
Constant                    388**               388**                387**                   382**
                             (17)                (17)                 (17)                    (17)
Observations                4,603               4,603                4,104                   3,496
R-squared                   0.068               0.071                0.069                   0.077




                                              Appendix-9
  Table A-8: Effects of information condition by gender, robustness to inconsistent behavior
                                (1)                 (2)                     (3)                   (4)
Robustness Check          Original Results   % Flush Reference    Eliminate High Flush   Eliminate High Flush
                                                                 Reference Agent-Weeks     Reference Agents
Dependent Variable          Price Quote         Price Quote           Price Quote            Price Quote
Market-Based EP, Women          -2.7                  6.6                   3.5                  12+
                               (5.4)                (5.8)                 (6.1)                  (6.8)
No EP, Women                    11*                 20**                  16**                   25**
                               (5.5)                (5.9)                   (6)                  (6.8)
No EP, Men                     -10+                  -7.9                  -9.4                   -3.3
                               (5.6)                (5.6)                 (6.3)                  (7.5)
Upward-Biased EP, Women        34**                 43**                  38**                   46**
                               (5.5)                (5.9)                   (6)                  (6.8)
Upward-Biased EP, Men          33**                 33**                  31**                   45**
                               (5.6)                (5.5)                 (6.4)                  (8.8)
% Flush Reference                                  519**
                                                   (112)
% Flush Reference Sq                              -1829**
                                                   (472)
Second Call                     11*                  11*                  8.8                     7.4
                               (5.4)                (5.4)               (5.4)                   (6.1)
Week Fixed Effects               X                    X                   X                       X
DMA Fixed Effects                X                    X                   X                       X
Constant                       388**               381**                382**                   370**
                                (17)                (17)                 (17)                    (17)
Observations                   4,603               4,603                4,104                   3,496
R-squared                      0.071               0.076                0.074                   0.083




                                             Appendix-10
                                                   Table A-9: Price concession results, robustness to inconsistent behavior
                                                 (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)            (5)                (6)                  (7)              (8)
              Robustness Check                 Original    %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High      Original       %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High
                                                                              FR Agent-Weeks       FRAgents                                           FR Agent-Weeks       FR Agents
                                               I(Price         I(Price             I(Price          I(Price      PriceConcession   PriceConcession    PriceConcession   PriceConcession
              Dependent Variable              Concession      Concession         Concession       Concession      if Concession     if Concession       if Concession    if Concession
                                                 > 0)            > 0)                > 0)             > 0)             >0                >0                  >0               >0
              No EP                              .013            .025                .006             .026             4.1                3.1                 12               2.8
                                                 (.03)          (.032)              (.034)           (.045)           (6.5)             (5.8)               (8.6)            (7.2)
              Upward-Biased EP                   .076            .081                -.014            .045             5.2                4.6                 12                1
                                                (.061)           (.06)              (.066)           (.098)           (7.2)             (7.6)                (11)             (11)
              No EP, Women                      .057*           .074*               .066*             .028             3.4                4.1                 3.8              4.1
                                                (.029)           (.03)               (.03)           (.034)           (4.8)             (5.2)               (5.2)            (5.3)
              Market-Based EP, Women            .12**           .15**               .12**              .1*             5.3                5.2                 13               5.2
                                                (.031)          (.035)              (.034)           (.042)           (6.1)             (5.9)               (8.1)              (7)
              Upward-Biased EP, Women           .24**           .27**               .33**             .25*             5.4                5.7                 7.1              9.4
                                                (.074)          (.074)              (.077)            (.1)            (4.7)             (6.9)               (8.5)            (8.7)
              % Flush Reference                                   .84                                                                     -71
                                                                 (.71)                                                                  (150)
              % Flush Reference Sq                                -1.8                                                                   427
                                                                  (3)                                                                   (595)
              RequestedConcession Decile 2       -.052           -.049             -.051             -.066            19**              19**              20**               19**
                                                (.047)          (.046)            (.049)            (.053)           (1.1)              (1.2)             (1.4)             (1.2)
              RequestedConcession Decile 3      -.26**          -.26**            -.25**            -.25**            27**              28**              27**               27**




Appendix-11
                                                (.064)          (.063)            (.067)            (.075)           (2.6)              (2.6)               (3)               (3)
              RequestedConcession Decile 4      -.14**          -.14**             -.13*            -.11+             36**              37**              36**               36**
                                                 (.05)           (.05)            (.053)            (.059)           (2.1)              (2.2)             (2.3)             (2.3)
              RequestedConcession Decile 5      -.24**          -.24**            -.25**            -.25**            57**              57**              57**               57**
                                                (.045)          (.045)            (.047)            (.052)           (2.9)                (3)             (3.3)             (3.2)
              RequestedConcession Decile 6      -.27**          -.26**            -.25**            -.27**            73**              73**              74**               76**
                                                (.053)          (.053)            (.057)             (.06)           (5.2)              (5.1)             (4.9)             (4.5)
              RequestedConcession Decile 7      -.22**          -.21**            -.21**            -.23**            94**              94**              94**               93**
                                                (.049)          (.049)            (.052)            (.056)           (4.8)              (4.8)               (5)             (5.1)
              RequestedConcession Decile 8      -.26**          -.26**            -.26**            -.28**           121**              122**             122**             123**
                                                (.048)          (.048)             (.05)            (.055)             (7)              (7.1)             (7.6)             (7.8)
              RequestedConcession Decile 9      -.28**          -.28**            -.28**             -.3**           171**              172**             169**             169**
                                                (.047)          (.046)             (.05)            (.053)           (6.7)              (6.7)             (7.4)             (7.5)
              RequestedConcession Decile 10     -.27**          -.27**            -.27**            -.29**           256**              257**             252**             266**
                                                (.048)          (.048)            (.051)            (.055)            (19)               (19)              (20)              (19)
              Constant                          .37**           .34**             .37**              .4**              4.1                 4               -3.9               4.1
                                                (.041)          (.045)            (.045)            (.053)           (5.8)              (5.7)               (8)             (6.8)
              Observations                      1,738           1,738             1,583              1,384            458                458               417               394
              R-squared                         0.081           0.084             0.084              0.081           0.814              0.815             0.803             0.844
Table A-10: Experiment 2, initial price quote results, robustness to inconsistent behavior
                                  (1)               (2)                 (3)              (4)
   Robustness Check             Original      %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High
                                                                 FR Agent-Weeks      FR Agents
   Dependent Variable          Price Quote      Price Quote        Price Quote      Price Quote
   Downward-Biased EP              -8.9               .72               1.4              -16
                                   (8)              (8.8)              (9.9)            (15)
   No EP, Women                    -5.7                11               8.6              -10
                                  (6.9)             (9.4)              (8.9)            (13)
   Downward-Biased EP, Women       -5.2               1.5               .46              .23
                                  (6.9)             (7.5)              (7.4)            (8.7)
   % Flush Reference                                300*
                                                   (143)
   % Flush Reference Sq                             -690
                                                   (546)
   Week 13                        -3.6               -5.4             -3.9              -5.2
                                 (6.4)              (6.5)            (6.6)             (7.7)
   Week 14                        -1.5               -7.7              -11               -12
                                 (7.1)              (7.3)              (8)             (8.6)
   Week 15                        -6.5               -11               -11               -14
                                 (8.6)              (8.8)            (9.2)              (11)
   Week 16                         -22             -24+                -23               -22
                                  (14)              (14)              (14)              (14)
   DMA Fixed Effects                X                  X                X                 X
   Constant                      388**             375**             378**             408**
                                  (14)              (15)              (15)              (18)
   Observations                  1,941             1,941             1,651             1,513
   R-squared                     0.056             0.059             0.070             0.072




                                           Appendix-12
                                             Table A-11: Experiment 2, price concession results, robustness to inconsistent behavior
                                                   (1)             (2)                  (3)              (4)            (5)                (6)                  (7)              (8)
              Robustness Check                   Original    %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High      Original       %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High
                                                                                FR Agent-Weeks       FRAgents                                           FR Agent-Weeks       FR Agents
                                                 I(Price         I(Price             I(Price          I(Price      PriceConcession   PriceConcession    PriceConcession   PriceConcession
              Dependent Variable                Concession      Concession         Concession       Concession      if Concession     if Concession       if Concession    if Concession
                                                   > 0)            > 0)                > 0)             > 0)             >0                 >0                 >0               >0
              Downward-Biased EP                    .03            -.025               -.078            -.013            2.5                -2.1                .98              8.5
                                                  (.036)          (.041)              (.062)           (.072)           (8.4)               (10)               (10)             (16)
              No EP, Women                        .062+            -.018               -.068            -.021            -.26               -6.7                 -2             -1.6
                                                  (.035)          (.049)              (.059)           (.067)           (7.5)               (10)              (9.5)             (15)
              Downward-Based EP, Women             -.018           -.039               -.043            -.056            4.9                 4.6                3.6               -4
                                                  (.029)          (.033)              (.032)           (.039)           (6.2)              (6.2)              (6.4)            (6.6)
              % Flush Reference                                     -.55                                                                    -306
                                                                   (.56)                                                                   (238)
              % Flush Reference Sq                                  -1.4                                                                   1915
                                                                   (1.8)                                                                  (1679)
              RequestedConcession Decile 2        -.16**          -.16**            -.18**             -.15*            18**               17**             18**               19**
                                                  (.057)          (.057)            (.064)            (.067)           (1.9)               (2.1)            (1.9)             (2.1)
              RequestedConcession Decile 3        -.24**          -.23**            -.29**            -.22**            25**               26**             25**               28**
                                                  (.057)          (.057)            (.065)            (.071)           (3.1)               (3.3)            (2.9)             (2.8)
              RequestedConcession Decile 4        -.19**           -.2**            -.27**            -.24**            38**               39**             39**               43**
                                                  (.057)          (.057)            (.061)            (.064)           (3.2)               (3.2)            (3.3)             (2.7)
              RequestedConcession Decile 5        -.31**           -.3**            -.37**            -.34**            61**               61**             62**               62**
                                                  (.052)          (.052)            (.057)             (.06)           (4.3)               (4.3)            (4.1)             (4.3)
              RequestedConcession Decile 6        -.29**          -.28**            -.34**            -.35**            66**               67**             69**               71**
                                                  (.052)          (.052)            (.058)            (.059)           (7.1)               (7.2)            (7.7)             (9.5)
              RequestedConcession Decile 7        -.37**          -.36**            -.43**            -.39**            94**               98**             90**              101**




Appendix-13
                                                  (.048)          (.048)            (.052)            (.054)           (8.3)               (9.7)            (9.7)             (7.2)
              RequestedConcession Decile 8        -.32**          -.32**            -.36**            -.34**           131**              130**             131**             132**
                                                  (.053)          (.053)             (.06)            (.061)           (7.7)               (7.8)            (7.8)             (8.2)
              RequestedConcession Decile 9         -.3**           -.3**            -.37**            -.35**           178**              181**             175**             200**
                                                  (.052)          (.052)            (.057)            (.058)            (12)                (10)             (14)             (4.5)
              RequestedConcession Decile 10        -.3**           -.3**            -.34**            -.33**           210**              210**             210**             206**
                                                  (.052)          (.052)            (.058)            (.059)            (24)                (24)             (24)              (25)
              Constant                            .41**           .48**              .58**             .51**             10                 17+               12                9.5
                                                  (.048)          (.059)             (.07)            (.078)           (6.6)               (9.2)            (8.6)              (15)
              Observations                        1,259           1,259              1,063              984             236                  236             215               199
              R-squared                           0.076           0.085              0.103             0.094           0.822               0.823            0.815             0.854
                                                Table A-12: Effects of information condition, pooled data
                                         (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)                    (5)                    (6)
                                     Experiment 1   Experiment 2     Pooled           Pooled                 Pooled                 Pooled
              Robustness Check                                                   % Flush Reference    Eliminate High Flush   Eliminate High Flush
                                                                                                     Reference Agent-Weeks     Reference Agents
              Dependent Variable     Price Quote    Price Quote    Price Quote      Price Quote           Price Quote            Price Quote
              No EP                      2.5                             2.3             3.1                   3.4                    5.8
                                         (4)                             (4)             (4)                  (4.1)                  (4.5)
              Upward-Biased EP          35**                           35**             35**                  34**                   37**
                                        (4.1)                            (4)             (4)                  (4.3)                  (4.9)
              Downward-Biased EP                        -8.4            -4.2             -2.3                  -2.9                   -2.6
                                                       (5.2)           (6.3)            (6.4)                 (6.7)                  (7.3)
              % Flush Reference                                                        294**
                                                                                        (74)
              % Flush Reference Sq                                                    -981**
                                                                                       (324)
              Second Call                13*                          13*               14**                 12*                      9.2
                                        (5.4)                        (5.4)              (5.4)               (5.3)                   (6.2)
              Week Fixed Effects          X              X             X                  X                   X                       X
              DMA Fixed Effects           X              X             X                  X                   X                       X
              Constant                  388**          388**         404**             404**                406**                   412**
                                         (17)           (14)          (22)              (22)                 (23)                    (23)
              Observations              4,603          1,941         6,544             6,544                5,755                   5,009
              R-squared                 0.068          0.056         0.065             0.068                0.071                   0.076




Appendix-14
                                           Table A-13: Effects of information condition by gender, pooled data
                                              (1)            (2)           (3)               (4)                     (5)                   (6)
                                          Experiment 1   Experiment 2     Pooled           Pooled                 Pooled                 Pooled
              Robustness Check                                                        % Flush Reference    Eliminate High Flush   Eliminate High Flush
                                                                                                          Reference Agent-Weeks     Reference Agents
              Dependent Variable          Price Quote    Price Quote    Price Quote      Price Quote           Price Quote            Price Quote
              Market-Based EP, Women          -2.7                             -3             6.1                    2.4                  11+
                                             (5.4)                          (5.4)            (5.7)                   (6)                  (6.7)
              No EP, Women                    11*            -5.7             5.3            17**                   14*                   21**
                                             (5.5)          (6.9)           (5.2)            (5.6)                 (5.8)                  (6.7)
              No EP, Men                     -10+                              -5             -5.2                  -7.2                   .92
                                             (5.6)                          (5.3)            (5.3)                   (6)                  (7.3)
              Upward-Biased EP, Women        34**                           33**             43**                  38**                   45**
                                             (5.5)                          (5.5)            (5.8)                   (6)                  (6.8)
              Upward-Biased EP, Men          33**                           32**             33**                  30**                   44**
                                             (5.6)                          (5.6)            (5.5)                 (6.4)                  (8.9)
              Downward-Biased EP, Women                     -14+               -7              6                     3.9                    11
                                                            (7.4)           (7.5)            (7.9)                 (8.2)                  (9.1)
              Downward-Biased EP, Men                        -8.9            -1.7             2.7                    3.7                    11
                                                              (8)             (8)             (8)                  (8.7)                  (11)
              % Flush Reference                                                             457**
                                                                                             (84)
              % Flush Reference Sq                                                         -1480**
                                                                                            (351)




Appendix-15
              Second Call                     11*                          12*                11*                9.1+                      7.9
                                             (5.4)                        (5.4)              (5.4)               (5.4)                   (6.1)
              Week Fixed Effects               X              X             X                  X                   X                       X
              DMA Fixed Effects                X              X             X                  X                   X                       X
              Constant                       388**          388**         405**             394**                396**                   396**
                                              (17)           (14)          (22)              (22)                 (23)                    (24)
              Observations                   4,603          1,941         6,544             6,544                5,755                   5,009
              R-squared                      0.071          0.066         0.066             0.072                0.074                   0.079
                                                                Table A-14: Price concession results, pooled data
                                                 (1)             (2)                   (3)              (4)            (5)               (6)                  (7)              (8)
              Robustness Check                             %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High                     %Flush Reference    Eliminate High   Eliminate High
                                                                              FR Agent-Weeks       FRAgents                                           FR Agent-Weeks       FR Agents
                                               I(Price         I(Price             I(Price          I(Price      PriceConcession   PriceConcession    PriceConcession   PriceConcession
              Dependent Variable              Concession      Concession         Concession       Concession      if Concession     if Concession       if Concession    if Concession
                                                 > 0)             > 0)               > 0)             > 0)             >0                >0                  >0               >0
              No EP                             .0024           .0054                  .03            .036              1.2               .36                   9            -.014
                                                (.027)          (.028)              (.033)           (.043)           (6.4)             (6.3)               (8.3)            (7.2)
              Upward-Biased EP                   .065             .068               -.022             .035            2.9                 3                  8.8               -2
                                                (.061)          (.061)              (.067)             (.1)           (7.5)             (7.7)                (12)             (11)
              Downward-Biased EP                .0083            .0072                .028             .032            -2.4              -3.4                   5              4.3
                                                (.032)          (.032)              (.037)           (.049)           (8.7)             (8.8)                (10)            (8.6)
              No EP, Women                      .054*           .051*                  .03           .0067               1               -.49                  .4              1.3
                                                (.022)          (.025)              (.025)           (.029)           (3.9)             (4.4)               (4.4)            (4.8)
              Market-Based EP, Women            .12**            .12**              .12**              .11*            2.6                .51                 9.7              1.9
                                                (.031)          (.033)              (.034)           (.042)            (6)              (5.9)               (7.8)            (6.5)
              Upward-Biased EP, Women           .25**            .25**              .34**              .26*            3.9                1.2                 5.1              7.8
                                                (.074)          (.074)              (.078)             (.1)           (5.1)             (6.4)                 (9)            (9.4)
              Downward-Biased EP, Women          -.018           -.017               -.041            -.056             8.7               8.3                  9               .87
                                                (.029)          (.031)              (.032)           (.039)           (6.4)             (6.3)               (6.8)            (6.2)
              % Flush Reference                                    .18                                                                   -154
                                                                 (.41)                                                                   (98)
              % Flush Reference Sq                                -1.3                                                                  709+
                                                                 (1.7)                                                                  (396)
              RequestedConcession Decile 2     -.096**         -.096**            -.11**              -.1*           18**                18**              19**              19**




Appendix-16
                                                (.036)          (.036)            (.039)            (.041)           (.97)                (1)             (1.1)             (.87)
              RequestedConcession Decile 3      -.21**          -.21**            -.22**            -.18**           28**                28**              28**              29**
                                                (.044)          (.044)            (.048)            (.054)           (1.8)              (1.9)               (2)             (1.7)
              RequestedConcession Decile 4      -.19**          -.19**            -.22**             -.2**            39**              40**               38**              40**
                                                (.036)          (.036)            (.039)            (.042)           (1.8)              (1.9)               (2)             (1.8)
              RequestedConcession Decile 5      -.27**          -.27**             -.3**            -.28**            58**              58**               58**              59**
                                                (.035)          (.035)            (.038)            (.041)           (2.6)              (2.7)             (2.8)             (2.7)
              RequestedConcession Decile 6      -.28**          -.28**             -.3**            -.31**            70**              71**               72**              75**
                                                (.037)          (.037)             (.04)            (.042)           (4.2)              (4.2)             (4.2)             (4.4)
              RequestedConcession Decile 7      -.28**          -.28**             -.3**             -.3**            94**               94**              94**             94**
                                                (.034)          (.034)            (.037)            (.039)             (4)                (4)             (4.2)             (4.2)
              RequestedConcession Decile 8      -.29**          -.29**            -.31**            -.31**           127**              128**             128**             130**
                                                (.037)          (.037)            (.039)            (.042)           (5.5)              (5.5)             (5.9)             (5.6)
              RequestedConcession Decile 9       -.3**           -.3**            -.32**            -.33**           172**              173**             170**             179**
                                                (.035)          (.035)            (.037)            (.039)             (7)              (6.8)             (7.8)             (6.1)
              RequestedConcession Decile 10     -.28**          -.28**            -.29**             -.3**           241**              242**             238**             243**
                                                (.036)          (.036)            (.039)            (.041)            (14)               (14)              (15)              (15)
              Constant                            .4**            .4**             .41**             .43**             8.3               11+                1.2               8
                                                (.034)          (.036)            (.038)            (.046)           (5.8)              (5.7)             (7.6)             (6.4)
              Observations                       2,997           2,997             2,646             2,368            694                 694               632              593
              R-squared                          0.082           0.082             0.088             0.088           0.814              0.815             0.804             0.836
